Genetic Algorithm-based Routing and Scheduling
for Wildfire Suppression using a Team of UAVs
Josy John Suresh Sundaram
Department of Aerospace Engineering Department of Aerospace Engineering
Indian Institute of Science Indian Institute of Science
Bengaluru, India Bengaluru, India
josyjohn@iisc.ac.in vssuresh@iisc.ac.in
Abstract—This paper addresses early wildfire management resourcesmayleadtouncontrollablefires,makingmulti-UAV
using a team of UAVs for the mitigation of fires. The early multi-task allocation a challenging research area.
detection and mitigation systems help in alleviating the destruc-
Theproblemofefficientlyschedulingfirefightingresources,
tion with reduced resource utilization. A Genetic Algorithm-
such as fire engines, air tankers, and helicopters, to contain
based Routing and Scheduling with Time constraints (GARST)
is proposed to find the shortest schedule route to mitigate the multiple fires is addressed in [9]. A multi-objective hybrid
fires as Single UAV Tasks (SUT). The objective of GARST is differentialevolutionparticleswarmoptimizationfortheemer-
to compute the route and schedule of the UAVs so that the gency scheduling of fire engines for forest fires is addressed
UAVS reach the assigned fire locations before the fire becomes a
in [10]. The multi-objective scheduling model is analyzed for
MultiUAVTask(MUT)andcompletelyquenchthefireusingthe
the case where the number of fire engines is higher than the
extinguisher.Thefitnessfunctionusedforthegeneticalgorithmis
the total quench time for mitigation of total fires. The selection, fire areas and offers efficient solutions to minimize both the
crossover, mutation operators, and elitist strategies collectively extinguishing time and the number of scheduled fire engines.
ensure the exploration and exploitation of the solution space, In [11], the challenge of assigning heterogeneous agents to
maintaininggeneticdiversity,preventingprematureconvergence,
tasks with growing costs is tackled using a lazy max-sum
and preserving high-performing individuals for the effective
algorithm.Amodel-basedmultiagentdynamictaskassignment
optimization of solutions. The GARST effectively addresses the
challenges posed by the NP-complete problem of routing and for wildfires is discussed in [12], aiming to minimize the
scheduling for growing tasks with time constraints. The GARST total completion time. In the above-mentioned works, the
is able to handle infeasible scenarios effectively, contributing to number of agents is much higher than the total tasks, and
the overall optimization of the wildfire management system.
the execution capacity employed is always higher than the
Index Terms—Wildfire management, Unmanned Aerial Vehi-
optimal value, leading to the wastage of resources. In the
cles, genetic algorithm, routing and scheduling, task allocation.
context of the Dynamic Multi-Point Dynamic Aggregation
(DMPDA) problem, [13] introduces a genetic programming
hyperheuristic algorithm. This approach evolves reactive co-
I. INTRODUCTION
ordination strategies for scenarios where task information is
Wildfire scenarios demand rapid mitigation strategies to unknownuntildetectionandtaskdemandistime-varying.The
reducethedestructionofwildlifeandwildlands.Thewildfires solution strategy requires a coalition between agents for the
grow in size and number, depending on wind and terrain suppression of fires.
conditions. Thus, containing the wildfires at an early stage Theearlymitigationofwildfiresisessentialforminimizing
is imperative to curtail the damage. The utilization of multi- biodiversity loss, ensuring a higher mission success rate,
UAV systems in wildfire management aims to reduce human and optimizing resource utilization. The delayed mitigation
interactionsinhazardousenvironments[1],[2].Whileexisting can lead to fires evolving into Multi-UAV Tasks (MUT),
literature has primarily focused on individual or combined necessitating simultaneous actions and cooperative coalitions
[3] aspects of search, monitoring, and mitigation, tackling among agents. However, forming such coalitions introduces
the task allocation dimension in the domain of multi-UAV computationalcomplexityandcommunicationoverhead.Ifthe
wildfiremanagementstandsoutasacriticalchallenge.Limited fires are contained as a Single UAV Task (SUT), they can be
works have explored the optimal sequence computation for addressed in their early stages with minimal damage, reduced
neutralizing multiple wildfires. Various multi-UAV multi-task computational demands, and lowered communication over-
allocation methods have been applied in diverse domains, head.Thisstrategicapproachnotonlyenhancestheefficiency
including search and rescue [4], [5], job-shop scheduling of wildfire management but also streamlines the coordination
[6], vehicle routing problems [7], etc. Sequential multi-task amongUAVs,ensuringamoreeffectiveandresource-efficient
allocation proves beneficial when the number of agents is mitigation process.
limited and tasks are distributed unevenly across the mission This paper presents a Genetic Algorithm-based Routing
area [8]. The dynamic nature of fire and limited firefighting and Scheduling with Time constraints (GARST) for wildfire
4202
luJ
72
]OR.sc[
1v26191.7042:viXrasuppression employing a team of UAVs. The primary goal upon the CBBA, [15]explores consensusalgorithms forcoor-
of GARST is to prevent fires from surpassing the quenching dinating UAVs in MUT assignments. The Consensus-Based
capabilities of a single UAV, coupled with the secondary Grouping Algorithm (CBGA) addresses challenges such as
objective of minimizing the total quench time for the fire MUTs, equipment requirements, and task dependencies. The
area.Theseobjectivesareaimedatachievingefficientresource CBGA enhances UAV cooperation for improved autonomous
allocation and reducing damage to wildlands during wildfire operations by efficiently reducing communication costs and
mitigation. The approach is formulated under the assumption achievingconsensusonMUTs.AConsensus-BasedTimetable
that the number of UAVs is significantly less than the total Algorithm (CBTA) is presented in [16] to address the de-
number of fire areas within the mission region. The wildfire centralized simultaneous multi-agent task allocation problem,
mitigationproblemiscastasashortestschedulerouteproblem where multiple agents are needed to perform a task simul-
with time constraints, wherein UAVs must compute routes for taneously. The CBTA minimizes the start time of each task,
the sequential mitigation of fire areas as SUT and minimize indirectly aiming to minimize the average start time of all
the scheduled dynamic quenching times. The NP-complete tasks. CBTA performs similarly to the CBBA for single-
nature of the problem makes it computationally complex to agent tasks and outperforms the CBGA for multi-agent tasks.
solve using conventional approaches hence, a routing and A decentralized genetic algorithm approach for multi-agent
scheduling based on Genetic Algorithm (GA) is proposed for task allocation to minimize the mission completion time,
the time-sensitive mitigation of wildfires. The effectiveness of highlighting its parallelization over agents for efficient use of
theGARSTforsolvingwildfiresuppressionisevaluatedusing computational resources is analyzed in [17].
different numbers of fires. A Monte-Carlo simulation is also
B. Multi-task Assignment Problems with Time Constraints
conductedwithdifferentinitiallocationsofUAVandfireradii.
TheresultsshowthatGARSTissuccessfulinevolvingabetter Thechallengeofmaximizingthenumberoftaskallocations
shortest schedule route to mitigate fires as SUT. The GARST in a distributed multi-robot system operating under strict time
is 100% successful in handling fires up to 4 times the number constraints and fuel limits is addressed in [18]. Performance
ofagentsand93%whenthenumberoffiresis5timesthatof Impact-MaxAss(PI-MaxAss)followsatwo-phasetaskassign-
the number of UAVs. The main contributions of GARST are ment strategy where a solution generated from an existing
summarized as follows: PI algorithm [19] is iteratively improved using PI-MaxAss
1) The wildfire suppression using a homogeneous team to maximize task assignments without repeating the entire
of UAVs is formulated as the shortest schedule route allocationprocedure.Adistributedtaskallocationproblemfor
problem with time constraints. maximizingthetotalnumberofsuccessfullyexecutedtasksin
2) A genetic algorithm-based solution is proposed for the multi-robot systems considering task deadlines and fuel limits
NP-complete problem of wildfire suppression. is studied in [20]. The Effective and Efficient Performance
Impact (EEPI) algorithm incorporates a novel cost function
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
thatminimizestravelingtimeandprioritizestaskswithearlier
II provides a review of existing multi-agent task allocation
deadlines.
approaches.SectionIIIpresentstheformulationofthewildfire
suppression problem as a shortest schedule route problem. C. Multi-task Assignment Problems for Real-world Scenarios
Section IV explains the GARST for wildfire management.
Aheuristicdistributedtaskallocationmethodformultivehi-
Numerical simulation results are given in Section V to verify
cle multitask assignment problems, particularly in the context
the performance of the GARST for wildfire suppression, and
of a search and rescue scenario is presented in [21]. The
Section VI concludes the paper.
heterogeneous team of UAVs uses a distributed algorithm
with local communication to handle rescue missions under
II. RELATEDWORKS
various scenarios, such as blocked paths or updated terrain
The wildfire mitigation using a team of UAVs has been information. The complex problem of multi-robot task allo-
framed as a multi-agent multi-task allocation problem in lit- cation, in the context of cooperative tasks in industrial plant
erature. This section briefly summarizes the existing literature inspection,isaddressedin[22].Itintroducesasubpopulation-
onmulti-agentmulti-taskallocation,coveringvariousproblem based genetic algorithm to minimize task completion time
contexts,anddiscussesitsrelevancetoreal-worldscenariosin with mutation operators and elitism for solving multi-robot
this domain. task allocation problems. A routing and scheduling problem
focusing on the airport ground movement problem is solved
A. Multi-task Assignment Problems
using the memetic algorithm for routing in multigraphs with
The Consensus-Based Bundle Algorithm (CBBA) for co- time constraints in [23]. The method is tested on real data
ordinating a fleet of autonomous vehicles addressing multi- fromtwoairports,demonstratingitseffectivenessinproviding
assignment problems is discussed in [14]. CBBA utilizes a solutions within given time budgets.
decentralized auction-based decision strategy for task selec- The existing literature lacks solutions for wildfire scenarios
tion and employs a consensus routine for conflict resolution, to compute the route and schedule for UAVs for neutralizing
ensuring convergence to conflict-free assignments. Building taskswithdynamicneutralizationtimeanddeadlinetime.Thispaper proposes GARST for wildfire suppression using a team firewithintheclusterismodeledasapointfirewithacircular
of UAVs. fire profile, adhering to the circular fire model described in
[12]. The initial areas of the fires are heterogeneous, each
III. PROBLEMDEFINITION having different initial areas denoted by Af in m2. The fire
j0
A wildfire management scenario is shown in Fig. 1, where area grows over time based on the radial spread rate, ϕs in
multiple UAVs are deployed in the mission area, Ω ⊂ R2 m/s. The area and perimeter of the jth fire point at time, t s
to mitigate randomly located multiple fires sequentially. The are denoted as Af(t) and Pf(t), respectively. The perimeter
j j
UAVs in the team need to compute the route and schedule for can be expressed as a function of the fire area, given by
√ (cid:113)
the sequential mitigation of fires to minimize the destruction Pf(Af)=2 π Af(t).Whenthejthfireisundermitigation
of wildlands. Each active forest fire area possesses a critical j j j
by a UAV, the rate of change of the fire area can be expressed
quench rate, surpassing which additional quench rates prove
as a first-order system equation:
ineffective in reducing the overall quench time [24]. This
study operates under the assumption that UAVs operate with A˙f(t)=ϕsPf(Af)−ϕq (1)
j j j
a quench rate near the critical quench rate. Consequently,
The fire area decreases when A˙f(t) < 0 i.e., ϕq >
introducing additional UAVs does not yield significant perfor- j
mance improvements if the fire scenario remains categorized ϕsP jf(Af j). The critical area, Ac is the fire area below which
as a SUT. If the UAVs possess adequate quench capacities the fire remains as a SUT, and Ac can be computed as
to sequentially mitigate fires independently at an early stage (cid:16) ϕq (cid:17)2
Ac = √ (2)
offires,thenpotentialbiodiversitylosscanbereduced,delays 2 πϕs
associatedwithwaitingforthecoalitionUAVscanbeavoided,
andresourceutilizationismaximizedbysequentialmitigation. If Af j > Ac, the fire area surpasses the critical area, the task
Therefore, this study addresses the SUT assignment problem, becomesinfeasibleforasingleUAV.Thecriticaltimeatwhich
focusingonthemitigationofallfireswithasingleUAVbefore the fire area reaches Ac serves as the deadline time for the
they escalate into MUT. successful mitigation of the jth fire as a SUT. The deadline
time, denoted as Td for the jth fire, can be computed as:
j
√ (cid:113)
Ac− Af
Td = √ j0 j ∈F (3)
j ϕs π
The overall objective of this work is characterized by the
allocation of a sequence of fires to UAVs, ensuring that all
UAVs commence fire mitigation along the designated route
before the respective deadline times while minimizing the
scheduled quench time for the fires along the route of all
UAVs. The route, denoted as ρ = {ρ ,ρ ,...,ρ ,...},
i i1 i2 il
represents the sequence of tasks executed by ith UAV. Here,
ρ , signifies the task executed by the ith UAV at the lth point
il
of route. The ith UAV is required to arrive at the fire location
and initiate the mitigation of the fire area, ρ before Td to
Fig.1. Awildfiremanagementscenarioshowingtheroutingandscheduling il ρil
forateamofUAVs constrainthefireareabelowAc andmitigatethefireasaSUT.
The start time of mitigation of jth fire by ith UAV is denoted
Let m be the number of UAVs, and U ≜ {U ,...,U }
1 m by Ts and can be computed as:
representthesetofUAVs.TheUAVsemployedinthemission ij
(cid:40)
are assumed to be homogeneous, possessing identical speeds dij, l=1
Ts = v (4)
denoted by v in m/s and quenching capabilities characterized ij Tc + d j′j, l>1
bytheareaquenchrateϕq.Thepositioncoordinateofthei-th ij′ v
UAV is represented by pu i. In the context of a typical wildfire where d ij is the distance from the initial position of ith UAV
scenario, the tasks or fires exhibit dynamic characteristics to jth task. l=1 indicates that j is the first task in the route
concerning size and quantity. This dynamic nature also arises of ith UAV. j′ is the previous task assigned to ith UAV, Tc
ij′
from external factors such as wind and terrain conditions, is the time to complete the previous task, d j′j is the distance
contributing to the dispersion of fire particles, resulting in an from the previous task to the current task.
increasednumberoffirescharacterizedbyclusteredfirespots. The constraint for mitigating fires in the route, ρ i ∀i ∈ U
Let n denote the number of fires in the mission area, with the as SUT can be mathematically defined as:
assumption that this number is significantly higher than the
Ts −Td <0 ∀j ∈ρ (5)
number of UAVs deployed for the mission, i.e., n≫m. The ij j i
setoffiresisrepresentedasF ≜{f ,...,f },andthecenterof The computation of ρ , minimizing the total quench time
1 n i
the jth fire spot is located at the position coordinate pf. Each while satisfying (5), can further aid in computing the shortest
jschedule routes. This ensures that all fires are quenched as and 0 otherwise. Each UAV can only address one fire at a
Single UAV Tasks (SUTs) at an earlier stage of fire develop- time, and it must continuously dispense water on the firefront
ment,therebyreducingthelossofbiodiversityandmaximizing forthescheduledquenchtimetoachievecompletemitigation.
resource utilization. Let Qt be quench time taken by ith After completing the task, the UAV proceeds to the next fire
ij
UAV for jth fire area and Qt can be computed from the location in the route.
ij
solution for Eq. 1 assuming fire area at start time, Af(Ts) Thewildfiremitigationproblemcanbeconsideredaderiva-
j ij
as the initial condition and the fire area after quench time as tive of the technician routing and scheduling problem with
Af(Ts +Qt )=0 [12]. repair times, belonging to the class of NP-complete problems.
j ij ij
Inthiscontext,thescheduledquenchtimeservesastheequiv-
(cid:113)
Qt =
2ϕq ln(cid:32) ϕq (cid:33)
−
2 Af j(T is j)
(6)
a ql ue en nt chof timre epa ii sr nt oim tce onin stat nh te fote rc ah fin ric eia dn uer to ou tt hin eg dyp nro ab mle icm n. aT tuh re
e
ij (Kϕs)2 ϕq−KϕsAf(Ts) Kϕs
j ij of the fire, rendering the problem NP-complete. Hence, the
where Af(Ts) is the fire area of jth fire when ith agent solution of Eq. 8 using conventional optimization approaches
j ij √ willbecomputationallycomplex.TheGARSTisproposedfor
reaches the fire location and K =2 π. The quench time for
solving the NP-complete problem of routing and scheduling
a specific task depends on the start time of the task, which,
of wildfire tasks.
in turn, is influenced by the completion time of the previous
task.Consequently,thequenchtimeforeachtaskisinterlinked
IV. GENETICALGORITHM-BASEDROUTINGAND
with the quench times of the previous tasks in the route. The
quench time, Tq for ith UAV to mitigate jth fire area as SUT
SCHEDULINGFORWILDFIREMANAGEMENT
ij
is defined as The GARST for Wildfire Management is proposed to min-
(cid:40) imize the destruction of wildlands by efficiently reducing the
Qt , Ts <Td
Tq = ij ij j (7) total quench time and mitigating the fires as SUTs. In the
ij κ, Ts ≥Td
ij j GARST framework, the route information, comprising the
sequence of fires assigned to UAVs, is encoded into chro-
The quench time is a finite value for all feasible tasks, while
mosomes as part of the genetic algorithm. Each chromosome,
it is represented as κ for all infeasible tasks. The fire areas
or individual, represents a potential solution to the problem
that cannot be successfully mitigated as SUT are termed as
of finding the shortest schedule route. Initiating the GARST
infeasibletasks.Theparameterκisassignedaveryhighvalue
algorithm involves generating a set of chromosomes to form
to impose a penalty on MUTs.
the initial population, with parents selected based on a fitness
The wildfire mitigation strategies involve routing UAVs
function that evaluates their effectiveness in minimizing the
to assigned fire locations and scheduling the UAVs for the
overall quench time. Through crossover operations, genetic
time required to quench the fire. Consequently, the wildfire
material is exchanged between parents to create offsprings,
management problem can be conceptualized as an integrated
promoting the exploration of different routes. Additionally,
routing and scheduling problem. The mitigation of the fire
mutation operators are employed to introduce variability
areas before it escalates into a MUT indirectly minimizes
within the population, aiding in the discovery of diverse
resource wastage. The UAVs should mitigate all fire locations
and potentially better solutions. The implementation of an
whilethefirearearemainsmanageableasaSUTforamission
elitiststrategyensuresthatthebest-performingindividualsare
tobeconsideredsuccessful.Theobjectiveofthemissionisto
preserved across generations, preventing the loss of superior
guarantee a successful mission, minimizing scheduled quench
solutions. This elitist approach contributes to the stability and
time, and the objective can be mathematically formulated as
efficiency of GARST by retaining the fittest individuals in the
(cid:88)m (cid:32) (cid:88)n (cid:33) population.
min Tq(ρ )x (8)
ij i ij
xij
i=1 j=1 A. Chromosome Representation
m
(cid:88)
s.t x ≤1 ∀j ∈F (9) The path representation, similar to the traveling salesman
ij
i problem [25], is adopted for chromosome representation of
Ts <Td ∀j ∈ρ ,∀i∈U (10) the routing and scheduling problem. The GARST utilizes a
ij j i
pathrepresentationwithatwo-partchromosomestructure[26]
x ∈{0,1} ∀(i,j)∈U ×F (11)
ij
for encoding routes. The first part of the chromosome denotes
TheobjectiveinEq.8isformulatedasanintegerprogramming the routes assigned to different UAVs, while the second part
problem to compute the optimal route, ρ , ∀i ∈ U. The signifies the total count of fire areas allocated to each UAV.
i
agents can execute multiple tasks sequentially, and the route Thechromosomeencodingmethodology,encompassingatotal
ρ contains the sequence of tasks for ith agent. Eq. 9 denotes of m + n genes, is illustrated in Fig. 2. In the first part
i
that each fire area is assigned to a single UAV, and Eq. 10 of the chromosome, the genes represent a permutation of
gives the temporal constraints to quench the fire as SUT. The integers ranging from 1 to n, corresponding to the fire areas.
Eq. 11 indicates the binary decision variable, x =1 ∀j ∈ρ Conversely, the second part of the chromosome consists of m
ij iFire areas
10 3 9 8 2 15 4 6 1 12 13 14 7 11 5 3 2 4 3 3
ρ 1 ρ 2 ρ 3 ρ 4 ρ 5 Number of fires in route
Fig.2. Representationofanencodedchromosome
genes, indicating the number of fire areas allocated to each In such scenarios, seeding the initial population with near-
respective UAV. optimal solutions becomes crucial for navigating the complex
The chromosome represented in Fig. 2 shows the routing solutionspace,enhancingconvergencetowardoptimalornear-
comprising of 15 fire areas and 5 UAVs. The route of UAVs optimal solutions [27]. The population initialization strategies
are ρ = {10,3,9}, ρ = {8,2}, ρ = {15,4,6,1}, ρ = in GARST contribute to the algorithm’s robustness and its
1 2 3 4
{12,13,14},andρ ={7,11,5}.Notably,thevaluesassigned potential to generate high-quality solutions in subsequent
5
tothegenesinthesecondpartareconstrainedtobempositive generations.
integers. The first part of the chromosome does not contain
C. Fitness Function
repetitive genes, ensuring uniqueness in the routes assigned
The fitness function is a fundamental component of GA
to each UAV. Furthermore, the genes in the second part are
that evaluates the suitability of individual solutions within the
subjecttotheconstraintthattheirsumequalsthetotalnumber
population. In GARST, the fitness function, J is formulated
of fires to be mitigated, thereby ensuring a valid chromosome
as the total quench time associated with the route encoded in
representation. Even though the chromosomes may meet the
the chromosome.
validity criteria, not every valid chromosome guarantees the
successful mitigation of all fires as SUTs. (cid:88)m (cid:32) (cid:88)n (cid:33)
J = Tq ∀j ∈ρ , ∀i∈U (12)
ij i
i=1 j=1
Algorithm 1: GARST Algorithm
Data: Input m, n, N , G0 with N0 chromosomes The fitness function for GARST integrates key parameters,
Result: GNg, J
best
g c including the scheduled quench time for fires, the routes
assigned to UAVs, and the route length of each UAV. This
while k <N do
g
closerelationwiththeroutegenerationprocesswithinGARST
Evaluate fitness, J ∀gk ∈Gk
c aligns the fitness evaluation of each chromosome to the
Gk =Selection(Gk): Best chromosomes as parents
best overall mission objectives. An essential feature of the fitness
Gk+1= Crossover(Gk ): Offsprings
best function involves the imposition of penalties on Tq, resulting
for c=1 to Nk+1 do ij
c in elevated fitness values corresponding to the number of
if rand<µ or Ik >γ then
c infeasible tasks. The penalty-enabled fitness function guides
gk+1=Mutation(gk+1)
c c the GARST toward solutions that not only minimize quench
Gk+1=Elitist(Gk) ∪ Gk+1: New generation time but also adhere to constraints and objectives related to
k =k+1 route optimization.
For all individuals in GNgevaluate J D. Genetic Operators
J
best
=min(JNg)
GeneticoperatorsarefundamentalcomponentsofGA-based
Chromosome with J is the route schedule solution
best methodologies,playingacrucialroleinsteeringthepopulation
evolution towards optimal or near-optimal solutions across
successivegenerations.GARSTreliesonthreeprimarygenetic
B. Population Initialization
operators: selection, crossover, and mutation.
TheinitiationofthepopulationinGAisacrucialstepinflu- 1) Selection: The selection operator determines the indi-
encingtheefficiencyofthealgorithminexploringthesolution viduals chosen as parents based on their fitness, favoring
space.Theinitialpopulationisdenotedbyset,G0.InGARST, those with superior traits. The set of chromosomes in the
the challenge is heightened by the constraint of starting fire kth generation is denoted by Gk and cth chromosome in kth
mitigation before the deadline time. This constraint narrows generationisdenotedasgk.Thetotalnumberofchromosomes
c
the solution space, and relying solely on random initialization in the population of kth generation is denoted as Nk. The set
c
may yield infeasible routes, hindering GA convergence. To of best-selected individuals in the kth generation is denoted
address this, GARST adopts a fitness-based initialization, asGk .Individualswithshorterscheduledquenchtimesand
best
allowing a maximum of four infeasible tasks. This strikes a higher degree of adherence to constraints are more likely
a balance between exploration and feasibility, promoting a to be selected as parents during the selection process. This
diverse yet feasible initial population. As the number of fires promotes the propagation of favorable traits in the population
increases, effective initialization becomes more significant. across subsequent generations.gen2 e) tiC cro ins fs oo rv mer a: tioT nhe frc oro msso sev le er co tep dera pt ao rr enin tsG tA oR gS eT nec ro atm eb nin ee ws 1000 f 4 U 3 f f 10 f
offspringwithdiversecharacteristics.Asingle-pointcrossover 800 f 3 7 U 1 15
with a repair mechanism is employed for the generation of U 5 f
9
v raa nli dd omof lf ys ,p ar nin dg thfr eo sm ingp la er -e pn ot is n. tT ch roe ssc or vo ess ro hv ee lr pspo inin mt ais intc ah io ns inen g 600 f 1 f 6 U 2 f 11
some subroutes. This process ensures that the resulting routes
400 f
14 in the offspring maintain the order and diversity of tasks from f
5
both parents, contributing to the exploration of the solution f f
200 f 8 12
space. 2 U 4 f 13
3) Mutation: The mutation operator in GARST introduces
0
random changes to individual chromosomes, promoting ge- 0 200 400 600 800 1000
netic diversity within the population. This mutation process is X - Position
contingent upon a mutation probability, µ, and the infeasible (a)
task ratio of the chromosome. The infeasible task ratio of
1000
ca
to
hc roh
th
mr eo om
st
oo
o
ms tao elme
t ia
ssr ke dsp er ne
a
os
n
te edn dts
th
at sehe
Iin
kp
f
.r eo
a
Ap so
i lb
lr it li cio htn
y
roo mtaf oski sn of mre aa ets sii ob wle
f io
tht ras
g
ak
c
nks
800
Uf 18
3
U f1
3 f 17
f 4 f
7
f 10
U
f
15
c U 4
infeasible task ratio greater than a threshold value, γ is mu- f 9 5
f tated. The infeasibility-based mutation helps retain offspring 600 f 19 f 6 f 11
1
with lower infeasible tasks and mutate offspring with higher U 2
f
infeasible tasks. Specifically, a swap mutation operator is 400 16 f 14 applied separately to two parts of the chromosome, targeting f 5 f 20
tasks with the highest probability of being infeasible. The 200 f f 8 f 12
2
threshold value on the infeasibility-based mutation plays a f 13
role in maintaining diverse individuals in future generations. 0
This mutation strategy aims to ensure genetic diversity in the 0 200 400 600 800 1000
X - Position
population, mitigating the risk of premature convergence to
(b)
suboptimal solutions.
4) Elitism: The elitist strategy is implemented during off- 1000
s ap rerin reg tag ine en der wat ii to hn o, uw tuh ne dre ergp oar inen gts anw yi gth ent eh te icb oe ps et rfi att in oe ns ss ,v ea nl su ue rs - 800 f 18 fU 34 f 17 U f 4 1 f 7 f 21 f 10 U 5 f 15 U
2
ing their continuation into the next generation. This ensures
t ph ra et veth ne tinto gp- thp eerf lo or sm si on fg bin ed ni ev fiid cu iaa lls gp ener es ti is ct mac ar to es rs iag l.en Te hra eti no en xs t, 600 f
1
f 19 f 25 f 6 f 9 f 11 f 23
generation of individuals will be the union of elitist parents f
400 16 f
and the set of unique offspring generated from parents after f 5 f 20 14
c or po es rs ao tov re sr ia nn Gd Am Ru Sta Ttio isn. caT reh fe ullo yrc dh ee ss it gr nat ei don too sf trt ih ke es ae bg ae ln ae nt cic e 200 f 2 2 f 2 U 3 f 8 f 24 f 1 2 f 13
betweenexplorationandexploitation,promotingthediscovery
of high-quality solutions for efficient wildfire management. 0
0 200 400 600 800 1000
The operational workflow of GARST, detailing the genetic X - Position
algorithm processes, is depicted in Algorithm 1. (c)
Fig.3. Routingandschedulingsolutionforascenariowith5UAVs(a)15
V. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION fires(b)20fires,and(c)25fires.
The GARST is assessed within a 1 km x 1 km area,
considering varying numbers of fire locations for 5 UAVs. The initial population size for the GARST is set to 10,
All fire locations possess a circular profile, with initial fire and the population evolves through 50 generations. A fixed
radii randomly chosen between 5 to 15 m. The UAVs are crossover probability of 0.8 and a mutation probability of
initialized from diverse locations within the search area and 0.01 are chosen for the genetic operations. The population
assumed to travel at a constant speed of 20 m/s. In this study, size is permitted to vary across generations, while an elitist
different UAVs are assumed to fly at different altitudes. Each countof5ensurestheretentionofsuperiorindividualsineach
UAVhasaquenchcapabilityof20m2/s.Thesimulationsare generation. This setup enables GARST to navigate the com-
performed in MATLAB R2022b environment with an Intel plexsolutionspaceefficiently,seekingoptimalornear-optimal
Core-i7, 3.2−GHz processor, and 16−GB memory. solutions for wildfire management in diverse scenarios.
noitisoP
-
Y
noitisoP
- Y
noitisoP
-
YTheGARSTisevaluatedfordifferentnumbersoffires,and TABLEII
theroutingschedulingsolutionsforsamplescenarioswith15, AVERAGEPERFORMANCEOFGARSTFORMONTE-CARLOANALYSIS
20,and25firesareshowninFig.3.Therepresentationofthe
Mean Mean
Success Mean
routing schedule illustrates that opting for a greedy solution, n completion quench
rate(%) FER
where each UAV addresses the nearest small fires, may not time(min) time(min)
15 100 5.18 13.75 1.10
result in a successful mission. This challenge is particularly
20 100 9.86 29.03 1.90
pronounced as the scenarios involve the neutralization of 25 93 15.23 42.88 1.95
dynamic tasks with time constraints. The fire may escalate
into a MUT in wildfire suppression, resulting in infeasible
task scenarios. To overcome this, route selection should be are success rate, mean completion time, mean quench time,
strategic, ensuring the mitigation of all fires as SUT with and mean Fire Expansion Ratio (FER) for the 100 iterations
the shortest schedule. This strategic approach may involve oftheMonte-Carloanalysis.Thesuccessrateisthepercentage
choosingdistantandlargerfiresbasedontheirdeadlinetimes, of successful iterations among the total number of iterations
thereby enhancing the overall effectiveness of the wildfire in the Monte-Carlo analysis. The FER is defined as the ratio
management mission. of an increase in the area of the fire to the initial area of the
The effectiveness of GARST for a wildfire scenario can fireatthestartofthemission[24].Themeancompletiontime
be assessed through the fitness function values in both the is the average value of the time required to mitigate all the
initial and final populations. The key performance indices, fires completely. The mean quench time is the average of the
such as the fitness of the best individual in the final pop- total quench time required to mitigate the fires.
ulation (JNg ), the average fitness of individuals in the final The average performance indices of the GARST from the
best
population(JNg),thefitnessofthebestindividualintheinitial Monte-Carlo analysis are presented in Table II. The mean
avg
population(J0 ),andtheaveragefitnessofindividualsinthe completion time, mean quench time, and mean FER increase
best
initial population (J0 ), serve as benchmarks for evaluation. with the increase in the number of fires. The lower value of
avg
The performance indices for sample scenarios with different FER indicates that the UAVs reached the fire location faster,
numbers of fires are presented in Table I. These metrics preventing further destruction of wildlands. The GARST is
provide insights into the evolution of better individuals over 100% successful in quenching all the fire areas as SUTs
generationsandthecapabilitytogeneratemorefeasibleroutes. in the cases of 15 and 20 fires. The GARST achieved a
success rate of 93% for the 25 fire scenario. The search space
increaseswithanincreaseintasks,andtheconstraintsontime
TABLEI
PERFORMANCEOFGARSTFORDIFFERENTNUMBERSOFFIRES become more prominent with the increased overall fire area
diminishing the success rate of finding optimal solutions in
n J b0 est J a0 vg J bN eg st JaN vg g larger search spaces. The sequential allocation for growing
15 16.02 29.93 12.68 13.62
tasks with time constraints depends on the initial area of
20 45.25 64.17 30.37 31.08
25 27.45 69.02 26.76 34.60 fire, and the failure cases had more fires with a larger initial
area. This also points out the importance of early wildfire
The average fitness value of the final population has been management systems to search, detect, and mitigate fires at
decreasedtomorethan50%oftheinitialpopulationinallthe early stages.
cases. The substantial decrease in the average fitness value
from the initial to the final population highlights the ability
VI. CONCLUSIONS
of GARST to explore and identify feasible assignments. The This paper presents GARST for early wildfire suppression
ability of the algorithm to navigate a vast search space and using a team of UAVs. The method generates the shortest
convergetofeasiblesolutionsiscrucial,giventhechallenging scheduleroutesfortheUAVsforthemitigationofmultiplefire
nature of sequential allocation for growing tasks with time areas with time constraints for SUT mitigations. The strategy
constraints. For scenarios involving 25 fires, seeding the of mitigating fires as SUTs, combined with the objective of
initial population strategically with a near-optimal solution minimizing total quench time through the fitness function,
was necessary for convergence. This emphasizes the pivotal effectively reduces the overall destroyed area and guarantees
role of the initial population in achieving successful results, earlysuppressionofwildfires.Theparentselectionandelitism
especiallywhenthetask-to-agentratioexceeds4.Eventhough mechanism helps in retaining the best individuals in future
the reduction in fitness of the best individual is smaller in generations. The proposed crossover and mutation operators
the case of n = 25,m = 5, the evolution from an initial balancethesearchbetweenfeasibleandinfeasibleassignments
population with only 3 feasible routes to a final population to help generate a better population for future generations.
with 54 feasible routes is noteworthy. The GARST effectively handled wildfire scenarios with time
The GARST performance is further evaluated with Monte- constraints by evolving superior successful solutions with
Carloanalysisfor100iterationsbyvaryingtheinitialpositions reduced total quench time. The GARST has been analyzed
ofUAVsandradiioffiresforthesamesetoffirelocations.The with Monte-Carlo simulations with different numbers of fire
performanceindicesusedtoevaluatetheaverageperformance areas.TheGARSThasa100%successrateforthenumberoffiresupto4timesthenumberofUAVsanda93%for5times [13] G. Gao, Y. Mei, B. Xin, Y.-H. Jia, and W. N. Browne, “Automated
the number of UAVs. The sequential mitigation of fire areas coordination strategy design using genetic programming for dynamic
multipointdynamicaggregation,”IEEETrans.Cybern.,vol.52,no.12,
as SUTs, while minimizing the total quench time, reduces the
pp.13521–13535,Dec.2022.
total burnt wildland with reduced resources. [14] H.-L. Choi, L. Brunet, and J. P. How, “Consensus-based decentralized
The future work includes the development of a scalable auctionsforrobusttaskallocation,”IEEETrans.Robot.,vol.25,no.4,
pp.912–926,Aug.2009.
decentralized approach with better genetic operators for the
[15] S. Hunt, Q. Meng, C. Hinde, and T. Huang, “A consensus-based
time-sensitivegrowingtaskstoimprovethequalityofthefinal grouping algorithm for multi-agent cooperative task allocation with
population and convergence of the algorithm. complexrequirements,”Cogn.Comput.,vol.6,no.3,pp.338–350,Apr.
2014.
REFERENCES [16] S.Wang,Y.Liu,Y.Qiu,andJ.Zhou,“Consensus-baseddecentralized
task allocation for multi-agent systems and simultaneous multi-agent
[1] M.A.Akhloufi,A.Couturier,andN.A.Castro,“Unmannedaerialvehi- tasks,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 12593–12600,
clesforwildlandfires:Sensing,perception,cooperationandassistance,” Oct.2022.
Drones,vol.5,no.1,p.15,Feb.2021. [17] R. Patel, E. Rudnick-Cohen, S. Azarm, M. Otte, H. Xu, and J. W.
[2] C.Yuan,Y.Zhang,andZ.Liu,“Asurveyontechnologiesforautomatic Herrmann,“Decentralizedtaskallocationinmulti-agentsystemsusing
forest fire monitoring, detection, and fighting using unmanned aerial a decentralized genetic algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
vehiclesandremotesensingtechniques,”Can.J.For.Res.,vol.45,no.7, Automat.,2020,pp.3770–3776.
pp.783–792,Mar.2015. [18] J. Turner, Q. Meng, G. Schaefer, A. Whitbrook, and A. Soltoggio,
[3] K. Harikumar, J. Senthilnath, and S. Suresh, “Multi-UAV oxyrrhis “Distributedtaskreschedulingwithtimeconstraintsfortheoptimization
marina-inspired search and dynamic formation control for forest fire- oftotaltaskallocationsinamultirobotsystem,”IEEETrans.Cybern.,
fighting,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 863–873, vol.48,no.9,pp.2583–2597,Sep.2018.
Apr.2019. [19] A.Whitbrook,Q.Meng,andP.W.Chung,“Anoveldistributedschedul-
[4] Y. Jin, Y. Liao, A. Minai, and M. Polycarpou, “Balancing search and ingalgorithmfortime-criticalmulti-agentsystems,”inProc.IEEE/RSJ
target response in cooperative unmanned aerial vehicle (uav) teams,” Int.Conf.Intell.RobotsSyst.,2015,pp.6451–6458.
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Part B (Cybern.), vol. 36, no. 3, pp. [20] S. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Qiu, S. Li, and J. Zhou, “An efficient distributed
571–587,Jun.2006. task allocation method for maximizing task allocations of multirobot
[5] W. Zhao, Q. Meng, and P. W. H. Chung, “A heuristic distributed task systems,”IEEETrans.Autom.Sci.Eng.,2023.
allocationmethodformultivehiclemultitaskproblemsanditsapplication [21] W. Zhao, Q. Meng, and P. W. Chung, “A heuristic distributed task
tosearchandrescuescenario,”IEEETrans.Cybern.,vol.46,no.4,pp. allocationmethodformultivehiclemultitaskproblemsanditsapplication
902–915,Apr.2016. tosearchandrescuescenario,”IEEETrans.Cybern.,vol.46,no.4,pp.
[6] J. Ahn and H.-J. Kim, “A branch and bound algorithm for scheduling 902–915,Apr.2015.
of flexible manufacturing systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., pp. [22] C. Liu and A. Kroll, “Performance impact of mutation operators of a
1–15,2023. subpopulation-based genetic algorithm for multi-robot task allocation
[7] K.Dorling,J.Heinrichs,G.G.Messier,andS.Magierowski,“Vehicle problems,”SpringerPlus,vol.5,no.1,p.1361,Aug.2016.
routingproblemsfordronedelivery,”IEEETrans.Syst.,Man,Cybern., [23] L. Beke, L. Uribe, A. Lara, C. A. C. Coello, M. Weiszer, E. K.
vol.47,no.1,pp.70–85,Jan.2017. Burke,andJ.Chen,“Routingandschedulinginmultigraphswithtime
[8] P.SujitandR.Beard,“Distributedsequentialauctionsformultipleuav constraints-a memetic approach for airport ground movement,” IEEE
taskallocation,”in2007Amer.ControlConf.,2007,pp.3955–3960. Trans.Evol.Comput.,vol.28,no.2,pp.474–488,Apr.2023.
[9] C. P. Pappis and N. P. Rachaniotis, “Scheduling in a multi-processor [24] J. John, K. Harikumar, J. Senthilnath, and S. Sundaram, “An efficient
environment with deteriorating job processing times and decreasing approach with dynamic multiswarm of UAVs for forest firefighting,”
values: the case of forest fires,” J. Heuristics, vol. 16, pp. 617–632, IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 2860–2871,
Aug.2010. May2024.
[10] G. Tian, Y. Ren, and M. Zhou, “Dual-objective scheduling of rescue [25] P.Larranaga,C.M.H.Kuijpers,R.H.Murga,I.Inza,andS.Dizdarevic,
vehiclestodistinguishforestfiresviadifferentialevolutionandparticle “Genetic algorithms for the travelling salesman problem: A review of
swarm optimization combined algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. representations and operators,” Artif. Intell Rev., vol. 13, pp. 129–170,
Syst.,vol.17,no.11,pp.3009–3021,Nov.2016. Apr.1999.
[11] J. Parker, A. Farinelli, and M. Gini, “Lazy max-sum for allocation of [26] A.E.CarterandC.T.Ragsdale,“Anewapproachtosolvingthemultiple
taskswithgrowingcosts,”Robot.Auton.Syst.,vol.110,pp.44–56,Dec. traveling salesperson problem using genetic algorithms,” Eur. J. Oper.
2018. Res.,vol.175,no.1,pp.246–257,Nov.2006.
[12] J. Chen, Y. Guo, Z. Qiu, B. Xin, Q.-S. Jia, and W. Gui, “Multiagent [27] L.Beke,M.Weiszer,andJ.Chen,“Acomparisonofgeneticrepresen-
dynamictaskassignmentbasedonforestfirepointmodel,”IEEETrans. tations and initialisation methods for the multi-objective shortest path
Autom.Sci.Eng.,vol.19,no.2,pp.833–849,Apr.2022. problem on multigraphs,” SN Comput. Sci., vol. 2, no. 3, p. 176, Mar.
2021.