Thisworkhasbeenacceptedforpublicationin2024EuropeanConferenceonNetworksandCommunications(EuCNC)&6GSummit
Early Acceptance Matching Game for User-Centric
Clustering in Scalable Cell-free MIMO Networks
Ala Eddine Nouali∗, Mohamed Sana∗, Jean-Paul Jamont†
∗CEA-Leti, Universite´ Grenoble Alpes, F-38000 Grenoble, France,
†LCIS, Universite´ Grenoble Alpes, Valence, France
Email : {ala-eddine.nouali, mohamed.sana}@cea.fr; jean-paul.jamont@univ-grenoble-alpes.fr
Abstract—The canonical setup is the primary approach
adopted in cell-free multiple-input multiple-output (MIMO) net-
works, in which all access points (APs) jointly serve every
user equipment (UE). This approach is not scalable in terms
of computational complexity and fronthaul signaling becoming
impractical in large networks. This work adopts a user-centric
approach, a scalable alternative in which only a set of preferred
APs jointly serve a UE. Forming the optimal cluster of APs
for each UE is a challenging task, especially, when it needs to
be dynamically adjusted to meet the quality of service (QoS)
requirements of the UE. This complexity is even exacerbated
when considering the constrained fronthaul capacity of the UE
and the AP. We solve this problem with a novel many-to-many Fig.1:Auser-centricclusteringoperationinacell-freeMIMO
matchinggame.Morespecifically,wedeviseanearlyacceptance network.Here,M geographicallydistributedAPsjointlyserve
matching algorithm, which immediately admits or rejects UEs K UEs. Each UE is served by a cluster of nearby preferred
based on their requests and available radio resources. The
APs depending on its QoS requirements.
proposed solution significantly reduces the fronthaul signaling
whilesatisfyingthemaximumofUEsintermsofrequestedQoS
compared to state-of-the-art approaches.
[9] maximizes network energy efficiency constrained to UEs
I. INTRODUCTION QoS and APs transmission power capabilities. Similarly, [10],
Commercialized networks use cellular architecture, where [11]studyclusterformationtomaximizethenetworkthrough-
terminals suffer from large variation of quality of service put. Although there are works that restrict the total number of
(QoS) [1]. User equipment (UE) close to the access point APs serving a UE, these works consider that the capacity of
(AP), which references the cell center can achieve a high the APs is unlimited: an AP can accept any number of UEs.
QoS. However, the QoS fluctuates significantly as user moves This assumption is unrealistic as in practice, UEs and APs
further away from the center, preventing cellular networks have limited fronthaul capacity and computational capability.
from providing high, consistent and uniform QoS to every Considering these constraints, various methods have been
UE regardless of their location in the network. Cell-free aims employedtoallocateradioresourcesefficiently,withmany-to-
to solve this problem. It is a proposed new paradigm that many(M2M)matchinggameemergingasaparticularlyeffec-
eliminates cell boundaries and manages interference by joint tive solution [12]. This approach is based on the principles of
processingatAPstoserveUEs[2].Thecanonicalsetupisthe matchingtheory,whichhasattractedtheinterestofresearchers
trivialapproachadoptedincell-freenetworks,inwhichallAPs because of its ability to enable distributed user association
jointly serve each UE. This approach does not scale well in withlowcomputationalcomplexityandfastconvergencetime
terms of fronthaul requirements and computational complex- [12]. Deferred acceptance (DA) is the common strategy used
ity, becoming impractical in large networks [3]. User-centric in M2M matching game. In this method, APs buffer user
clustering is the proposed scalable alternative, in which each association requests at each round, finalizing the association
UE is served by the nearest preferred APs [4], [5]. Different procedure only at the last iteration [13]. This results in a
techniques are adopted to form clusters of APs for UEs. The prohibitive delays and slow convergence time.
works [3], [6] study centralized and distributed association Different from previous work, we propose to optimize
AP-UEbasedonpilotassignment.Authorsin[7],[8]propose radio resource allocation by forming clusters of APs for UEs
to minimize fronthaul signaling while guaranteeing minimum depending on their specific QoS requirements (as shown in
QoS for UEs. Due to limited network resource, which need Fig. 1). We present a novel user association scheme based
to be efficiently allocated according to demand and network on M2M matching game between the set of UEs and APs,
conditions,variousstudiesinvestigateuser-centricclusteringto aiming to satisfy the maximum UEs in the network in terms
manageresourceallocationincell-freenetworks.Forinstance, of requested QoS. In contrast to the DA strategy proposed in
4202
nuJ
01
]PS.ssee[
1v20460.6042:viXra[13], we adopt an early acceptance (EA) strategy to speed In Eq. (5) and (6), P (t) denotes the power allocated by
k,m
up the AP-UE association process. In this approach, UEs AP m to UE k at time t and δ (t) is a binary association
k,m
apply to a specific set of APs, which immediately accept or variable, which indicates whether UE k is associated with AP
reject the association requests based on their preferences and m at time t, in which case δ (t) = 1 and δ (t) = 0
k,m k,m
available radio resources. The proposed solution significantly otherwise. Hence, the data rate perceived by UE k at time t
reducesthecomputationalcomplexityoftheclusterformation is given by:
process, while providing an acceptable satisfaction level for R (t)=B·SE (t), (7)
k k
the maximum number of UEs in the network, depending on
their requested QoS. where SE (t)=log (1+SINR (t)) is the spectral efficiency
k 2 k
(SE) of UE k at time t and B is the total system bandwidth.
II. SYSTEMMODEL&PROBLEMFORMULATION
A. System Model B. Problem Formulation
We consider a downlink cell-free MIMO network consists Let Rreq(t) denote the time-varying data rate demand of
of M geographically distributed APs that cooperate to serve k
UEk andκ (t)indicatesitsQoSsatisfactionattimet,which
k
K geographically distributed UEs. Let M={1,...,M} and
we define as in [15] as follows:
K={1,...,K} denote the set of APs and UEs, respectively.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
Each AP m is equipped with N antennas, while each UE has R (t)
κ (t)=min 1, k . (8)
a single antenna. We consider the Rayleigh fading channel k Rreq(t)
k
model adopted in [7], in which the complex random channel
h k,m ∈ CN×1, independent and identically distributed (iid), Let κ 0 ∈ [0,1] define the minimum QoS satisfaction level of
between UE k and AP m at time t reads as: UEs. We say a UE k is κ 0-satisfied if κ k(t) ≥ κ 0. In this
(cid:113) case, when κ 0 = 1, we say the UE is fully satisfied. The
h k,m(t)=α k,m(t) g k,m(t), (1) QoS of a UE varies according to multiple factors, including
powerallocationanduser-clusteringstrategy,whichaffectcell
where α (t) ∼ CN(0,I ) denotes the small-scale fading
k,m N
interference and hence network performance.
and g (t) is the channel gain, which captures the distance-
k,m
In this context, we are interested in maximizing the total
dependent path loss and the shadowing effect as follows:
number of κ -satisfied UEs, while minimizing the number of
(cid:18)
λ
(cid:19)2(cid:18)
1
(cid:19)η
fronthaul
ass0
ociations. To this end, we propose the following
g (t)= χ (t). (2)
k,m 4π d (t) k,m optimization problem:
k,m
Here, λ is the wavelength of the operated carrier frequency (cid:40) (cid:41)
(cid:88)
f th, ed pk a,m thi ls ot sh se ed xi ps ota nn ec ne
t
b ae nt dwe χen UE ∼k La Nnd (0A ,σP 2)m d, eη nod te en so tt he es m Ψ(a tx
)
E 1 {κk(t)≥κ0} , (P)
k,m s k∈K
random log-normally distributed shadowing. s.t. δ (t)∈{0,1}, ∀k ∈K,m∈M, (C )
k,m 1
In the downlink scenario, we assume a full knowledge of
P (t)≥0, ∀k ∈K,m∈M, (C )
channels between APs and UEs. We denote with v (t) ∈ k,m 2
k,m (cid:88)
CN×1 thedownlinktransmitbeamformeratAPmforUEk at δ k,m(t)P k,m(t)≤P max, ∀m∈M, (C 3)
timet,whichweobtainviathelinearminimummeansquared k∈K
(cid:88)
error (LMMSE) precoding algorithm [14]: δ (t)≤K , ∀m∈M, (C )
k,m max 4
v (t)=h (t)(hH (t)h (t)+σ2(t))−1. (3) k∈K
k,m k,m k,m k,m n (cid:88)
δ (t)≤M , ∀k ∈K, (C )
Here, hH is the conjugate transpose of h and σ2(t) k,m max 5
k,m k,m n m∈M
denotes the receiver noise power at time t, which is a scalar
in our case. Accordingly, the signal-to-interference-plus-noise where Ψ(t) = {δ k,m(t),P k,m(t), ∀k,m ∈ K × M} is
ratio (SINR) perceived by UE k at time t reads as: the set of parameters to adjust to maximize our objective
function. The expectation in (P) is taken w.r.t. the random
S (t)
SINR k(t)=
I
(t)k +σ2(t), (4) traffic requests and channel realizations. The constraint (C 1)
k n defines the variable of association δ as a binary variable.
k,m
where S k(t) is the received signal power given as: Constraints(C 2)and(C 3)restrictsthetransmissionpowerofan
(cid:12) (cid:12)2 AP m to do not exceed its maximum of transmission power
(cid:12)(cid:88)M (cid:113) (cid:12)
S k(t)=(cid:12)
(cid:12)
P k,m(t)hH k,m(t)v k,m(t)δ k,m(t)(cid:12)
(cid:12)
, (5) P max. Constraint (C 4) indicates that each AP m can serve
(cid:12) m=1 (cid:12) K max UEs at most. Finally, constraint (C 5) ensures that each
UE k is associated to at most M APs.
and I (t) is the perceived interference power given as: max
k
In this work, we focus on the user-clustering problem. We
(cid:12) (cid:12)2
(cid:88)K (cid:12)(cid:88)M (cid:113) (cid:12) assume that each AP equally shares its transmit power with
I (t)= (cid:12) P (t)hH (t)v (t)δ (t)(cid:12) . (6)
k (cid:12) j,m k,m j,m j,m (cid:12) its served UEs. Thus, the power allocation strategy is fully
(cid:12) (cid:12)
j=1 m=1 determined by the user-clustering operation.
j̸=kSTART
UE set UE1 UE2 ... UEk ... UEK
Initialization
-Initializeκ0.
-Setmk=1,∀k∈K.
-PutallUEsinarejectionsetR.
AP set AP1 AP2 ... APm ... APM -Ini -tia Uliz :e ue nm asp st oy cis ae tt es d: UEs
-A:associatedUEs
-S+:satisfiedUEs
Fig. 2: Many-to-many matching between APs and UEs. -S−:unsatisfiedUEs
III. USER-CENTRICCLUSTERINGASAMANY-TO-MANY ForceeachUEk ∈Rassociationwithitsfirst
preferredunsaturatedAP.
MATCHINGGAME IsthereanyUE -Ifsuccess:
As shown in Fig. 2, user association can be seen as a u up l nk d is sa t at∈ te q ud u rR aop ttr eaei dn f oe Aft rh e Pae n nc ?e No - -uA Rn es ss mao t oc u vi ra eat te UedU EAE kPk fruw os mii nth g Ri Ats alg nfi . drs 1 at . dp dre if te tr ore Ad .
many-to-many matching game between two sets of players: -Else:
-RemoveUEkfromRandaddittoU.
APs and UEs. During this game, each player, from a set of
local observations, constructs a preference list based on its Yes
own objective. UEs request association to APs according to
their preference lists and APs, in turn, decide individually the RequesteachUEk∈Rassociationwithitsmk–th
preferredunsaturatedAP.
UEs to serve based on their own preference lists. -Ifsuccess:
-AssociateUEkwithAPmusingAlg.1.
-RemoveUEkfromRandaddittoA.
A. Background on many-to-many matching concepts -Else:
-IfPkUE=∅:
Beforeformulatingtheuser-centricclusteringasamany-to- -RemoveUEkfromRandaddittoU.
-Else:
many matching game, we first introduce some basic concepts -mk←mk+1.
-keepUEkinR.
based on two-sided matching theory [12].
Inmatchinggame,eachUEkstartsbybuildingapreference
list of ordered APs PUE, from most to least preferred. To do
k
so, it relies on a preference metric ϑUE (e.g. the perceived
SINR w.r.t. AP m): UE k prefers AP k m,m to AP m′ (m̸=m′) No IsRempty? Yes U evp od la ut te ioc nlu ss tt re ar ts egb yas oe fd Ao ln g.th 2e .
if ϑUE ≥ ϑUE . Similarly, each AP m uses a preference
k,m k,m′
metric ϑAP (e.g. the channel gain g w.r.t. UE k) to build
k,m k,m
its preference list of ordered UEs PAP.
m
Definition 1. A many-to-many matching µ is a mapping STOP
function that assigns a matching vector of APs CUE to each Fig. 3: Flowchart representing our EA user-centric clustering
k
UE k and a matching vector of UEs CAP to each AP m. The procedure.
m
matching process is constrained to:
1) µ(k)=CUE ⊆M and |µ(k)|≤M ∀k ∈K,
k max
2) µ(m)=C mAP ⊆K and |µ(m)|≤K max ∀m∈M, untiltheendofthegame.Asaresult,theassociationbetween
3) k ∈µ(m)⇔m∈µ(k). APs and UEs can be a time-consuming process.
To overcome this problem, we adopt a new matching game
Conditions (1) and (2) represent the matching process
called early acceptance (EA) with preference list updating
between APs and UEs whereas condition (3) guarantees a
(EA-PLU) [16]. In this game, APs immediately decide to
mutually accepted match between the set of UEs and APs.
accept or reject UEs at each iteration. This procedure al-
Theinitialstepinamatchinggameinvolvesconstructingthe
lows to accelerate the association process and control the
preferencelistsoftheplayers.Inthecaseofwirelessnetworks,
number of associations between APs and UEs. Consequently,
we can build these preference lists through various metrics
EA game reduces the total number of fronthaul connections
includingchannelsgains,UEsSINRordatarates.Inourcase,
unlike DA game with known number of associations equal to
we build the preference lists for both UEs and APs based on
min(MK ,KM ). With lower AP-UE connections, few
the channel gains. max max
messages are exchanged between UEs and APs via fronthaul
B. Proposed algorithm links, thus, limiting the communication overhead.
Deferredacceptance(DA)isatwo-sidedmatchinggamein OuralgorithmissummarizedintheflowchartofFig.3.The
which,ateachiteration,eachAPretainsinitswaitinglistonly proposedEAgametakesasaninputthepreferencelistsofAPs
the K UEs preferred among the first new UE applicants (PAP,∀m ∈ M) and UEs (PUE,∀k ∈ K) and the quotas of
max m k
and those previously in its waiting list, and reject the others APs (qAP,∀m ∈ M) and UEs (qUE,∀k ∈ K). The quota
m k
[13]. UEs in APs waiting list will be associated after the final of UE k (resp. AP m) is the number of remaining possible
iteration of the game i.e. the association procedure is deferred associationsitcanestablish.TheoutputoftheEAgameisthematching vector for UEs CUE =(cid:2) CUE,CUE,...,CUE(cid:3) . Algorithm 2: Cluster evolution process
1 2 K
We initialize our algorithm by setting the preference index Data: PAP,PUE,qAP,qUE,∀k∈K,m∈M,
m k m k
ofallUEstoone(m k =1,∀k ∈K),formingarejectionsetR and sets A,S+ and S−
containingallUEs,andcreatingemptysetsofassociatedUEs Result: Matching vector CUE
(A=∅),unassociatedUEs(U =∅),satisfiedUEs(S+ =∅) 1 while A̸=∅ and there exists a favorable-association pair
andunsatisfiedUEs(S− =∅).Thefirststepofouralgorithm do
2 Each UE k∈A tests its satisfaction;
consistsinmaximizingthenumberofassociatedUEs.Westart
3 if κ k ≥κ 0 then
by associating each UE to one AP. At each iteration of the 4 Remove UE k from A and add it to S+;
game, each UE k applies to each m k-th preferred AP m and 5 else
it will be immediately accepted if it is among the top-q mAP 6 if P kUE ̸=∅ then
UEs in the preference list of the AP m. Algorithm 1 details 7 Keep UE k in A ;
the association procedure between UE k and AP m. 8 else
9 Remove UE k from A and add it to S−;
WhentheupdatedpreferencelistofaUEkbecomesempty,
itwillbeaddedtothesetofunassociatedUEsU.UEsthatare 10 Each UE k∈A tries to improve its κ k;
rejected by all APs remain in R. For each UE k remaining 11 if P kUE ̸=∅ then
in R (not preferred by APs), we force the association with 12 Set m k =1;
its first AP m in its updated preference list even though it 13 while m k ≤min(q kUE,|P kUE|) and there exists no
favorable-association pair do
is not among the top-qAP UEs in its updated preference list.
m 14 UE k applies to its m k-th preferred AP (namely
When all APs run out of quota, UEs remaining in R will be AP m with qAP ̸=0);
m
addedtothesetofunassociatedUEsU.Throughthoseforced 15 if (AP m,UE k) is a favorable-association pair
associations, we provide best link quality for UEs remaining then
in R after prioritizing UEs favored by APs in the previous 16 Associate UE k with AP m using Alg. 1;
17 Keep UE k in A ;
step. In this way, we guarantee that either all UEs are served
18 else
byatleastoneAPorthequotasoftheAPsarefullyexploited. 19 m k ←m k+1 ;
Definition 2 (favorable-association pair). (AP m, UE k) is a 20 else
favorable-association pair if and only if it satisfies 21 Remove UE k from A and add it to S−;
1) UE k ∈P
mAP(cid:0)
1:q
mAP(cid:1)
, 22 if A̸=∅ then
2) Associ (cid:88)ate UE k to AP m ⇒ (cid:88)κ k(µ evolve)>κ k(µ) 23 Remove each UE k∈A from A and add it to S−;
and κ (µ )≥ κ (µ),
i evolve i
i∈K\U i∈K\U
whereµ isthematchingstrategyobtainedafterlettingµ
evolve
evolve with the new association between AP m and UE k. Otherwise,itremainsinAwhenitspreferencelistisnotempty
or we add it to S−.
Condition (1) indicates that UE k must be among the top-
The next steps in the Algorithm try to improve the satisfac-
qAP UEs in the updated preference list of AP m. Condition
m tion level of each UE k remaining in A. We start by setting
(2) implies that the association AP −UE should improve
m k the reference index of all UEs to one (m =1,∀k ∈A), and
k
thesatisfactionlevelofUEk andshouldnotdecreasethesum
each UE k will apply to its m -th preferred AP m among
k
of satisfaction level of all associated UEs. the top-qUE APs in its updated preference list. When the pair
k
Based on definition 2, we propose the cluster evolution (AP , UE ) is a favorable-association pair, the association
m k
process described in Algorithm 2. It starts by testing the AP − UE is set (see Algorithm 1). Otherwise, m is
m k k
satisfaction of each UE k in A. When UE k is κ 0-satisfied updated as m ← m +1 and UE k will apply to the next
k k
(i.e. κ k ≥ κ 0) , we add it to the set of satisfied UEs S+. m -th preferred AP. The cluster evolution process is repeated
k
until there exists no favorable-association pair or A becomes
empty. Hence, we obtain the association vector CUE.
Algorithm1:UserassociationbetweenAP andUE
m k
1 Add AP m to C kUE; IV. NUMERICALRESULTS
2 Remove UE k from P mAP;
Inthissection,weevaluatetheperformanceofourproposed
3 Remove AP m from P kUE;
algorithm,focusingspecificallyonitseffectivenessinenhanc-
4 q kUE ←q kUE−1;
ing the satisfaction level of UEs while limiting the number of
5 q mAP ←q mAP−1;
AP-UE associations. In our simulations, we consider a cell-
6 if q mAP =0 then free MIMO network consists of fixed number of M = 50
7 Remove AP m from P kUE,∀k ∈K; APs, each equipped with N = 16 antennas that jointly serve
8 if q kUE =0 then a fixed number of K =20 single-antenna UEs. The APs and
9 Remove UE k from P mAP,∀m∈M; UEs are randomly distributed in a 200 m by 200 m area.
During T = 100 realizations, the APs are static and UEsTABLE I: Simulation parameters TABLEII:Computationalcomplexityofcomparedalgorithms.
Notations Parameters Values[17] UserClusteringAlg. ComputationalComplexity
f Carrierfrequency 3.5GHz BC O(KMlog(M))
B Systembandwidth 20MHz MD O(KMlog(M))
T Simulationduration 100
CS O(KM)
M NumberofAPs 50
K NumberofUEs 20 GCA O(KM3log(M))
Kmax MaximumnumberofservedUEsperAP 12 M2Mw/oSMP O(KMlog(M)+KM2log(K))
M RNm rea qx Maxim Rum N equ un m eu sbm te eb r de or tf ho raf on ua t gess n ho n pc a ui s tat bpe yed r UA A EP Ps kperUE {5,30,118 06
0}Mb/s
PM A2M (EAw -/ MS 2M MP )1 2 O O(K (KM Mlo lg o( gM (K) M+K )+M N2 Elo Ag( mK in) (+ KmN aS xM ,MPM mam xa )x KK )3)
Pmk ax MaximumpowerofeachAP 200mW 1Oursimulationsshowthat,ingeneral,NSMPdoesnotexceedMmax.
η Pathlossexponent 2 2NEA denotesthenumberofpotentialteststoformfavorable-associationpairs
σσ ns 22 Sha Nd oo iw sein vg arv iaa nri ca ence 106
−5
givenasNEA=(cid:80) k∈Kmin(q kUE,|P kUE|).Itisupper-boundedbyMmaxK.
Dth PowerdifferencethresholdforAPsselection 30dB1
λGCA SE-EEratioforGCA 02
κ0 UEsatisfactionlevelthreshold {0.8,0.9,1}
1Weusethesamethresholdasin[9]toformclustersofAPsforeachUE.
2WechooseλGCA=0toconsideronlyminimumofSEmaximizationproblem
fortheimprovementprocess[9].
follow a random way-point mobility where the UE chooses
a random direction and moves with 1 m/s. The UEs request
random traffic data from the set {5,30,100} Mb/s. Table I
summarizes the simulation parameters.
Benchmarks.Wecompareoursolutionwithsixclassicbench-
marks from the literature:
• Best channel (BC) associates each UE to the AP with
the highest channel gain.
• Min distance (MD) associates each UE to the closest
AP based on distance.
• Canonical setup (CS) associates each UE to all APs.
• Greedy combining algorithm (GCA) forms clusters of Fig. 4: Percentage of κ 0-satisfied UEs in the network.
APs for each UE by improving the minimum of QoS per
UE with deactivation of certain APs [9].
• Many-to-manywithoutswap-matchingprocess(M2M Percentage of κ 0-satisfied UEs. This metric is exactly our
w/o SMP) associates UEs via many-to-many matching objectivefunctionthatweaimtomaximize.Here,wemeasure
game with DA [13]. howmanyUEsreachedaκ -satisfactionlevelusingouralgo-
0
• Many-to-many with swap-matching process (M2M w/ rithm versus benchmarks. As depicted in Fig. 4, our approach
SMP) is an extension of previous benchmark. After ob- surpasses the benchmarks significantly, irrespective of the κ
0
taining clusters, we will try to switch, between two UEs, value. Our proposed algorithm shows higher κ -satisfied UEs
0
one of their associated APs while all other associations percentage that exceeds 10% in the case of fully satisfaction
remain unchanged. We will allow swap between two (i.e.κ =1).Thus,wewereabletoimproveclusterformation
0
different associated APs of each pair of UEs when the process with less computational cost compared to the most
substitution should not reduce the total satisfaction level competitive benchmark M2M w/ SMP.
of the network and should strictly increase at least κ of Level of satisfaction per UE. With this metric, we evaluate
one UE while κ of the other should not decrease. the QoS perceived by UE (i.e. κ in Eq. (8)). As shown in Fig.
Complexity analysis. Table II details the computational com- 5, the results demonstrate that our proposed method ensures
plexity of the different benchmarks and our proposed algo- the highest satisfaction level, exceeding 98% regardless of
rithm, which we refer to as PA (EA-M2M). In particular, in κ 0 value. Specifically, in scenarios where fully satisfaction
the matching process of M2M w/ SMP, each AP sorts the is desired, our method reaches a satisfaction rate of 99.1%.
list of UEs requesting association and chooses the top K Consequently, we guarantee that even for 5.9% of UEs that
max
preferred UEs. This procedure costs O(KMlog(K)) at each do not achieve complete satisfaction (see Fig. 4), they still
iteration. In addition, the swap-matching process (SMP) in experience a satisfactory QoS.
M2M w/ SMP requires, in the worse case, O(M2 K3) pro- Number of AP-UE associations. Here, we assess the num-
max
hibitive permutations further complexifying this approach. In ber of associations established between APs and UEs. The
contrast,oursolutiondoesnotrequireasortingprocedure,and results presented in Fig. 6 show that our solution significantly
the cluster evolution process we propose as an alternative to improves the QoS for each UE while substantially reducing
SMP, limits the computational cost to O(NEAK). Therefore, the number of necessary associations between APs and UEs.
PA (EA-M2M) significantly reduces the total execution time Compared to M2M w/ SMP, which complies with the as-
compared to M2M w/ SMP. sociation limits of UEs and APs, our algorithm reduces byFuture work will investigate advanced ways for defining
UEs and APs preference lists to strengthen user-centric clus-
teringprocess.Moreover,oursolutionwillincludesleepmode
mechanisms to improve energy efficiency of the network.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This work was funded by the French government under the
France 2030 ANR program “PEPR Networks of the Future”
(ref. 22-PEFT-0003).
REFERENCES
[1] O¨.Tug˘feDemir,E.Bjo¨rnson,andL.Sanguinetti,“Foundationsofuser-
centriccell-freemassivemimo,”arXive-prints,pp.arXiv–2108,2021.
[2] H.Q.Ngo,A.Ashikhmin,H.Yang,E.G.Larsson,andT.L.Marzetta,
“Cell-free massive MIMO versus small cells,” IEEE Transactions on
WirelessCommunications,vol.16,no.3,pp.1834–1850,2017.
[3] E.Bjo¨rnsonandL.Sanguinetti,“Scalablecell-freemassiveMIMOsys-
tems,”IEEETransactionsonCommunications,vol.68,no.7,pp.4247–
Fig. 5: Percentage of satisfaction level per UE in the network. 4261,2020.
[4] S.Buzzietal.,“Cell-freemassiveMIMO:User-centricapproach,”IEEE
WirelessCom.Letters,vol.6,no.6,pp.706–709,2017.
[5] S. Buzzi et al., “User-centric communications versus cell-free massive
MIMOfor5Gcellularnetworks,”in21thInternationalITGWorkshop
onSmartAntennas,pp.1–6,2017.
[6] Z. Ren, A. Doufexi, and M. A. Beach, “Scalable pilot assignment for
user-centric cell-free massive MIMO networks,” in IEEE International
ConferenceonCommunications(ICC),pp.2555–2560,2022.
[7] C.F.Mendoza,S.Schwarz,andM.Rupp,“Clusterformationinscalable
cell-free massive MIMO networks,” in IEEE International Conference
on Wireless and Mobile Computing, Networking and Communications
(WiMob),pp.62–67,2020.
[8] C. F. Mendoza et al., “User-Centric Clustering in Cell-Free MIMO
Networks using Deep Reinforcement Learning,” in IEEE International
ConferenceonCommunications(ICC),pp.1036–1041,2023.
[9] M. Ito, I. Kanno, Y. Amano, Y. Kishi, W.-Y. Chen, T. Choi, and
A. F. Molisch, “Joint AP On/Off and User-Centric Clustering for
Energy-EfficientCell-FreeMassiveMIMOSystems,”inIEEEVehicular
TechnologyConference(VTC2022-Fall),pp.1–5,2022.
[10] H. A. Ammar, R. Adve, S. Shahbazpanahi, G. Boudreau, and K. V.
Srinivas, “Downlink resource allocation in multiuser cell-free MIMO
networks with user-centric clustering,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless
Communications,vol.21,no.3,pp.1482–1497,2021.
Fig. 6: Number of AP-UE associations in the network. [11] J.Jiang,J.Wang,H.Chu,Q.Gao,andJ.Zhang,“WhaleSwarmRein-
forcementLearningBasedDynamicCooperationClusteringMethodfor
Cell-Free Massive MIMO Systems,” IEEE Transactions on Vehicular
Technology,vol.72,no.3,pp.4114–4118,2022.
84% the number of associations required by M2M w/ SMP. [12] Y.Gu,W.Saad,M.Bennis,M.Debbah,andZ.Han,“Matchingtheory
Consequently, we significantly limit the fronthaul signaling, for future wireless networks: Fundamentals and applications,” IEEE
CommunicationsMagazine,vol.53,no.5,pp.52–59,2015.
as each AP now interacts with a smaller number of UEs.
[13] Z. Si, G. Chuai, W. Gao, and K. Zhang, “Many-to-Many matching
Furthermore,italsolimitthecomputationalcomplexityneeded user association scheme in ultra-dense millimeter-wave networks,” in
for e.g. channel precoding schemes. IEEEInternationalSymposiumonPersonal,IndoorandMobileRadio
Communications(PIMRC),pp.739–744,2022.
[14] B. Bandemer, M. Haardt, and S. Visuri, “Linear MMSE multi-user
V. CONCLUSION
MIMOdownlinkprecodingforuserswithmultipleantennas,”inIEEE
InternationalSymposiumonPersonal,IndoorandMobileRadioCom-
Inthispaper,weproposeamatchinggameanddevisescal-
munications(PIMRC),pp.1–5,2006.
able algorithms for user-centric clustering in cell-free MIMO
[15] M. Sana, N. di Pietro, and E. Calvanese Strinati, “Transferable and
networks. Our solution jointly takes into account the QoS re- DistributedUserAssociationPoliciesfor5GandBeyondNetworks,”in
Proc. IEEE International Symposium on Personal, Indoor and Mobile
quirementsofUEsandlimitedradioresourcestomaximizethe
RadioCommunications(PIMRC),pp.966–971,2021.
number of satisfied UEs in terms of requested QoS. To do so,
[16] A.AlizadehandM.Vu,“DistributeduserassociationinB5Gnetworks
weproposeanEA-basedmany-to-manymatchingalgorithmto usingearlyacceptancematchinggame,”IEEETransactionsonWireless
speed the convergence time and limit the signaling overhead.
Communications,vol.20,no.4,pp.2428–2441,2020.
[17] G. Interdonato, M. Karlsson, E. Bjo¨rnson, and E. G. Larsson, “Local
Numericalresultsshowthatourproposedsolutionoutperforms partialzero-forcingprecodingforcell-freemassiveMIMO,”IEEETrans.
state-of-the-art benchmarks. For instance, compared to DA- onWirelessCommunications,vol.19,no.7,pp.4758–4774,2020.
basedschemes,itreducesthenumberofassociationsby84%,
while providing up to 10% improvement in the number of
fully satisfied UEs.