How is the Pilot Doing: VTOL Pilot Workload Estimation by
Multimodal Machine Learning on Psycho-physiological Signals
Jong Hoon Park∗†, Lawrence Chen∗†, Ian Higgins†, Zhaobo Zheng‡, Shashank Mehrotra‡, Kevin Salubre‡,
Mohammadreza Mousaei†, Steven Willits†, Blaine Levedahl‡, Timothy Buker‡, Eliot Xing†, Teruhisa Misu‡,
Sebastian Scherer†, and Jean Oh†
∗These authors made equal contributions to this work
†Robotics Institute, Carnegie Mellon University
‡Honda Research Institute USA, Inc
Abstract—Vertical take-off and landing (VTOL) aircraft do These novel tasks require additional knowledge about flight
not require a prolonged runway, thus allowing them to land dynamicsandcontrol,andtherelatedworkloadiscriticalbut
almostanywhere.Inrecentyears,theirflexibilityhasmadethem
poorly understood.
popular in development, research, and operation. When com-
In this work, we demonstrate pilot workload estimation
pared to traditional fixed-wing aircraft and rotorcraft, VTOLs
bringuniquechallengesastheycombinemanymaneuversfrom for VTOL operation through psycho-physiological sensing.
bothtypesofaircraft.Pilotworkloadisacriticalfactorforsafe We design flight tasks, taking into consideration the unique-
and efficient operation of VTOLs. In this work, we conduct ness of VTOL maneuvers, and collect data and associated
a user study to collect multimodal data from 28 pilots while
workloads. We also integrate a complete set of sensors that
they perform a variety of VTOL flight tasks. We analyze and
provides design guideline for future VTOL pilot workload
interpolate behavioral patterns related to their performance
and perceived workload. Finally, we build machine learning estimation.Tothebestofourknowledge,thisworkisthefirst
modelstoestimatetheirworkloadfromthecollecteddata.Our inthefieldtoinvestigatepsycho-physiologicalmeasurements
resultsarepromising,suggestingthatquantitativeandaccurate of workload for pilots of VTOL aircraft. We also contribute
VTOL pilot workload monitoring is viable. Such assistive tools
to the understanding of the predictive power of almost all
wouldhelptheresearchfieldunderstandVTOLoperationsand
available wearable sensor signals in such tasks.
serveasasteppingstonefortheindustrytoensureVTOLsafe
operations and further remote operations. Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows.InSectionII,
we discuss some preexisting literature on workload estima-
I. INTRODUCTION tion.InSectionIII,weintroducedetailsabouttheuserstudy,
The interest in urban air mobility (UAM), such as VTOL including the simulation platform, sensor setup, and flight
aircraft, has steadily increased through the past few decades. task design. In Section IV, we go over the various signal
Combining the advantages of a rotorcraft and fixed-wing processing and feature extraction methods performed on the
aircraft, VTOLs can take off and land from the same place raw data. Then, in Section V, we show some preliminary
without the need for a long runway [1]. VTOLs are ad- results of the statistical analysis. In Section VI, we describe
vantageous in urban and short-distance flights as they allow the machine learning algorithms used to estimate workload.
faster cruise speeds, better transport capabilities, and ease Finally, we conclude the paper and discuss the limitations
of landing and take-off [2]. The more modern electric or and future research directions in Section VII.
hybrid VTOLs provide additional benefits, including lower
II. RELATEDWORK
emissions and noise levels, which are highly beneficial for
UAM [3]. With these advantages, VTOLs introduce new Workload measurement and management for VTOL pi-
modesofmobility,expandingthewaysindividualscantravel. loting is vital for safe and efficient commercial operation
However, despite their advantages, VTOLs present dif- [6]. There has been some existing research on this topic for
ferent challenges and considerations compared to existing single-pilot fixed-wing aircraft. It was found that subjective
aviation modes. For example, due to their better ability to measurementslikeNASA-TLXwereabletoeffectivelymea-
takeoffandlandforshort-distanceflights,mostcurrentcom- sure task demands [7]. However, during normal operations,
mercial VTOL designs are smaller in size compared to their pilots are already highly occupied with their primary tasks
fixed-wing counterparts. Thus, most commercial VTOLs are and would not have the capacity for questions or workload
designedforasinglepilotonboard.Thisreducesredundancy self-reports,especiallyduringorimmediatelyafterthetask(s)
in the cockpit when pilot workload reaches critical levels being evaluated for workload. Continuous, non-invasive, and
during a flight [4]. Moreover, VTOLs combine challenging automaticmeasurementsareneededforpracticalmonitoring.
maneuvers from both rotorcraft and fixed-wing aircraft, such Wilson analyzed pilots’ mental workload during flight using
as both vertical and rolling landings. Many potential VTOL psycho-physiological measures [8]. Ten pilots flew for about
pilotscomefromeitherrotorcraftorfixed-wingbackgrounds, 90-minute scenarios while their heart rate, eye blinks, elec-
and frequent transitions between the maneuver habits may trodermalactivity,andelectricalbrainactivitywererecorded.
add a significant workload [5]. VTOLs also bring unique Cardiacandelectrodermalmeasureswerefoundtobehighly
challenges, such as vertical and horizontal flight transitions. correlated with task demands, and blink rates decreased dur-
4202
nuJ
01
]CH.sc[
1v84460.6042:viXraing the more highly visually demanding tasks. Eye gaze was
more thoroughly studied later for commercial single-pilot
operations [9]. Participants flew short approach and landing
scenarios with or without the support of a second pilot,
andfixationincreasedwhiledwelldurationdecreasedduring
single pilot operations. Machine learning tools are also used (a) VTOL in X-Plane
to identify pilot mental workload. Mohanavelu et al. used
support vector machine (SVM), k-nearest neighbors (kNN),
and linear discriminant analysis (LDA) to detect normal and
high workload [10]. They found out that heart rate variance
features were more predictive than electric brain activity
features, and the workload was better predicted during the (b) VTOL in real life
cruise and landing phase than the takeoff phase. Taheri et al.
Fig. 2: VTOLs in simu-
usedEEGandsimilarmachinelearningalgorithmstoclassify
Fig. 1: Flight Simulator lator and real life
low, medium, and high workloads [11]. They used power
spectral density and log energy entropy to select the fea-
turesandachievedimprovedperformance.Existingliterature of force-sensitive resistor strips on the joystick, and a pair
demonstrates the possibility of using psycho-physiological of Tobii eye tracking glasses. Many of these sensors have
measurements to detect their cognitive workloads. However, demonstratedpredictionpowerinpriorwork[14],[15],[16],
there are two main limitations of existing literature. They all [17],thoughforcesensingandbodyposetrackinghavebeen
focus on fixed-wing operations. The workload from unique relatively unexplored.
VTOLmaneuvers,suchastransitionsbetweenrotorcraftand The E4 sensor is a wristband we wrap around the par-
fixed-wing modes, have not been researched. Most existing ticipant’s left wrist. It uses photoplethysmography (PPG) to
work also utilize only one type of signal, while some use a measure blood volume pulse (BVP), heart rate (HR), and
combination of two types of signals. A dataset with a more interbeat interval (IBI). In addition, it also measures body
complete set of wearable sensors could provide insight into temperature and wrist acceleration.
which combination of sensors should be integrated in the The Shimmer GSR+ device has two electrodes which we
future cockpit. attach to the index and middle fingers of the participant’s
left hand. It measures the galvanic skin response (GSR),
III. USERSTUDY
whichreflectssweatglandactivity.Itisworthnotingthatthe
A. Simulation E4 sensor measures GSR as well, but we use the Shimmer
We integrate a medium-fidelity aviation simulation plat- GSR+ for improved data quality and fewer motion deficits.
form with X-Plane 12 [12]. The flight scenes are rendered Heart rate and skin conductance are the most common
on5verticallyorientedscreens,resultinginatotalhorizontal peripheral physiological signals and have been proven to
field of view of 225 degrees, as shown in Fig. 1. The wide strongly correlate with arousal and mental workload [18].
field of view provides an immersive flying experience and WecollectbrainactivitydatafromthefNIRSopticalbrain
aims to give the pilot more situational awareness. For the imagingsensor.Thissensorlookslikeahairbandandisworn
aircraft model, we choose the Beta Technologies ALIA- ontheforehead.Ituses4infraredlightemitters,10detectors,
250 electric VTOL [13] as it has an off-the-shelf model and 18 optodes to noninvasively measure oxygen levels in
in X-Plane 12. It has 4 vertical propellers and 1 horizontal the prefrontal cortex. Compared to EEG, which is another
propeller, as can be seen in Fig. 2. The controls consist of a popular sensor in brain activity measurement for cognitive
throttlequadrant,ajoystick,andapairofrudderpedals.The state sensing, fNIRS is less invasive and more comfortable
throttle quadrant has two sticks responsible for the vertical with comparable prediction power [19].
and horizontal propellers. We customize the vertical stick The Tobii Pro 3 eye tracking glasses have the shape of
to adaptively set the rate of ascent/descent of the aircraft. normal glasses with integrated IR-LED emitters and micro-
The joystick is used to control the roll and pitch of the cameras.Ithasafront-facingscenecamerawitha106°field
aircraft, while the rudder pedals are responsible for the yaw. of view to capture the pilot’s POV during the flight. During
The pedals are also used to control the aircraft’s differential recording, each frame is annotated with the 2D coordinates
brakes,allowingforturningandstoppingontheground.This of the pilot’s gaze.
pilot control configuration is not specific to Beta or other Tactileinformationonthecontrollersisstronglyrelatedto
aircraft. maneuvers, which is a strong indicator of physical workload
[20].Westraptwoforcesensingresistorstothehandleofthe
B. Sensing Framework
joystick to measure the amount of pressure applied on those
We integrate a multimodal sensing framework to record areas. This setup aims to capture factors like grip strength.
the pilot’s psycho-physiological signals. The sensors consist The 3D spatial upper body poses of participants are
of an Empatica E4 wristband, a Shimmer GSR+ device, a collected using a Kinect V2 sensors. The upper body joints,
Microsoft Kinect V2, a BIOPAC fNIRS headband, a pair includingtheshoulders,elbows,wrists,andhead,arethepri-mary moving parts when operating aircraft as hands control eventwouldberecorded,andthesimulatorwouldbesettoa
thejoystickandthrottles,whiletheheadconstantlyscansthe state suitable for participants to continue the following flight
scene for points of interest. task.Allfootageoftheexperimentismanuallyreviewedand
We used XPlaneROS, an X-Plane wrapper application, annotated so that each task has an accurate start/end time, as
that provides functionality for extracting aircraft data from well as a label indicating whether or not it was completed
the simulator and feeding control commands to control the successfully.
aircraft[21].Usingit,wecollectedflightcontrolinputsmade Throughout the experiment, participants may gain better
by the participants through the joystick and throttles, as well skills and familiarity with the system, which may ease their
as spatio-temporal positions and orientations of the aircraft. workload [24]. At the same time, fatigue may increase with
flight time and affect workload [25]. To avoid task order
C. Flight Tasks biases, we counter-balance the order of the flight tasks.
We design the flight tasks to represent core aspects of However, continuous flight is still needed for the pilots
VTOL commercial operations. We use the private powered to have a natural and immersive experience to reflect the
lift airman certification standards (ACS) by the Federal Avi- appropriate workload. Therefore, we group the tasks into
ation Administration (FAA) as a guideline while designing three flights, each a continuous sequence that starts and
tasks, which is based on the risk management handbook ends at the runway. We assign each participant one of the
by FAA [22]. The tasks include taxiing, vertical takeoff, 6 permutations of the 3 flights, so that the bias of exposure
transitionfromverticalflighttohorizontalflight,maintaining is reduced while the simulation experience stays natural.
altitude, climbing, turning to heading, landing in fixed- We measure pilot workload during flight tasks through
wing mode, and landing vertically. Three certified pilots (1 subjective self-reports. We choose the NASA-TLX, a multi-
private, 1 commercial, and 1 airline) with extensive flight dimensional scale designed to obtain workload estimates
experiences provided ratings for the expected difficulty of from operators while they are performing a task or im-
the tasks to achieve well-distributed workload levels from mediately afterward [26]. This scale has been validated
the participants. They rated the expected task difficulty from and demonstrated to be effective for both fixed-wing and
1 to 6, with 1 requiring only a guided mental process and 6 rotocraft pilot workload [7], [27]. Each TLX survey has 6
requiringhighdynamicmentalprocessplusdynamicphysical questions,askingtheparticipanttoratetheirmentaldemand,
action close to ground obstructions. A complete list of the physicaldemand,temporaldemand,performance,effort,and
tasks and their expected difficulty is shown in Table I. frustration on a scale from 1-20. We implement a Unity
application so that the participants can conveniently input
D. Experimental Protocol their answers on a Microsoft Surface tablet.
Eachexperimenttakesapproximately2hoursfrompartic- There are 23 flight tasks and the simulation needs to be
ipant arriving to leaving, with the actual flight time taking pausedduringansweringofNASA-TLX.Therefore,perform-
roughly 1 hour. Two researchers oversee each participant, ing one NASA-TLX for each individual flight task would
with one moderator facilitating the tasks and overall pro- likelyleadtoover-surveyingandinaccurateself-reports[28].
cedures and one technical operator overseeing the sensor This would also break immersion, which could negatively
modalities and data collection. impact the realism of the simulation. To mitigate this, we
group consecutive flight tasks with similar expected diffi-
When each participant arrives, we first describe the pur-
culties together into a single “task group”. Furthermore, we
pose of the study and obtain their written consent to par-
conduct surveys in batches, with multiple surveys conducted
ticipate. Next, we show and describe each sensor. This is
at each pause. The exact way we determine task groups and
followed by a practice session in which the participant is
survey points is shown in Table I. In the end, participants
given time to learn the flight simulator controls and conduct
each complete 13 NASA-TLX’s over 5 pause points.
somepracticemaneuvers.Duringthissession,weguidethem
through a vertical takeoff, a rolling takeoff, and transitions IV. MULTIMODALWORKLOADESTIMATION
between vertical and fixed-wing modes. They are also given
Through signal processing and feature extraction, we pre-
a few minutes to perform maneuvers on their own. Then,
pare the collected multimodal signals for statistical analysis
we attach the sensors and conduct a physiology baseline
andmachinelearning.Outofthe28totalparticipants,15had
collection for roughly 30 seconds, during which participants
complete data with no missing modalities, 2 had inaccurate
areinstructedtostareatadotonanotherwiseemptyscreen.
eye gaze data, 10 had one modality missing, and 1 had
Physiological signals such as heart rate, skin conductance,
two modalities missing. Missing data was attributed mostly
andgripforcedependonphysicalcharacteristicslikeweight,
to hardware issues, with a few experimenter oversights and
height, and strength [23], so we aim to use the baseline data
softwareissues.Ratherthandiscardingdatafromtheincom-
to remove the individualized differences.
plete participants, we design models that can handle missing
Afterthebaselinedatacollection,westarttheexperimental
values, as will be discussed in Section VI.
sessions with the flight tasks. To initiate each task, the
A. fNIRS Signal Processing
moderator plays an audio recording with flight instructions
whilethetechnicaloperatorrecordsthestarttimestamp.Ifthe The brain activity signals contain much noise and we
participant fails a certain task, for example by crashing, this follow the standard process [29] to filter it out. We utilizeTABLE I: Flight Tasks and Expected Difficulty
ACSRef Task Expected Survey Task Flight
Difficulty Group Group Group
IV.A Verticaltakeoffto1600MSL.Holdpositionandheading280for30seconds. 3 1 1 A
IV.B Maintainaltitude,rotatetoheading360.Holdfor10seconds. 3 1 1 A
V.A Transitionfromhovertoforwardflight.Usefullhorizontalthrustuntilat100 4 1 2 A
knots.Thenturnoffverticalthrust.Maintainheadingandaltitude.
V.C Climbto3000feetat80knotsusingfullhorizontalthrust.Onceat3000feet, 3 1 3 A
accelerateto100knots.Maintainheading.
VI.B Turnto090with30degreebank.Maintainaltitudeand100knots. 3 1 3 A
VI.B Turnto180with30degreebank.Maintainaltitudeand100knots. 3 1 3 A
VI.C Performasteepturntotheright,using45degreebank,backto180.Maintain 4 2 4 A
altitude.
VI.C Performasteepturntotheleft,using45degreebank,backto180.Maintain 4 2 4 A
altitude.
VI.C Performslowflightat75knotsfor30seconds.Maintainheading180at3000 4 2 4 A
feet.
VI.B Transitionbacktoverticalflight.Pullbackonhorizontalthrustallthewayand 5 2 5 A
setverticalspeedto0.Maintainheading180at3000feet.
VI.B Holdheadingandpositionfor30seconds. 3 2 6 A
V.C FlybacktoKAGC.Followtheblueheadingbug. 2 2 6 A
V.A,V.D Descendto2300feet.Enterlefttrafficpatternforrunway28. 4 3 7 A
V.D,V.E Hoveroverrunway28markersat1600feet.Landverticallyfullstop. 5 3 7 A
IV.A,IV.C Takeoffverticallyandhoverat1300feet.Airtaxitofrontoftower.Thenreturn 6 4 8 B
torunway28.Stayabovethetaxiwaywhileairtaxiing.
V.B Hoveronthecenterlineofrunway28,maintainingheading280and1300feet, 6 4 8 B
for30seconds.Thenland.
IV.A Maintainaltitude,rotatetoheading180.Holdfor10seconds. 3 4 9 B
IV.B Maintainaltitude,rotatetoheading090.Holdfor10seconds. 3 4 9 B
V.E,II.D Land.Taxionthegroundtothefrontoftower.Thenreturntorunway28. 6 4 10 B
V.B Performashortfieldrollingtakeoff,usingverticalthrustersifnecessary.Enter 5 5 11 C
lefttrafficpatternandsetupforapproachonrunway28.
V.E Performrollinglandingtouchandgoonrunway28. 5 5 11 C
V.H Transitionbacktoverticalflight.LandbetweentwoadjacenthangarsatKAGC. 6 5 12 C
V.H Takeoffinthisconfinedarea,airtaxitofrontoftowerandlandfullstop. 5 5 13 C
the fNIR Soft Pro software from Biopac because it has C. Gaze Annotation
tuned default parameters and convenient functions. We first
We hypothesize that the subject of the pilot’s gaze could
apply a low-pass filter with a frequency threshold of 2Hz.
be a useful feature for workload estimation. Thus, we use
Then, we apply a motion artifact rejection (SMAR), which
data collected from the eye tracking glasses, as well as a
is an algorithm that uses sliding window signals from the
pre-trainedimagesegmentationmodel,todeterminewhatthe
accelerometer on the fNIRS device to level the optode read-
pilot was looking at throughout the experiment.
ings[30].Fromtherefineddata,wecomputetheoxygenation
TheTobiiPro3eye-trackingglassesproducesavideofrom
through the Modified Beer Lambert Law (MBLL) [31].
the participant’s point of view, along with estimated gaze
coordinates for each frame. We used these measurements
B. Eye Movement Processing
to compute the corresponding gaze positions in the screen
Eye movement can be broken down into saccades and recording of the flight. This was done using FLANN Based
fixations. Saccades are when gaze quickly switches from Matching [34] with SIFT Descriptors [35].
one target to another, and fixations are when the gaze is Next, we use OneFormer [36], a transformer-based image
stagnant in one place. Previous research [32] has shown that segmentation model, to perform semantic segmentation on
saccadic distance tends to be shorter when pilots perceive every frame of our recorded simulation videos from all
their workload as high during flight deck operations, and participants.Specifically,weuseOneFormerpre-trainedwith
vice versa. Hence, we hypothesize that saccade and fixation COCO 2017 [37] on DiNAT [38] backbones, and semantic
information could be useful features and performed some and panoptic classes of COCO 2017. A comparison of the
calculations to extract them. original simulation and the semantic segmentation image is
Onewaytodetectsaccadesistolookatthespeedofgaze shown in Fig. 3. To improve accuracy, we override some
position and mark the current timestamp as a saccade if it of segmentations generated by Oneformer using manually
exceeds a certain threshold [33]. In our processing pipeline, segmented static objects that were connected to the plane
we compute the speed of gaze position at each point in time (and thus didn’t move throughout the experiment).
and determine whether it exceeds an appropriate saccade When the pilot’s eye gaze is located at the intersection
threshold, determined by manually reviewing footage. The of multiple objects, it becomes difficult to determine which
saccade event timestamps are then used to generate three object the pilot is paying more attention to. Following the
new features: average saccades per second, average fixation method used in [39], we design a semantics priority weight-
time, and average saccade distance. ing algorithm. We first group the semantic classes we col-a wide range of ages and flight hours. Based on FAA
pilot certification levels, there were 5 student, 11 private, 9
commercial,and3airlinetransportpilots(ATPs).Themedian
agegroupwas36to45,andtheaveragetotalflighthourswas
1,324 with a standard deviation of 2,300. All of the pilots
Fig. 3: Semantic Segmentation
had fixed-wing licenses, and 2 of them also had helicopter
lectedfromthesegmentedframesintoeightsemanticgroups experience.
withpriorityscores:Monitors(10),Roads(7),Buildings(7),
Water (5), Sky (4), Ground (4), Airframe (2), and Inside (1).
Foreacheyegazeinthevideoframe,weextractthesemantic
groups of 121 pixels in a circular shape from the center of
the gaze.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
priority
W =exp −1 (1)
annotation 3
Using Eq. 1, we sum the weights over each class and
normalize them to obtain a probability distribution over the
8 semantic classes. This vector is computed for each frame
of the original glasses recording.
D. Complete Modality List
We categorize each data modality into one of four cate-
gories: Physiological, Behavioral, Situational, and Flight
Derivative, as shown in Table II. Physiological data are
Fig. 4: Demographics
biological signals that are correlated with human affective
states. Behavioral data deal with the physical behaviors B. NASA-TLX Survey Responses
of human subjects. Situational data are the surroundings
We analyze the distribution of mental demand across all
perceived by the human subjects. Flight Derivative data are
participants for each task. Participants rated mental demand
quantifiable metrics derived from flight operations, such as
on a scale from 1-20. Figure 5 shows the results. On
velocity and distance.
average,thetasksrequiringtheleastmentaldemandare“hold
TABLE II: Feature List position,thenflybacktoKAGC”and“takeoffverticallyand
hover”, which are rated at around 5. The most difficult tasks
Category Modality Dim Comments
are “steep turns and slow flight” and “left traffic pattern and
Physiological GSR 1 Sweatglandactivity
land vertically”, which are rated at around 12. This shows a
HR 2 HR,IBI
fNIRS 16 Brainhemoglobinlevels wide breadth of task difficulty.
Pupillary 2 Pupildiameters
Behavioral FSR 2 Gripforce
BodyPose 27 3Dbodyposecoordinates
ACC 3 Wristacceleration
Gaze 5 2D gaze coordinates, sac-
cade,fixation
FlightControl 4 Throttle/joystickinputs
Situational GazeSemantics 8 Gazesemanticclass
FlightDerivative FlightDerivative 9 Aircraft position, orienta-
tion,andspeed
V. STATISTICALANALYSIS
Wedesignedandconductedauserstudytocollectdatafor
workload estimation. All the pilots signed a consent form
to participate in the study and were compensated with a Fig. 5: Mean Mental Demand Rating for Each Task Group
$100 Amazon gift card. The study was approved by the
Carnegie Mellon University Institutional Review Board (ID: As a baseline and sanity check, we attempt to predict par-
STUDY2023 00000131). ticipantmentaldemandusingonlythepre-screenedexpected
taskdifficulties.Foreachparticipant,weclassifytheirmental
A. Demographics
demandoneachtaskaslow/medium/high.Taskswithmental
Figure 4 shows a demographic summary of the partici- demand within 0.6 standard deviations from the mean are
pants. We recruited a total of 28 pilots based in Pittsburgh, classified as medium, and the rest are classified as low or
PA. Participants came from a variety of backgrounds with highbasedonwhichsideofthemeantheyareon.Similarly,normalized versions of the mean, minimum, and maximum
based on measurements across the entire experiment. We
manually choose a subset of these aggregated measurements
to include as input to the models. To handle missing modal-
ities, we use a KNN imputer to fill in any missing values
[41]. This works by finding other data points in the dataset
that have similar values for the non-missing modalities, and
using those examples to infer the missing ones.
Tocomputethelabels,wefirststandardizetheNASA-TLX
mentaldemandresponsesacrossalltasksforeachparticipant.
Wecalculatethemeanscoreandsetthelowthresholdas0.6
Fig. 6: Mental Demand vs. Expected Difficulty
standard deviations below the mean, and the high threshold
we use the pre-screened expected difficulties to categorize as 0.6 standard deviations above the mean.
tasks as easy if it was 1-2, medium if it was 3-4, and hard
A. Generalized Model
if it was 5-6.
AsshowninFig.6,theassumptionthateasytasksresultin For the generalized case, our goal is to train a single
low mental demand, medium tasks result in medium mental model that is applicable across all participants. To achieve
demand, and hard tasks result in high mental demand gives this, we split our data into training/validation sets across
accuracy below 40% for the most tasks. This suggests that participants. In other words, we perform 5-fold cross val-
anticipatedtaskdifficultyisnotareliableindicatorofpilots’ idation across pilots, resulting in 22-23 pilots in the training
experienced workloads. set and 5-6 pilots in the validation set for each fold. We
average validation accuracy across the 5 folds. We apply a
C. Exploratory Analysis few popular machine learning algorithms, including linear
To assess whether the mental demand is related to the discriminantanalysis(LDA),supportvectormachine(SVM),
physiological or flight technical errors, a linear mixed ef- random forest (RF), and XGBoost. The balanced accuracies
fects model is used. The analysis allows us to recognize of these models are 42%, 48%, 51%, and 51%, respectively.
whether psycho-physiological responses impact the pilots’ The best-performing model is XGBoost, which achieves
self-reportedmentaldemands.Thefixedeffectsforthemodel approximately 51% accuracy across the 3 classes.
are the features listed in Table II, whereas the random effect
B. Individualized Model
is the participant. To shortlist the best fit model, the lowest
possibleAICcriteriaisconsidered.TheanalysisisdoneinR Although the generalized model outperforms random
programming language and utilizes the lmer4 package [40]. chance in the 3-class classification, we are able to achieve
For the physiological responses, significant main effects better results by training models specialized for each partic-
are found for FSR(thin1) [F(1,34.4) = 28.407, p<0.001], ipant. In a practical setting, we would have pilots conduct a
standard deviation of left wrist (X) [F (1,30.63) = 7.601, p few test flights to calibrate a model specifically designed to
<0.001], standard deviation of left wrist (Y) [F (1,32.08) = estimate the workload for that particular pilot.
7.601, p <0.001] and standard deviation of the left wrist (Z) For the individualized models, we choose a single partic-
[F (1,32.27) = 10.326, p <0.001]. For behavioral responses, ipant as the target and divide their extracted features over
the eye glance toward roads is found to have a significant task boundaries into training and validation sets using 5-fold
main effect [F (1,32.23) = 17.565, p <0.001]. For flight cross-validation.Weupsamplethetargetparticipant’straining
data,maineffectsarefoundsignificantformeanvelocity(Z), setandcombineitwithatrainingsetderivedfromeveryother
[F (1,89.453) = 6.998, p <0.001], and angular velocity (Y) participant. The purpose of the upsampling is to incentivize
[F (1,95.6)=10.16,p <0.001]. The findings from the analysis the model to specialize on the target pilot by exposing it to
confirm that several physiological data modalities and flight a larger volume of their data. Since XGBoost is the best-
behaviors are likely to impact the perceived workload. How- performing model in the generalized case, we choose to use
ever, it is critical to estimate workload to understand which it for the individualized case as well.
set of inputs can provide the appropriate representation of Overallpossibletargetparticipants,weareabletoachieve
the workload state. The next section describes the machine an average of around 63% balanced accuracy with this
learning framework for estimating workload models. method, a boost of 12% compared to the generalized model.
Figure 7 shows how the accuracy changes as we vary the
VI. WORKLOADESTIMATION
amount of upsampling. When there is no data from the
The input to our machine learning pipeline is aggregated target participant, the individualized model is only able to
measurements for each modality, and the output is one of achieve around 52% accuracy, which roughly matches the
three classes: low, medium, or high mental demand. For generalized model case. As we increase the proportion of
each modality, we compute the mean, standard deviation, data from the target participant, the model accuracy quickly
minimum,andmaximumofthemeasuredvaluesacrosseach increases before dropping off. Initially, adding more data
task. To account for individual differences, we also compute from the target participant helps the model specialize onsensing modalities all provide surprisingly strong prediction
power. Body pose and grip force are related to pilots’ flight
maneuversandphysicalworkload[42],andthustheircorrela-
tion with mental workload makes sense. The gaze semantics
information conveys which types of objects the pilots were
focusing on. This can be explained by a trend we noticed
while reviewing experiment footage: pilots tended to stare at
themonitorsduringlowworkloadcruising,butscannedtheir
surroundings rapidly during high-workload landing tasks.
VII. CONCLUSIONS
This work aims to investigate VTOL pilot workload esti-
Fig. 7: Individualized Model Accuracy mation through multimodal sensing. We integrated a simu-
lation platform with XPlane-ROS and implemented a data
them. However, when too much of the training set is owned
capture framework including eye gaze, semantics, fNIRS,
by the target participant, the model starts to overfit, which
body pose, grip force, heart rate, and skin conductance
explains the later dropoff in accuracy.
signals.Wedesignedasetofflighttasksthatrepresentcritical
Theoriginaldatasetconsistsof364input/outputpairsover
and novel aspects of VTOL operation, such as transition
28 participants, with each participant comprising roughly
between vertical and horizontal flight, vertical takeoff, and
3.5%ofthedataset.Upsamplingthetargetparticipantto20%
rolling landing. We recruited 28 participants to conduct the
of the dataset yields the best results, increasing the total to
experiments and collected the data. Using classical machine
438 input/output pairs.
learning techniques, we achieved a prediction accuracy of
63%. This proves the validity of the proposed approach to
C. Ablation Study
classify VTOL pilot workload through continuous measure-
In order to identify which sensors are the most predictive,
ments.
we perform an ablation study on the sensing modalities to
There are some limitations to this research. An ideal goal
determine which are the best indicators of mental workload.
of this research is to monitor workload continuously, in
Foreachmodality,weremoveitfromtheinputsandobserve
real time. It is worth noting that we explored a transformer
the resulting decrease in validation accuracy. As illustrated
network [43], with raw time series inputs. However, the
in Fig. 8, the most important modalities are flight derivative
transformer model did not out-perform the XGBoost, with
and body pose. Interestingly, flight control, GSR, and ACC
a prediction accuracy of around 49%. We attribute the poor
have a negative impact on the model’s performance.
performance to limited training data sample size, which led
to quick overfitting. For our future work, we would like to
expandthedatasetsizegivenmoretimeandresources.More
importantly, we would like to explore more sophisticated
modelstructurestopotentiallyachievetime-seriesrawsignal
workload predictions. Despite the limitations, this work is
the first in the field to estimate VTOL pilot workload. Such
a system may provide critical support for VTOL commer-
cial safe operation. The model ablation study also provides
insight to VTOL pilot state understanding research, on the
most effective sensor sets.
REFERENCES
Fig. 8: Accuracy Drop by Modality [1] DB Jagdale, SC Pardeshi, and SND Coe, “Vertical take off &
The ablation study identifies patterns that align with exist- landingvehicles,” InternationalResearchJournalofEngineeringand
Technology(IRJET),vol.5,2018.
ingresearchandnovelusefulsensingmodalitiesforworkload
[2] Christopher Silva, Wayne R Johnson, Eduardo Solis, Michael D
estimation. Flight derivative, naturally directly related to
Patterson, and Kevin R Antcliff, “Vtol urban air mobility concept
flightmaneuvertasks,containsrichdataformentalworkload. vehicles for technology development,” in 2018 Aviation Technology,
GSR,HR,gazeandfNIRShavebeenrepeatablyinvestigated Integration,andOperationsConference,2018,p.3847.
[3] Senwei Xiang, Anhuan Xie, Minxiang Ye, Xufei Yan, Xiaojia Han,
for workload estimation [8], [4], [10]. We find HR and gaze
HongjiaoNiu,QiangLi,andHaishanHuang, “Autonomousevtol:A
to be somewhat predictive, and fNIRS and GSR to be less summaryofresearchesandchallenges,” GreenEnergyandIntelligent
important. Transportation,p.100140,2023.
[4] Anja K Faulhaber, “From crewed to single-pilot operations: Pilot
We are the first in the field to investigate body pose, grip
performanceandworkloadmanagement,” in20thInternationalSym-
force, and gaze semantics for workload estimation. These posiumonAviationPsychology,2019,p.283.[5] Zairil Zaludin and Ezanee Gires, “Automatic flight control require- [25] GianlucaBorghini,LauraAstolfi,GiovanniVecchiato,DonatellaMat-
mentsfortransitionflightphaseswhenconvertinglongendurancefixed tia, and Fabio Babiloni, “Measuring neurophysiological signals in
winguavtovtolaircraft,” in2019IEEEInternationalConferenceon aircraftpilotsandcardriversfortheassessmentofmentalworkload,
AutomaticControlandIntelligentSystems(I2CACIS).IEEE,2019,pp. fatigueanddrowsiness,” Neuroscience&BiobehavioralReviews,vol.
273–278. 44,pp.58–75,2014.
[6] Jing Liu, Alessandro Gardi, Subramanian Ramasamy, Yixiang Lim, [26] Sandra G Hart, “Nasa-task load index (nasa-tlx); 20 years later,”
andRobertoSabatini,“Cognitivepilot-aircraftinterfaceforsingle-pilot in Proceedings of the human factors and ergonomics society annual
operations,” Knowledge-basedsystems,vol.112,pp.37–53,2016. meeting.SagepublicationsSageCA:LosAngeles,CA,2006,vol.50,
[7] Vernoi Battiste and Michael Bortolussi, “Transport pilot workload: pp.904–908.
A comparison of two subjective techniques,” in Proceedings of the [27] HeikkiMansikka,KaiVirtanen,andDonHarris,“Comparisonofnasa-
HumanFactorsSocietyAnnualMeeting.SAGEPublicationsSageCA: tlx scale, modified cooper–harper scale and mean inter-beat interval
LosAngeles,CA,1988,vol.32,pp.150–154. as measures of pilot mental workload during simulated flight tasks,”
[8] Glenn F Wilson, “An analysis of mental workload in pilots during Ergonomics,vol.62,no.2,pp.246–254,2019.
flightusingmultiplepsychophysiologicalmeasures,”TheInternational [28] CynthiaSCycyotaandDavidAHarrison,“What(not)toexpectwhen
JournalofAviationPsychology,vol.12,no.1,pp.3–18,2002. surveying executives: A meta-analysis of top manager response rates
andtechniquesovertime,” OrganizationalResearchMethods,vol.9,
[9] Anja K Faulhaber and Maik Friedrich, “Eye-tracking metrics as
no.2,pp.133–160,2006.
an indicator of workload in commercial single-pilot operations,” in
[29] Hasan Ayaz, Patricia A Shewokis, Scott C Bunce, and Banu Onaral,
Human Mental Workload: Models and Applications: Third Interna-
“Functional near infrared spectroscopy based brain computer inter-
tionalSymposium,H-WORKLOAD2019,Rome,Italy,November14–
face,”Apr.172018, USPatent9,946,344.
15,2019,Proceedings3.Springer,2019,pp.213–225.
[30] HasanAyaz,MeltemIzzetoglu,PatriciaAShewokis,andBanuOnaral,
[10] K Mohanavelu, S Poonguzhali, A Janani, and S Vinutha, “Machine
“Sliding-windowmotionartifactrejectionforfunctionalnear-infrared
learning-based approach for identifying mental workload of pilots,”
spectroscopy,” in2010AnnualInternationalConferenceoftheIEEE
BiomedicalSignalProcessingandControl,vol.75,pp.103623,2022.
EngineeringinMedicineandBiology.IEEE,2010,pp.6567–6570.
[11] Hamed Taheri Gorji, Nicholas Wilson, Jessica VanBree, Bradley
[31] LaszloKocsis,PeterHerman,andAndrasEke, “Themodifiedbeer–
Hoffmann,ThomasPetros,andKouhyarTavakolian, “Usingmachine
lambertlawrevisited,” PhysicsinMedicine&Biology,vol.51,no.5,
learning methods and eeg to discriminate aircraft pilot cognitive
pp.N91,2006.
workload during flight,” Scientific Reports, vol. 13, no. 1, pp. 2507,
[32] Kyle Ellis and Thomas Schnell, “Eye tracking metrics for workload
2023.
estimationinflightdeckoperation,” 2010.
[12] LaminarResearch, “Xplane12simulator,”https://www.x-plane.com/, [33] MarcusNystro¨mandKennethHolmqvist, “Anadaptivealgorithmfor
2023. fixation,saccade,andglissadedetectionineyetrackingdata,”Behavior
[13] BETATechnologies,“Aliavtol,”https://www.beta.team/aircraft/,2022. researchmethods,vol.42,pp.188–204,022010.
[14] Andrea Alaimo, Antonio Esposito, Calogero Orlando, and Andre [34] MariusMujaandDavidGLowe,“Fastapproximatenearestneighbors
Simoncini, “Aircraft pilots workload analysis: heart rate variability withautomaticalgorithmconfiguration,” pp.331–340,2009.
objective measures and nasa-task load index subjective evaluation,” [35] David G Lowe, “Distinctive image features from scale-invariant
Aerospace,vol.7,no.9,pp.137,2020. keypoints,” ComputerVision,p.91–110,2004.
[15] PhilippeDoyon-Poulin,BenoitOuellette,andJean-MarcRobert, “Ef- [36] JiteshJain,JiachenLi,MangTikChiu,AliHassani,NikitaOrlov,and
fectsofvisualclutteronpilotworkload,flightperformanceandgaze HumphreyShi, “Oneformer:Onetransformertoruleuniversalimage
pattern,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on Human- segmentation,” 2023.
ComputerInteractioninAerospace,2014,pp.1–7. [37] Tsung-YiLin,MichaelMaire,SergeBelongie,LubomirBourdev,Ross
[16] Chuanyan Feng, Xiaoru Wanyan, Kun Yang, Damin Zhuang, and Girshick, James Hays, Pietro Perona, Deva Ramanan, C. Lawrence
XuWu, “Acomprehensivepredictionandevaluationmethodofpilot Zitnick, and Piotr Dolla´r, “Microsoft coco: Common objects in
workload,” Technology and health care, vol. 26, no. S1, pp. 65–78, context,”2015.
2018. [38] Ali Hassani and Humphrey Shi, “Dilated neighborhood attention
[17] Mickae¨l Causse, Zarrin K Chua, and Florence Re´my, “Influences of transformer,”2023.
age,mentalworkload,andflightexperienceoncognitiveperformance [39] YuningQiu,CarlosBusso,TeruhisaMisu,andKumarAkash, “Incor-
andprefrontalactivityinprivatepilots:afnirsstudy,”Scientificreports, poratinggazebehaviorusingjointembeddingwithscenecontextfor
vol.9,no.1,pp.7688,2019. drivertakeoverdetection,” inICASSP2022-2022IEEEInternational
[18] YoshihiroShimomura,TakumiYoda,KojiSugiura,AkinoriHoriguchi, Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP).
Koichi Iwanaga, and Tetsuo Katsuura, “Use of frequency domain IEEE,2022,pp.4633–4637.
analysis of skin conductance for evaluation of mental workload,” [40] Douglas Bates, Martin Maechler, Ben Bolker, Steven Walker, Rune
Journal of physiological anthropology, vol. 27, no. 4, pp. 173–177, Haubo Bojesen Christensen, Henrik Singmann, Bin Dai, Gabor
2008. Grothendieck, Peter Green, and M Ben Bolker, “Package ‘lme4’,”
convergence,vol.12,no.1,pp.2,2015.
[19] MatthewMastersandAxelSchulte, “Investigatingtheutilityoffnirs
[41] TahiraMahboob,AimenIjaz,AmberShahzad,andMuqadasKalsoom,
to assess mental workload in a simulated helicopter environment,”
“Handling missing values in chronic kidney disease datasets using
in 2020 IEEE International Conference on Human-Machine Systems
knn,k-meansandk-medoidsalgorithms,” in201812thInternational
(ICHMS).IEEE,2020,pp.1–6.
Conference on Open Source Systems and Technologies (ICOSST).
[20] Joshua Bhagat Smith, Prakash Baskaran, and Julie A Adams, “De-
IEEE,2018,pp.76–81.
composed physical workload estimation for human-robot teams,” in
[42] BerndJohannes,StefanieRothe,Andre´ Gens,SoerenWestphal,Katja
2022IEEE3rdInternationalConferenceonHuman-MachineSystems
Birkenfeld, Edwin Mulder, Jo¨rn Rittweger, and Carla Ledderhos,
(ICHMS).IEEE,2022,pp.1–6.
“Psychophysiologicalassessmentinpilotsperformingchallengingsim-
[21] Rohan Baijal, Jay Patrikar, Brady Moon, Sebastian Scherer, and
ulated and real flight maneuvers,” Aerospace medicine and human
Jean Oh, “Xplaneros : Ros wrapper for autonomous fixed wing
performance,vol.88,no.9,pp.834–840,2017.
applications,”Sep2021.
[43] RuiqiWang,WonseJo,DezhongZhao,WeizhengWang,BaijianYang,
[22] Federal Aviation Administration, “Risk management handbook,” Guohua Chen, and Byung-Cheol Min, “Husformer: A multi-modal
https://www.faa.gov/regulationspolicies/handbooksmanuals/ transformerformulti-modalhumanstaterecognition,”2023.
risk-management-handbook-faa-h-8083-2a,2022.
[23] Bradley M Appelhans and Linda J Luecken, “Heart rate variability
as an index of regulated emotional responding,” Review of general
psychology,vol.10,no.3,pp.229–240,2006.
[24] DeborahABoehm-Davis,JohnGCasali,BrianMKleiner,JeffreyA
Lancaster, Jason J Saleem, and Kathryn Wochinger, “Pilot perfor-
mance, strategy, and workload while executing approaches at steep
anglesandwithlowerlandingminima,” Humanfactors,vol.49,no.
5,pp.759–772,2007.