Exploring the potential of AI in
nurturing learner empathy, pro-
social values and environmental
stewardship
Kenneth Y T Lim
National Institute of Education, Singapore
Minh Anh Nguyen Duc, Minh Tuan Nguyen Thien
Independent authors
Abstract: With Artificial Intelligence (AI) becoming a powerful tool for education (Zawacki-Richter et al.,
2019), this chapter describes the concept of combining generative and traditional AI, citizen-science
physiological, neuroergonomic wearables and environmental sensors into activities for learners to
understand their own well-being and emotional states better with a view to developing empathy and
environmental stewardship. Alongside bespoke and affordable wearables (DIY EEG headsets and
biometric wristbands), interpretable AI and data science are used for learners to explore how the
environment affects them physiologically and mentally in authentic environments. For example,
relationships between environmental changes (e.g. poorer air quality) and their well-being (e.g.
cognitive functioning) can be discovered. This is particularly crucial, as relevant knowledge can
influence the way people treat the environment, as suggested by the disciplines of environmental
neuroscience and environmental psychology (Doell et al., 2023). Yet, according to Palme and Salvati,
there have been relatively few studies on the relationships between microclimates and human health
and emotions (Palme and Salvati, 2021). As anthropogenic environmental pollution is becoming a
prevalent problem, our research also aims to leverage on generative AI to introduce hypothetical
scenarios of the environment as emotionally strong stimuli of relevance to the learners. This would
provoke an emotional response for them to learn about their own physiological and neurological
responses (using neuro-physiological data). Ultimately, we hope to establish a bidirectional
understanding of how the environment affects humans physiologically and mentally; after which, to gain
insights as to how AI can be used to effectively foster empathy, pro-environmental attitudes and
stewardship.
Keywords: Artificial Intelligence (AI); Generative AI; environmental data; electrodermal activity (EDA);
mental health; sensors; machine learning; Internet of Things; citizen science
1. Introduction
Climate change has been one of the most urgent problems to confront in the 21st century. The
Sixth Assessment Report (AR6) of the Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change (IPCC) highlights
the unequivocal role of human activities in causing widespread and rapid changes occurring in the
Earth's climate systems, some of which may be irreversible [1]. Climate change has been degrading
the quality of life for every creature on Earth. Glaciers have shrunk, ice on rivers and lakes is breaking
up earlier, plant and animal ranges have shifted and trees are flowering sooner [2]. A microclimate is a
small area within the surrounding larger area with a different climate [3]. Any given climatic region
therefore comprises many other types of microclimates, which vary in characteristics from the regionas a whole. Comparing the human scale to that of the various habitats in which we live, the difference
of these scales, compounded by rapid climate change, means that changes in the climates of these
habitats may disproportionately affect the conduct of our daily activities. As of now, the detrimental
effects of anthropogenic environmental pollution have worsened the physical environment for
education, teaching, and learning. For instance, heat waves have been shown to seriously impair
students’ health and productivity [4]. Palme and Salvati (2021) highlighted that there is relatively
inadequate research focusing on the connections between microclimates and human health and
emotions [5]. Therefore, it is crucial to delve into how microclimates influence health and productivity to
tackle this overlooked issue. In June 2022, the IPCC suggested that rapidly increasing climate change
presents a growing risk to mental health and psychosocial well-being, from emotional distress to
anxiety, depression, grief, and suicidal behavior. Thus, the investigation of electrodermal activity
(EDA)—referring to the continuous variation in the electrical characteristics of the skin, which varies
with the moisture level—as a noninvasive method to detect stress and emotional arousal is an area of
interest. EDA is linked to the sympathetic nervous system and consists of two components: tonic and
phasic, which are represented by skin conductance level (SCL) and skin conductance response (SCR)
[6]. For the frequency domain, features relative to EDASymp, TVSymp (spectral powers in specific
frequency bands according to Posada-Quintero et al. (2016a; 2016b) [7, 8] and their normalized
versions were focused on as they were found to be highly sensitive to orthostatic, cognitive, and physical
stress (Posada-Quintero et al., 2020) [9]. It is self-evident that climate change has various effects on
individual well-being. Specifically, climate change could potentially alter microclimates to a degree
where such changes could adversely affect the physical and mental well-being of those residing in these
environments. For instance, a study by Liu et al. in 2019 concluded that “the increasing research interest
in thermal comfort and health has heightened the need to figure out how the human body responds,
both psychologically and physiologically, to different microclimates” [10]. Hence, delving into EDA data
may reveal previously implicit connections regarding how microclimate correlates with our perception
of well-being on a detailed scale.
With the rise of Artificial Intelligence (AI), we see the opportunity to use AI in understanding well-
being and emotional states better with a view to developing empathy and environmental stewardship.
AI is computer algorithms capable of performing difficult tasks that traditionally require human
intelligence (such as object identification, drawing relationships and pattern identification) [11]. Using
labelled data, in our case, machine learning models were trained to potentially recognise complex
relationships between the changes in environment and his own health, stress and emotion, which can
be measured by indicators such as EEG and EDA. This understanding can help to raise environmental
awareness. In addition to this traditional approach of relationship analysis, we proposed another
application with the use of generative AI. Generative AI are deep learning models that can create new
contents, such as images, texts, simulations and audio. According to Chui et al. in 2023, Generative AI
has become a global phenomenon, with widespread usages in various areas and purposes [12]. There
have also been changing perceptions in various fields with the use of Generative AI. With regards to
this, we are particularly interested in Generative AI, specifically image generation and content fill’s
potential in understanding how it can be a stimuli to elicit emotions and change perceptions. Made
possible by the measurements and analysis of this was made possible via various indicators like EDA
and EEG, our goal is to understand the extent to which Generative AI can effectively foster empathy,
pro-environmental attitudes and stewardship.
In our study, two types of experiments were devised. One experiment focused on how the usage
of AI could allow us to understand the relationships between the environment, stress and emotions
while doing cognitively stressful tasks. The other type of experiment was designed to gain insights into
the effectiveness of Generative AI, specifically image generation and content filling as a stimulus that
can elicit strong emotional response to environmental degradation. This can unveil insights into
Generative AI as an engine for empathy, pro-environment attitudes and stewardship. We see our
potential contribution to the notion of human-AI symbiosis, when AI can be a tool to process data and
give meaningful insights, at the same time a potential stimulus as a cause for change. This also has
implications on improving the living environment for better well-being, as well as instilling pro-
environmental attitudes that can contribute to reducing environmental degradation and, even better,
improving it.2. Literature review
2.1. Urgency of Studying the Effects of Microclimates in the Context of Rapid Climate
Change
The phenomenon of rapid urbanization, particularly notable in developing nations, has spurred
significant migration flows toward urban centers [13]. As per Statista, global urbanization reached
approximately 56% in 2020 [14]. With the pace of urbanization accelerating, alterations to urban
environments and climates are inevitable [15]. This widespread urbanization complicates predictions
regarding anthropogenic impacts on Earth’s climate. At local levels, activities linked to changes in land
use, land cover, and urban expansion result in various impacts, including alterations in atmospheric
composition, water and energy balances, and ecosystem dynamics [16]. Given the interconnected
nature of ecosystems, even minor changes in one component can trigger nonlinear effects elsewhere.
For instance, a study by Xiong et al. in 2015 examined the effects of different air temperature shifts on
human health and thermal comfort, revealing sensitivities such as perspiration, eye strain, dizziness,
accelerated respiration, and increased heart rate as reported symptoms [17].
Amidst global climate change and the exacerbation of urban heat island effects, urban living
conditions have deteriorated, significantly affecting human thermal comfort and health [10]. These
effects extend beyond psychological impacts, influencing thermal sensation, mood, and concentration,
to physiological repercussions such as sunburn, heat stroke, and heat cramps. Liu et al. (ibid.) have
also cautioned that “global climate change and intensifying heat islands have reduced human thermal
comfort and health in urban outdoor environments”. The mentioned effects extend to the context of
teaching/learning and classroom environment. For example, heat waves have been shown to seriously
impair students’ health and productivity [4]. One way to explain this is that the external environmental
setting can be an ambient stressor on students’ health [18]. Since climate change results in the
continuous change in the external environment, e.g., the microclimate inside a classroom, a different
degree of stress might be experienced by students, even teachers. With a deeper understanding of the
extent to which microclimatic change can affect health, stress, and performance, measures can be
taken to maximize productivity
2.2. Utility of Electrodermal Activity (EDA) Data in Research
As defined by Critchley and Nagai [19], electrodermal activity (EDA) denotes a measurement
of neurally mediated effects on sweat gland permeability, manifested as alterations in skin resistance
to a minor electrical current or variations in electrical potential across different skin regions. EDA
comprises both tonic and phasic components, represented, respectively, by skin conductance level
(SCL) and skin conductance response (SCR). It is closely linked to human stress and emotional
responses and can be measured non-invasively [6]. Hence, it is a viable option for reliable and accurate
assessment of human stress and emotions in a more comfortable setting outside laboratories. Ward et
al. in 2004 [20] have demonstrated that electrodermal activity and heart rate variability are under the
influence of the responses of the autonomic nervous system to psychological and emotional activity.
They have suggested that any change in EDA during so-called sustained attention to response tests
(SARTs) would also be reflected in a change in heart rate variation. As such, their work suggests the
possibility of underlying correlations between electrodermal activity and other biometric factors. EDA
data have proven effective in many studies that involve emotional and stress assessment. What is more
noteworthy is that there have been attempts to study EDA with a multidisciplinary approach. For
example, the effects of thermal variance on a person’s electrodermal activity following the circadian
rhythm were investigated by Kobas et al. [21]. Another exemplification would be the work of Fernandes
et al. in linking physical and social environments with mental health using EDA data to assess emotions
[22]. As such, the wide adoption of EDA data in investigating various relationships between humans
and the environment means that it is a popular and suitable data type to collect. As argued in the
preceding paragraphs, changes in climate can affect individuals both physiologically and
psychologically. Our review of the literature also suggests correlations between the changing conditions
of the climate and changes in recorded EDA. As such, we posit that an understanding of electrodermal
activity contributes to a better understanding of mental well-being with respect to changes in
microclimate.2.3. Artificial Intelligence (AI) and its applications
According to Sheikh et al. 2023 study on the definition and background of Artificial Intelligence,
Artificial Intelligence (AI) is computer algorithms, with the ability to mimic human intelligence in doing
complex tasks, such as pattern identification, object identification and language processing. It also
comes with a “degree of autonomy” [11]. In the context of our research, AI takes on the approach of
“connectionism”, following closely to the neurons functioning in the human brain. Trained on labelled
data, with predetermined sets of tasks and rules, AI can then take on calculation and resource intensive
tasks. The transformative applications of AI could be seen across various fields, such as medicine
technological innovation (Wang et al., 2015) and human performance enhancement (Wilson &
Daugherty, 2018) [23, 24]. Over the years, from a rather vague definition of AI, both advancements in
understanding of human intelligence and artificial intelligence have significantly pushed the boundaries
of applications of AI in our lives. This will further reinforce human-AI symbiosis as suggested by
Moravec’s Paradox, where tasks that are very difficult for humans, requiring immense calculation power
are easy for computers, but sensorimotor and perception tasks are difficult for computers [25].
In recent years, rapid advancements in AI have been driven by the usage of machine learning
techniques (ML) and innovations in Deep Learning (DL) (Sheikh et al., 2023) [11]. Towards the end of
2022, Generative AI became a worldwide phenomenon with the introduction of “Chat Generative Pre-
trained Transformer” or ChatGPT by OpenAI. Generative AI refers to Deep Learning models that are
capable of generating multimodal contents such as texts, images, audios and simulations. There are
many types of Generative AI, from text-to-image generative models (Qiao et al. 2022), text-to-speech
generative models (Chowdhury & Hussan, 2023) to recently, text-to-video generative models (Singer
et al., 2022) [26, 27 ,28] . It is also common to find these Generative AI tasks, such as ChatGPT for
text-to-text generation, Midjourney for text-to-image and Sora for text-to-image generation. Generative
AI has had a tremendous effect on various sectors. In education, it fundamentally changed how lessons
could be delivered and how knowledge could be obtained. In a study by Moorhouse & Kohnke in 2024,
the result showed that Generative AI tools would substantially alter the Initial Language Teacher
Education curriculum in terms of incorporating Generative AI into learning outcomes, and AI literacy
[29]. This means that there will be a significant change in perceptions of how education is delivered in
conjunction with generative AI. In another study by Firat in 2023, Generative AI could encourage a shift
in mindset to autodidactic learning, as tools like ChatGPT can provide feedback and answers to
students, void of criticisms or biases [30]. In another 2024 study of consumerism by Mogaji & Jain,
Generative AI could change consumer behaviour in various aspects, such as giving consumers
recommendations, changing purchasing behaviours and shaping global trends [31]. In both of these
cases, generative AI has shown the potential to change perceptions of stakeholders.
According to a study by Lin et al. in 2024, Generative AI, specifically image generation, is able
to affect or effectively elicit emotions via emotional image editing [32]. There have been rigorous studies
in various global and local factors that can elicit certain emotions, such as different tones of
backgrounds, and object associated emotions, like graveyards associated with sadness and balloons
associated with amusement [33]. To elaborate further, Nico (2009) found that certain objects tend to
have a relationship with corresponding emotions [34]. In our study, we focused on representing
sentiments via two dimensional (2-D) valence-arousal coordinate space (Nicolaou et el., 2011)[35]. The
emotional valence dimension helps classify pleasantness of an emotion ranging from positive or
pleasant to negative or unpleasant [36]. The emotional arousal dimension helps classify the degree of
intensity of emotions [37]. This has implications for generating impactful images that convey the
bleakness of environmental degradation and climate change. Furthermore, in a 2020 study on
emotional responses and plastic waste, Septianto & Lee concluded that images that depict plastic
wastes could be tailored to target various emotional evocations, such as disgust and sadness [38]. They
also demonstrated how this understanding of discrete emotional responses could reduce consumers’
impact on the environment as well as propose policies for social marketers and policy makers. Thus,
by leveraging the power of Generative AI in generating impactful environmental images, those that
convey messages of degradation and pollution through symbolic objects like trash, there can be
powerful emotions experienced by viewers. These emotions can catalyse transformative shifts in
mindsets and perceptions that could fundamentally foster pro-environment attitudes and stewardship.
According to Haller, empathy for the environment would encourage more willingness to take action to
mitigate climate change. Not only are there implications for policy makers and marketers, individuals
themselves can also be directly influenced to change for the better [39].3. Methodology
3.1. Collecting Electrodermal Activity (EDA)
Data For the do-it-yourself (DIY) physiological wristband used in this study, EDA sensors are
built based on the design described in Zangróniz et al. (2017) [40] with an input voltage of 3.3 V and a
10 Hz sampling rate. LM324 operational amplifier with low noise of 35 nV/rtHz was used alongside Dry
Ag/AgCl Finger Electrodes. TP4056 battery charger circuit and 1200 mAh 3.7 V lithium battery provided
approximately 10 h battery life for the unit.
Figure 1a. and b. Assembled EDA wristband.
3.2. Collecting Environmental Data
To gather microclimate data, a compact portable device was constructed to assess the
ambient environmental conditions, including noise level, light intensity via infrared radiation, dust
concentration, carbon dioxide concentration, temperature, relative humidity, air pressure, and wind
speed. Sampling rate of the unit is roughly 1 Hz. The schematics for the device are depicted in Figure
2a, and the assembled device is shown in Figure 2b.
Figure 2a and 2b. Schematics for environmental sensors device and assembled device.
3.3. Data collection - self-reported measures
Data collection through self-reported measures was carried out through an assessment of
general stress, and an assessment of mental stress. A baseline score was determined before any tasks
were assigned and under prevailing ambient microclimatic conditions. Participants were requested to
evaluate the task difficulty on a scale ranging from 1 to 10. Similarly, they were prompted to rate their
stress level using a scale from 1 to 7. The range of the scale was designed to sync with subsequent
types of questionnaires for mental and workload assessment. For the purposes of the study reported in
this paper, a self-reported score of task difficulty greater than 6, and a level of stress greater than 4 was
interpreted as ‘high stress’; conversely a score of task difficulty and a level of stress less than 3 was
interpreted as ‘low stress’.As for the assessment of mental stress, we chose to focus on what is generally termed acute
stress, that is, short-term, event-triggered exposures to threatening or challenging stimuli that elicit a
psychological and/or physiological stress response, such as delivering a public speech. To assess this,
we administered the instrument known as the Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) to participants. SAM is
a “non-verbal pictorial assessment technique that directly measures the pleasure, arousal, and
dominance associated with a person's affective reaction to a wide variety of stimuli” [41]. SAM was
chosen for its effectiveness in directly assessing the pleasure, arousal, and dominance associated in
response to the event, which reduces resources needed to measure other types of variables for higher
resolution. Furthermore, SAM can be used universally as language barriers can be overcome when
emotions are represented by pictures.
For stress in this study, we focused on: Acute Stress - Short-term, event-based exposures to
threatening or challenging stimuli that evoke a psychological and/or physiological stress response, such
as giving a public speech. the Acute Stress Appraisals questionnaire was used. The Acute Stress
Appraisal emphasises the multifaceted nature of demand and resource appraisals to be used in
laboratory stress paradigms. Demands were defined to be made up of perceived uncertainty, required
effort, and how demanding the task seems, among other factors, whereas resources comprise
perceived knowledge and abilities, controllability, social support, and expectations [42]. There are two
parts to this questionnaire: a pre-task appraisal and a post-task appraisal
3.4. Experiment to investigate how the environment affects physiological, mental health
and productivity
Figure 3. Procedure of investigating the effects of environment on stress and emotions
The two-hour period was divided into eight 15 min intervals / windows. Each interval featured
varied, randomized combinations of microclimatic factors, as illustrated in Figure 3. Each interval
consisted of a 3-minute baseline where participants rest, a 5-minute task and a survey which featured
SAM and Acute Stress Appraisal. Participants wore a DIY wristband on the wrist of their non-dominant
arm throughout the experiment while engaging in challenging mathematical tasks aimed at sustaining
elevated stress levels. Few windows had easier tasks to serve as baseline and low-stress periods. The
participants should be junior college students with similar levels of mathematical competency. There
are also baseline periods/breaks before, during, and after the experiment.
The collected data underwent processing in Python, with outlier detection conducted using the
z-score method to eliminate outlier data. Initially, the collected EDA data were normalized and filtered
using a low-pass filter (1.5 Hz, Butterworth, 32nd order) to eliminate unwanted artifacts [43].
Subsequently, the EDA data were decomposed into tonic and phasic components utilizing the convex
optimization (cvxEDA) method developed by Greco et al. in 2016 [44]. The number of skin conductance
responses per minute (NSSCR) was also derived, representing the quantity of rapid transient events
within the phasic component [45]. According to the literature, NSSCR refers to skin conductanceresponses occurring without a specific eliciting stimulus [46], and NSSCR levels increase alongside
ratings of emotional arousal [47]. As per Wichary et al. (2016), heightened arousal and negative valence
characterize emotional stress [48]. Thus, this metric serves as a potentially reliable indicator of stress.
To conduct frequency-domain analysis, the EDA data were downsampled to 2 Hz. Subsequently, the
signals underwent high-pass filtering (0.01 Hz, Butterworth, 8th order) to eliminate any underlying trend.
Using variable frequency complex demodulation, TVSymp is calculated as the mean of time-varying
spectral amplitudes in the 0.08–0.24 Hz band. In the frequency domain, a Blackman window (length of
128 points) was applied to each segment (0.5-s overlap with each other), and the fast Fourier transform
was calculated for each windowed segment. EDASymp(n), as a tool for sympathetic tone assessment,
was computed as the normalized power within the frequency band of interest (0.045 to 0.25 Hz) [45].
Random forest regression (RF) models were trained. Random forest regression models performed the
best. Thus, it was chosen as the tool of analysis. Random forest regression models are then trained on
environmental data and EDA features, with the former as input and the latter as output, with a train–
test split ratio of 7:3 to discover the nonlinear relationships between environmental factors and EDA
features. The outcomes of the random forest regression models were analyzed using Shapley values
and Shapley summary plots to uncover intricate connections between input and output variables.
3.5. Experiment to investigate the potentials of Generative AI as a stimulus in fostering
environmental empathy and pro-environment attitudes
For the duration of this experiment, participants wore EDA physiological wristbands on the wrist
of their non-dominant arm. This was to analyse their emotions, using the aforementioned indicators of
EDA in the frequency and time-frequency domains.
Figure 4. Procedure of investigating the feasibility of Generative AI on being a stimulus of change
Figure 4 details the procedure of investigating the feasibility of Generative AI on being a
stimulus of change. The experiment began with participants entering a baseline period, during which
they were instructed to rest and relax without engaging in any activity for 2 minutes. Following this,
participants were shown an image of a polluted environment. They were asked to take a general
glance at the image and then focus on any details that caught their attention. Immediately afterward,
for 1 minute, participants completed a Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM) survey to assess their
emotional response. After this, participants returned to a resting state for another 2 minutes. Next,
they observed an image of a pristine environment for 15 seconds (see Figure 5 as an example). They
then filled out another SAM survey, which again took 1 minute. After 1 minute of resting, participants
moved on to the Generative Fill prompt task. In this task, they were asked to select areas within an
image that they wished to generative fill (i.e., generate filled content) and began typing out a prompt
for this task on Adobe FireFly. The original image to be altered was one that depicted pristine
environments. Participants spent 5 minutes and 30 seconds refining their prompts and selecting the
option they were most satisfied with. Afterwards, participants completed a third SAM survey to assess
how they mentally feel with the degraded environment, which took 1 minute, and then concluded the
experiment with a final 2-minute rest period.Figure 5. Picture of pristine school campus before Generative Fill task
Data processing was the same methodology as the experiment to investigate how the
environment affects physiological, mental health and productivity. First, EDA data was preprocessed,
then EDA features were extracted. Preliminary statistical analysis on EDA extracted features were
performed, such as the Kruskal-Wallis test. Random forest classifiers were trained to detect the
emotional states of participants during each observation of pictures, via emotional indicators. Finally,
this result was compared against that of the Self-Assessment Manikin data collected.
4. Results
For the first experiment to investigate how the environment affects physiological, mental health
and productivity, more than 30,000 environmental data points and 300,000 EDA data points were
collected from 5 participants (4 males and 1 female). For the second experiment to investigate the
potentials of Generative AI as a stimulus in fostering environmental empathy and pro-environment
attitudes, data were collected from 4 male participants.
4.1. Predicting EDA features using random forest regressor with environmental
variables as inputs for high stress windows
Figures 6a and 6b. 𝑅! Score of 0.425 and Shapley Summary Plot using environmental data
as input to predict TVSymp
From Figures 6a and 6b, Shapley Summary Plot suggests that TVSymp is most significantly affected
by the variable ‘CO2 concentration’, followed by the variables ‘Temperature’ and ‘Humidity’. For the
variable ‘CO2 Concentration’, higher value of CO2 concentration tends to decrease TVSymp value,
which results in lower Stress level and emotional valence. For the variable ‘Temperature’, higher
temperature can either increase or decrease the value of TVSymp. Therefore, it is inconclusive to
which extent a change in temperature may affect stress. Finally, for the variable ‘Humidity’, lower
humidity can either increase or decrease the value of TVSymp.Figures 7a and 7b. 𝑅! Score of 0.622 and Shapley Summary Plot using environmental data as input
to predict NSSCR
From Figures 7a and 7b, Shapley Summary Plot suggests that the NSSCR is most
significantly affected by the variable ‘Carbon dioxide concentration’, followed by the variables 'Infrared
radiation’ and ‘temperature’. For the variable ‘Carbon dioxide concentration’, higher carbon dioxide
concentration tends to decrease NSSCR value, which in turn correlates with lower Stress level and
emotional arousal of participants. For the variable ‘Infrared radiation’, it can be seen that higher level
of infrared radiation (intensity) leads to higher NSSCR value and vice versa. Thus, higher Infrared
radiation can lead to higher levels of stress and emotional arousal.
4.2. Results of Generative AI as a stimulus to elicit emotional response
4.2.1. Random Forest Classifier to predict emotional arousal, valence and control
(dominance)
Table 1. EDA input features and its importance in Random Forest Classifiers
Valence Arousal Dominance
TVSymp (n.u.) feature importance 0.282 0.256 0.280
NSSCR (count/min) feature importance 0.397 0.260 0.397
EDASymp (µS²) feature importance 0.321 0.484 0.323
Model Accuracy 0.924 0.951 0.909
Table 2. Spearman’s rho coefficient between EDA features and SAM domains
TVSymp (n.u.) EDASymp (µS²) NSSCR (count/min)
Valence - 0.123 - 0.014 - 0.198
Arousal 0.332 0.434 0.577
Dominance 0.097 0.326 0.192Fig 8. Confusion matrices of Random Forest Classifiers (n_estimators=2000) on emotional arousal
(left, accuracy = 0.92), valence (middle, accuracy = 0.95) and dominance (right, accuracy = 0.91)
In Fig 8, the higher the number on the True label and Predicted label axes, the higher emotional
arousal / valence / dominance. The output of this Random Forest Classifier was the prediction of SAM
domains on the Likert scale, of which the labelled data came from the first line of Self-Assessment
Manikin. In our experiment, the Likert scale for emotional arousal in the Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM)
ranged from 1 to 9. From Table 1, both NSSCR and EDASymp have high feature importance in Random
Forest Classifier in predicting discrete emotional arousal. The high accuracy of this classifier means
that EDA features could predict emotional arousal accurately. Both EDASymp had highest feature
importance in Random Forest Classifier in predicting discrete emotional valence. The high accuracy of
this classifier means that EDA features could predict emotional valence accurately. NSSCR had the
highest feature importance in Random Forest Classifier in predicting discrete control (dominance). The
high accuracy of this classifier means that EDA features could predict control (dominance) accurately.
4.2.2. Statistical analysis to investigate the use of Generative AI to elicit emotions
Table 4: EDA features statistics during different events
Event TVsymp (Mean ± STD) EDASymp (Mean ± NSSCR (Mean ± STD)
STD)
Event 1: During 0.7762 ± 0.7485 0.6117 ± 0.1237 13.3628 ± 14.2879
Baseline
Event 2: During 0.9200 ± 0.8309 0.6880 ± 0.1073 18.0409 ± 12.3995
Generative AI Prompting
task
Event 3: Viewing image 0.8080 ± 0.7557 0.6178 ± 0.1180 14.8548 ± 13.8581
of Pristine Environment
Event 4: Viewing image 1.0719 ± 0.8577 0.6462 ± 0.0927 19.3034 ± 8.8849
of Polluted Environment
Event 5: Viewing 2.2723 ± 2.6380 0.6544 ± 0.1027 21.3833 ± 8.0218
generative-filled polluted
images
Table 5: p-value of Kruskal Test on EDA featuresComparison TVSymp EDASymp NSSCR
Rest vs. Affective Stimuli 1.08E-23 1.26E-06 1.54E-16
Real Image vs. AI Generated
3.54E-12 0.052 0.0055
Affective Stimuli
Calming (Pristine) vs.
4.76E-21 1.85E-05 3.51E-10
Distressing (Polluted) Stimuli
Figure 9. EDA features statistical analysis (y-axis: EDA feature, x-axis: EventID)
(In order: left - TVSymp, middle - EDASymp, right - NSSCR)
As seen in Tables 4 and 5, and in Figure 9, TVSymp does not vary much from baseline when
participants viewed an image of Pristine Environment and thought of prompts for Generative fill in the
image. In contrast, it can be seen that when viewing an original image of Polluted Environment, TVSymp
of participants increased by around 0.3. This effect was amplified when participants were viewing
polluted images Generatively filled by Firefly from the original pristine environment image. This is
statistically significant, as seen in p-value of Kruskal-Wallis Test (3.54E-12). The value of TVSymp
during this event (2.2723 ± 2.6380) was more than twice that when the participants viewed only an
original, real life captured image of Polluted Environment. This suggests that using Generative AI to
create images conveying environmental degradation using a real life image can significantly lead to
higher emotional arousal and more negative emotional valence. EDASymp does not vary much from
baseline. The value of EDASymp during the Generative AI Prompting task (0.6880 ± 0.1073) and in
general, during the periods of viewing images of Polluted environments were the highest. Since there
is an increase in EDASymp from baseline, this suggests that Generative AI stimulus has the potential
to elicit higher emotional arousal. NSSCR during the event of viewing an image of a pristine environment
does not vary much from baseline. In contrast, it can be seen that when viewing an original image of
Polluted Environment, during Generative AI Prompting task and viewing images of polluted environment
generated with Firefly, NSSCR increased sharply. The value of NSSCR during the event of viewing
images of polluted environments generated with Firefly was the highest. Again, this indicates that using
Generative AI to create images conveying environmental degradation using a real life image can
significantly lead to higher emotional arousal.
5. Discussion
5.1. Discussion on first experiment to investigate how the environment affects
physiological, mental health and productivity
Overall, temperature tends to increase cognitive stress but makes emotional arousal and
emotional valence more negative (less positive). Furthermore, it was found that air quality also has a
great impact on participants’ cognitive stress.
This has demonstrated a universal approach of using the Shapley summary plot to interpret
both the direction and magnitude of the effects of microclimate on EDA features. To elaborate, the study
has shown that based on the magnitude of Shapley values, the significance and extent to which
microclimate affects cognitive stress and emotional states can be inferred. With a known effect of
increasing or decreasing the value corresponding to the EDA feature, literature can be reviewed to
understand how cognitive stress and emotional state change accordingly. It has solidified the traditionaluse of AI in understanding stress and emotions. These are the AI tools that will be crucial in raising
awareness of the tangible effects of climate change, thus increasing the willingness for people to take
action to mitigate climate change and unsustainable practices.
It is acknowledged that the approach in this report has some limitations. There might be a
degree of uncertainty in data measurements made by self-built devices and a limited number of
participants. Besides improving on these limitations, another key consideration for the future is to
consider the significance of circadian rhythm, as it can also affect EDA data. A more expansive
multimodal approach could also be devised, such as incorporating data from EEG and facial action
units.
5.2. Discussion on second experiment to investigate the potentials of Generative AI as
a stimulus in fostering environmental empathy and pro-environment attitudes
As suggested by the results of the experiments, the act of viewing images that convey
environmental degradation mostly leads to higher emotional arousal and emotional valence. What
was even more interesting was the fact that by involving themselves in the act of using Generative AI,
specifically Generative fill-in altering images to convey environmental degradation, participants
experienced more intense and negative emotions. These emotions could potentially be identified
along the emotion spectrum from sadness to disgust.
In this experiment, we acknowledge the limited number of participants. That being said, our
study further propounded that Generative AI could be an effective tool in eliciting negative emotions in
humans. In combination with previous literature on the psychological effects of these emotions as an
engine for change in perceptions and behaviours, Generative AI will play a crucial role in fostering
environmental empathy and pro-environmental attitudes. In the future, more experiments will be
carried out and other areas of interest can be better studied, such as the extent to which AI will
motivate students to learn, or workers to perform their job, whether it is creative or office jobs.
6. Conclusions
The research has demonstrated the success of utilising AI and multidisciplinary approach to
understanding the link between microclimate and human health, stress, and emotions. This highlighted
the feasibility of large scale application of this method to gather larger amounts of data for analysis.
This can also be customised to each person, as their emotional and stress responses to changes in the
environment can vary. This is backed up by Machine Learning, as the more amount of data there is to
train the models, the more accurate it gets in prediction.
Not only has AI proven to be extremely valuable in understanding the relationships between
the environment, stress and emotions, but also a catalyst for change. This was demonstrated in
Generative AI, more specifically, Generative Fill’s ability to elicit certain negative motions that were
scientifically proven to psychologically trigger changes in perceptions and behaviours on the
environment. Hence, there is tremendous possibility in harnessing the transformative power of AI in
evoking emotions to nurture empathy, pro-social values and environmental stewardship.
If utilised correctly on a large scale, AI is the key to a favourable societal shift in mindsets
towards sustainability and conservation on a macro level. This has implications for policy makers,
marketers and AI developers. Using a closed-loop approach - AI feeding data to users and users
providing data to AI models, stakeholders can tailor the training and output of AI to align to these
understandings of usage of AI. In combination with other usages of AI in the same topic of the
environment such as setting trends and consumer’s behaviours, we can hope that in the near future,
there will be higher awareness of the environment and pro-environmental practices. This is one of many
benefits that human-AI symbiosis will bring in the future.
References
1. Lee, H; Romero, J. IPCC, 2023: Summary for Policymakers. In: Climate Change 2023:
Synthesis Report. Contribution of Working Groups I, II and III to the Sixth Assessment Report of the
Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change; IPCC, Geneva, Switzerland, 2023; pp. 1-34; doi:
10.59327/IPCC/AR6-9789291691647.001
2. NASA. The Effects of Climate Change. Available online: https://climate.nasa.gov/effects/
(accessed on 25 December 2021).3. Furer, F. Microclimates: What Are They and Why Do We Have Them? Spectrumnews1. 2021.
Available online: https://spectrumnews1.com/ca/la-west/weather/2020/12/30/microclimates--what-
they-are-and-why-we-have-them- (accessed on 25 December 2021).
4. Lala, B.; Hagishima, A. Impact of Escalating Heat Waves on Students’ Well-Being and Overall
Health: A Survey of Primary School Teachers. Climate 2023, 11, 126.
5. Palme, M.; Salvati, A. Urban Microclimate Modelling for Comfort and Energy Studies, 1st ed.;
Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2021
6. Rahma, O.N.; Putra, A.P.; Rahmatillah, A.; Putri, Y.S.K.A.; Fajriaty, N.D.; Ain, K.; Chai, R.
Electrodermal Activity for Measuring Cognitive and Emotional Stress Level. J. Med. Signals Sens.
2022, 12, 155–162.
7. Posada-Quintero, H.F.; Florian, J.P.; Orjuela-Cañón, Á.D.; Chon, K.H. Highly sensitive index
of sympathetic activity based on time-frequency spectral analysis of electrodermal activity. Am. J.
Physiol. Regul. Integr. Comp. Physiol. 2016, 311, R582–R591.
8. Posada-Quintero, H.F.; Florian, J.P.; Orjuela-Cañón, A.D.; Aljama-Corrales, T.; Charleston-
Villalobos, S.; Chon, K.H. Power Spectral Density Analysis of Electrodermal Activity for Sympathetic
Function Assessment. Ann. Biomed. Eng. 2016, 44, 3124–3135.
9. Posada-Quintero, H.F.; Chon, K.H. Innovations in Electrodermal Activity Data Collection and
Signal Processing: A Systematic Review. Sensors 2020, 20, 479.
10. Liu, B.; Lian, Z.; Robert Brown, D. Effect of Landscape Microclimates on Thermal Comfort
and Physiological Wellbeing. Sustainability 2019, 11, 5387.
11. Sheikh, H., Prins, C., Schrijvers, E. (2023). Artificial Intelligence: Definition and Background.
In: Mission AI. Research for Policy. Springer, Cham. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-21448-6_2
12. Chui, M., et al. (2023) The State of AI in 2023: Generative AI’s Breakout Year. McKinsey &
Company. Available online: https://www.mckinsey.com/capabilities/quantumblack/our-insights/the-
state-of-ai-in-2023-generative-ais-breakout-year
13. van Eck, M.; Berkhof, H.; Nicolson, N.; Sulon, J. The effects of perceived stress, traits, mood
states, and stressful daily events on salivary cortisol. Psychosom. Med. 1996, 58, 447–458.
14. Statista. Share of Urban Population Worldwide in 2021, by Continent. 2021. Available online:
https://www.statista.com/statistics/270860/urbanization-by-continent/ (accessed on 25 December
2021).
15. Sanusi, R.; Bidin, S. Re-naturing Cities: Impact of Microclimate, Human Thermal Comfort and
Recreational Participation. In Climate Change, Hazards and Adaptation Options, 1st ed.; Filho, W.L.,
Nagy, J.G., Borha, M., Muñoz, P.D.C., Magnuszewski, A., Eds.; Springer: Cham, Switzerland, 2020;
Volume 1, pp. 545–562.
16. de Souza, D.O.; dos Santos Alvalá, R.C.; do Nascimento Guedes, M. Urbanization effects on
the microclimate of Manaus: A modeling study. Atmos. Res. 2016, 167, 237–248.
17. Xiong, J.; Lian, Z.; Zhou, X.; You, J.; Lin, Y. Effects of temperature steps on human health
and thermal comfort. Build. Environ. 2015, 94 Pt 1, 144–154.
18. Najafi, N.; Movahed, K.; Barzegar, Z.; Samani, S. Environmental Factors Affecting Students’
Stress in the Educational Environment: A Case Study of Shiraz Schools. Int. J. Sch. Health 2018, 5,
1–7.
19. Critchley, H.; Nagai, Y. Electrodermal Activity (EDA). In Encyclopedia of Behavioral Medicine;
Gellman, M.D., Turner, J.R., Eds.; Springer: New York, NY, USA, 2013.
20. Ward, S.; Brickley, M.; Sharry, J.; McDarby, G.; Heneghan, C. Assessment of Heart Rate and
Electrodermal Activity during Sustained Attention to Response Tests; Computers in Cardiology:
Chicago, IL, USA, 2004; pp. 473–476.
21. Kobas, B.; Koth, S.; Nkurikiyeyezu, N.; Giannakakis, G.; Auer, T. Effect of Exposure Time on
Thermal Behaviour: A Psychological Approach. Signals 2021, 2, 863–885.
22. Fernandes, A.; Van Lenthe, F.J.; Vallée, J.; Sueur, C.; Chaix, B. Linking physical and social
environments with mental health in old age: A multisensor approach for continuous real-life ecological
and emotional assessment. J. Epidemiol. Community Health 2021, 75, 477–483.
23. C. Wang, A. V. Savkin, R. Clout and H. T. Nguyen, "An Intelligent Robotic Hospital Bed for
Safe Transportation of Critical Neurosurgery Patients Along Crowded Hospital Corridors," in IEEE
Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 23, no. 5, pp. 744-754, Sept.
2015, doi: 10.1109/TNSRE.2014.2347377.
24. Wilson, H. J., & Daugherty, P. R. (2018). Collaborative intelligence: Humans and AI are
joining forces. Harvard Business Review, 96(4), 114-123.
25. To study the phenomenon of the Moravec's paradox. arXiv. 2010; (published online Dec 14.)
(preprint). http://arxiv.org/abs/1012.314826. Qiao, H., Liu, V., & Chilton, L. (2022,). Initial images: Using image prompts to improve subject
representation in multimodal AI generated art. In Proceedings of the 14th Conference on Creativity
and Cognition, Venice, Italy, (pp. 15–28). https://doi.org/10.1145/3527927.3532792
27. Chowdhury, M. J. U., & Hussan, A. (2023). A review-based study on different Text-to-Speech
technologies. arXiv preprint arXiv:2312.11563.
28. Singer, U., Polyak, A., Hayes, T., Yin, X., An, J., Zhang, S., ... & Taigman, Y. (2022). Make-a-
video: Text-to-video generation without text-video data. arXiv preprint arXiv:2209.14792.
29. Moorhouse, B. L., & Kohnke, L. (2024). The effects of generative AI on initial language
teacher education: The perceptions of teacher educators. System, 122, 103290.
30. Firat, M. (2023). How chat GPT can transform autodidactic experiences and open education?.
31. Mogaji, E., & Jain, V. (2024). How generative AI is (will) change consumer behaviour:
Postulating the potential impact and implications for research, practice, and policy. Journal of
Consumer Behaviour, 1–11. https://doi.org/10.1002/cb.2345
32. Lin, Q., Zhang, J., Ong, Y. S., & Zhang, M. (2024). Make Me Happier: Evoking Emotions
Through Image Diffusion Models. arXiv preprint arXiv:2403.08255.
33. Yang, J., Huang, Q., Ding, T., Lischinski, D., Cohen-Or, D., & Huang, H. (2023). Emoset: A
large-scale visual emotion dataset with rich attributes. In Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF International
Conference on Computer Vision (pp. 20383-20394).
34. Nico H Frijda. Emotion experience and its varieties. Emotion Review, 1(3):264–271, 2009.
35. M. A. Nicolaou, H. Gunes, and M. Pantic, “A multi-layer hybridframework for dimensional
emotion classification,” in ACM Int. Conf.Multimedia, 2011.
36. Pekrun, R. (2017). Emotion and achievement during adolescence. Child Development
Perspectives, 11(3), 215-221.
37. Harley J.M., Bouchet F., Azevedo R. Computer Vision. Volume 7315. Springer; Singapore:
2012. Measuring Learners’ Co-Occurring Emotional Responses during Their Interaction with a
Pedagogical Agent in MetaTutor; pp. 40–45.
38. Septianto, F., & Lee, M. S. W. (2020). Emotional Responses to Plastic Waste: Matching
Image and Message Framing in Encouraging Consumers to Reduce Plastic Consumption.
Australasian Marketing Journal, 28(1), 18-29. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ausmj.2019.09.002
39. Haller, C. (2024). Using Empathy to Shift Climate Change Attitudes.. Crop, Soil and
Environmental Sciences Undergraduate Honors Theses Retrieved from
https://scholarworks.uark.edu/csesuht/41
40. Zangróniz, R.; Martínez-Rodrigo, A.; Pastor, J.M.; López, M.T.; Fernández-Caballero, A.
Electrodermal Activity Sensor for Classification of Calm/Distress Condition. Sensors 2017, 17, 2324.
41. Margaret, M.B.; Lang, P.J. Measuring emotion: The self-assessment manikin and the
semantic differential. J. Behav. Ther. Exp. Psychiatry 1994, 25, 49–59.
42. Mendes, W.B.; Gray, H.M.; Mendoza-Denton, R.; Major, B.; Epel, E.S. Why egalitarianism
might be good for your health: Physiological thriving during stressful intergroup encounters. Psychol.
Sci. 2007, 18, 991–998.
43. Umer, W.; Yu, Y.; Fordjour Antwi Afari, M.; Anwer, S.; Jamal, A. Towards automated physical
fatigue monitoring and prediction among construction workers using physiological signals: An on-site
study. Saf. Sci. 2023, 166, 106242.
44. Greco, A.; Valenza, G.; Lanata, A.; Scilingo, E.P.; Citi, L. cvxEDA: A Convex Optimization
Approach to Electrodermal Activity Processing. IEEE Trans. Biomed. Eng. 2016, 63, 797–804
45. Posada-Quintero, H.F.; Bolkhovsky, J.B.; Qin, M.; Chon, K.H. Human Performance
Deterioration Due to Prolonged Wakefulness Can Be Accurately Detected Using Time-Varying
Spectral Analysis of Electrodermal Activity. Hum. Factors 2018, 60, 1035–1047.
46. Dawson, M.E.; Schell, A.M.; Filion, D.L. The electrodermal system. In Handbook of
Psychophysiology, 4th ed.; Cacioppo, J.T., Tassinary, L.G., Berntson, G.G., Eds.; Cambridge
University Press: New York, NY, USA, 2017; pp. 217–243.
47. Sato, W.; Kochiyama, T.; Yoshikawa, S. Physiological correlates of subjective emotional
valence and arousal dynamics while viewing films. Biol. Psychol. 2020, 157, 107974.
48. Wichary, S.; Mata, R.; Rieskamp, J. Probabilistic Inferences Under Emotional Stress: How
Arousal Affects Decision Processes. J. Behav. Decis. Mak. 2016, 29, 525–538.