How Much is too Much: Exploring the Effect of
Verbal Route Description Length on Indoor Navigation
Fathima Nourin N1, Pradip Pramanick1,2, and Chayan Sarkar1
Abstract—Navigatingthroughanewindoorenvironmentcan Option 2: Can you tell me where is
Option 1:
be stressful. Recently, many places have deployed robots to GIt o is s n tre aa igr h g t a at ne d n tu um rnb e ler f tt .h Tre ae ke. It is near gate the medicine shop?
assistvisitors.Oneofthefeaturesofsuchrobotsisescortingthe the lift to the first floor. After number three
visitorstotheirdesireddestinationwithintheenvironment,but exiting the lift walk on your at the first floor
this is neither scalable nor necessary for every visitor. Instead, right for couple of minutes.
a robot assistant could be deployed at a strategic location Option 3:
to provide wayfinding instructions. This not only increases It is near gate number three.
the user experience but can be helpful in many time-critical Go straight till the end of the
scenarios e.g., escorting someone to their boarding gate at an corridor and turn left. After
couple of steps, take the lift on
airport.However,deliveringroutedescriptionsverballyposesa
your left. Go to the first floor.
challenge.Ifthedescriptionistooverbose,peoplemaystruggle After exiting the lift, walk to the
torecallalltheinformation,whileoverlybriefdescriptionsmay right. Keep walking for two
besimplyunhelpful.Thisarticlefocusesonstudyingtheoptimal minutes. You shall find it on your
right after the big candy store.
lengthofverbalroutedescriptionsthatareeffectiveforreaching
thedestinationandeasyforpeopletorecall.Thisworkproposes .
a theoretical framework that links route segments to chunks
Fig. 1: Different lengths of verbal route descriptions for the
in working memory. Based on this framework, an experiment
same route – a very crisp description may not help find the
is designed and conducted to examine the effects of route
descriptions of different lengths on navigational performance. destination (option 1), whereas a very detailed description
The results revealed intriguing patterns suggesting an ideal may be difficult to remember (option 3).
length of four route segments. This study lays a foundation
for future research exploring the relationship between route
the indoor wayfinding experience is complex and markedly
descriptionlengths,workingmemorycapacity,andnavigational
performance in indoor environments. different from the outdoor wayfinding experience.
Navigating through complex indoor spaces can be chal-
I. INTRODUCTION lenging, especially for people who are not familiar with
Over the past few years, the study of navigation and the layout or visiting for the first time. Hence, acquiring
wayfinding in indoor environments has emerged as an im- knowledge about the environment becomes necessary to
portant research area [1], [2]. It is driven by the growing successfully reach their preferred destination. In daily life,
recognition of its profound implications for human mobility, to acquire this knowledge, people either ask someone for
accessibility, and spatial cognition. Traditional geospatial directions or search for the preferred route on a map or the
science and popular wayfinding & navigation systems focus web. Meilinger et al. [4] found that maps and verbal route
on outdoor environments. But humans spent most (about descriptions are equally effective in conveying wayfinding
90%) of their time in indoor environments 3. Large indoor knowledge, as they are memorized in a language-based
environments,likehospitals,schools,offices,shoppingmalls, format used mainly for wayfinding purposes. Hence, it is
airports, railway stations, etc., constitute the primary spaces reasonable to assume that individuals can rely solely on ver-
where most humans spend a significant portion of their time balwayfindinginstructionstoachieveaneffectivenavigation
throughouttheirlives.Thus,indoorwayfindingisacommon experience. But this experience would also depend on the
scenario for many people in their daily lives. A study by type of route descriptions given. Inefficient or unclear route
Viaene [3] notes that during the experiments, participants descriptionscanleadtofrustrationsanderrorsinnavigation.
consistently reported facing more difficulties with indoor Toaddressthechallenge,theuseofescortrobotstoguide
wayfinding compared to outdoor navigation. Moreover, in- people from their current positions to preferred destinations
door environments present unique challenges due to their has become increasingly common in indoor environments
architectural structures like elevation changes, limited field (e.g., airports) 4. However, adoption of escort robots is lim-
of view & poor visual access. These factors make it difficult itedprimarilyduetothefollowinglimitations–(i)costofthe
to find and focus on key objects for orientation [3]. Thus, robotduetotheirsophisticateddesign,mobilityfeatures,and
escortcapacity,(ii)lackofscalabilityasonerobotcanescort
1Fathima Nourin N & Chayan Sarkar are with TCS Research, India onlyonepersonorgroupatatimeresultingininefficiencyin
{fathimanourin.n, sarkar.chayan}@tcs.com
crowded environments, (iii) space requirements of the robot,
2Pradip Pramanick is with Interdepartmental Center for Advances in
and (iv) limited adaptability to environmental factors like
RoboticSurgery-ICAROS,UniversityofNaplesFedericoII,Naples,Italy
pradip.pramanick@unina.it
3https://essay.utwente.nl/85763/ 4https://airportimprovement.com/airport-robots-are-already-reality
4202
guA
72
]OR.sc[
1v76351.8042:viXramoving obstacles, dynamic layouts, and temporary barriers regarding route descriptions and navigational performance.
that are common in indoor spaces. Thus, stationary socially Finally, This study identified promising trends, indicating
assistive robots that provide verbal route descriptions have that shorter route descriptions generally lead to improved
emerged as an alternative due to their cost effectiveness, navigationaloutcomes,aligningwiththeinitialexpectations.
ability to assist multiple individuals in quick successions
& lower maintenance requirements. They also would face II. THEORETICALFRAMEWORK
minimal disruptions caused by mechanical failures, thus
In this section, we establish a theoretical framework for
ensuring reliable and efficient navigation support in diverse
this study. Baddeley et al. [13] shows working memory
environments.
represents the ability to hold transient representations while
A key element for a robot to effectively fulfill its role
simultaneously processing and assimilating ongoing events.
in providing route descriptions is the quality of the route
A study by A M Hund [14] found that visuospatial working
descriptionsprovided.Manyexistingstudiesfocusonnatural
memory plays an important role in wayfinding in an indoor
language interaction with robots. They aim to build models
environment. Hund’s findings suggest that efforts aimed
for robots to understand human input [5], [6], [7] and how
at facilitating wayfinding should consider the demands on
robots should navigate in public places [8], [9]. However,
working memory. This involves reducing the amount of in-
how a robot provides information to humans concerning
formationpeoplehavetorememberastheynavigatethrough
route description is understudied. The question of what
the environment. The study emphasizes that the capacity
constitutes an ideal route description is not new [10], [11].
limitsofverbalworkingmemorydirectlyimpacttheprocess
Since people have cognitive limits in remembering and
of recalling and following route descriptions in indoor set-
recallingverbalroutedescriptions,alonganddetailedverbal
tings. Individuals must temporarily hold and process verbal
description of the route may not be the best option. Hence
informationintheirworkingmemorytosuccessfullyexecute
determining the optimal length of verbal route descriptions
navigation tasks. Exceeding the capacity limits of verbal
that individuals can effectively remember and recall during
working memory may lead to difficulties recalling crucial
indoor navigation is essential.
landmarks, turns, or instructions, affecting the accuracy and
This study aims to identify cognitive limitations and
efficiencyofindoornavigation.Therefore,understandingand
preferences in comprehending and retaining verbal route
accommodating these limitations are essential for enhancing
descriptions,establishingameasurablethresholdfortheideal
wayfinding instructions and improving user experience in
length of route descriptions through experiments. This study
indoor environments.
addresses two primary questions – (1) How to define the
An early study by Miller [15] suggested that people
concept of “length” in the context of route descriptions? (2)
could remember about seven chunks in Short Term Memory
What is the optimal length of route descriptions that results
(STM).Subsequentresearchindicatedamoreprecisecapac-
in the best navigation performance when followed?
ity limit of three to five chunks. Cowan in his seminal work
To address these questions, firstly, a theoretical frame-
on working memory capacity limits [12], brought together a
work is proposed by integrating findings from cognitive
widevarietyofdatatosuggestthatthesmallercapacitylimit
psychologyandgeospatialresearchtodefinearoutesegment
of four chunks is ideal. He defines a “chunk” as a collection
corresponding to a chunk in working memory. By utilizing
of concepts with strong associations to one another and
the concept of chunks in working memory [12], this article
weaker associations to other concurrently used chunks. This
proposes a comparison between the concept of a route
sheds light on the cognitive processes underlying working
segment and a chunk, aiming to define the ‘length’ of a
memory capacity.
route description. Based on this comparison and the typical
In geospatial research, most of the route
short-term capacity limit from cognitive psychology [12],
description constitutes a list of triplets <
this paper hypothesizes that a similar limit of approximately
orientation,action,landmark > [16]. This triplet forms
four route segments would represent the optimal length of
the basis of a route description, which involves designating
route description recallable during navigation.
a landmark, reorienting the listener, and prescribing an
Secondly, based on this theoretical framework, an exper-
action to continue the progression along the route. In order
iment is designed and conducted to assess people’s nav-
to understand the concept of chunks within the context of
igational performance corresponding to route descriptions
verbal route descriptions, it is important to understand how
of varying lengths. Route descriptions of three different
chunks are formed in memory. McLean and Gregg [17]
lengths of short, medium, and long are created for the
described three ways chunks can be formed in working
same route, comprising 4, 6, and 8 route segments (or
memory.
chunks in working memory), respectively. A correlation
between superior navigation performance and the length of • Some stimuli may already form a unit with which the
route descriptions confirms the theory that a route segment subject is familiar. This means that individuals may
in geospatial research corresponds to a chunk in working naturally perceive certain elements as a cohesive unit
memory. because of their prior knowledge or familiarity with
Thirdly, the methodology proposed in this work provides those elements. In the context of route descriptions,
a template for future research investigating similar questions each segment of the route might be perceived as achunk because people associate navigating each triplet position via a non-overlapping route, random assignment of
<orientation,action,landmark > as a sub-task. routedescriptions,instructiontoparticipantsnottoseekhelp,
• External punctuation of the stimuli may serve to create recording the duration and locations of stops, as well as the
groupingsoftheindividualelements.Thisreferstotheuse total navigation time.
of external cues, markers, or punctuation to create group- However, our study differed significantly in several re-
ings or chunks from individual elements. In the context of spects. In our study, participants were presented with pre-
route descriptions, phrases like ‘first walk down’, ‘then’, recorded videos containing the route descriptions, allowing
‘continue’,etc.atthestart/endofaroutesegmentreinforce them to listen to the instructions only once. This approach
chunking. Additionally, pauses between route segments aimedtosimulatereal-worldscenarioswhereuserstypically
during the narration would further emphasize chunking. receive navigation instructions just once, such as when ask-
• Thepersonmaymonitorhisownperformanceandimpose ing a robot for wayfinding guidance. Moreover, participants
structure by selective attention, rehearsal, or other means. wereprovidedwiththeoptiontoterminatetheexperimentif
Based on these prior works, we can conclude that the they believed they could no longer recall the route descrip-
concept of a route segment fits closely with the idea of tion. To maintain our focus on navigation using the recall of
a chunk in working memory. Thus, this work suggests route descriptions and considering the short duration of the
defining a chunk in the context of verbal route descrip- selectedroutes,a5-minutethresholdwasused.Ifparticipants
tions as a route segment corresponding to the triplet, < exceededthislimit,theexperimenterstoppedtheexperiment
orientation,action,landmark >,asexplainedearlier.This as participants were likely wandering aimlessly and unable
proposed definition of chunk addresses the question of how to reach the destination. Participants were also instructed
to define the length of a route description. Further, based to refrain from engaging with anyone, including the ex-
on this definition of chunks as route segments and findings perimenter, during navigation, ensuring minimal distractions
from cognitive psychology, we hypothesize that the ideal andaconsistentexperienceforallparticipants.Additionally,
length of a route description is four route segments. This the definition of errors as behavioral indicators was refined
ideal length would facilitate easy recall and successful navi- encompassing only errors, as experimenter-corrected errors
gationcompletion.Together,thisdefinitionofchunkandthe were deemed inconsequential for our objective of evaluating
proposedoptimallengthcollectivelyestablishthetheoretical navigationperformancebasedonparticipants’routedescrip-
framework for this study. tion recall.
III. METHOD
B. Participants
We conducted a user participation study where users
A total of 27 participants were part of this study, who
navigated within a real-world environment. First, at the
are colleagues of the author, but do not belong to the same
starting point of a given route, a participant watched videos
researchgrouporresearchdomain.Theparticipantsincluded
of an AI-generated talking avatar narrating the directions to
20males(meanage=26.10,SD=4.27)and7females(mean
a destination. Then, the participant attempted to recall and
age = 23.43, SD = 4.15). The participants were all non-
follow those directions to reach the final destination.
native English speakers and had different levels of English
A. Protocol proficiency according to their own ratings (Fig. 2a). All the
participants had at least an undergraduate degree, out of
The methodology used in this study was inspired by the
which55%hadapostgraduatedegreeorabove(Fig.2b).All
research conducted by Daniel et al. [11], where similar
the participants reported that they are familiar with at least
approaches were utilized to examine the effectiveness of
onesmartphonemapapplication,whileafewreportedfamil-
three types of route descriptions – labeled as good, poor,
iaritywithsomeothernavigationappstoo.Mostparticipants
andskeletal–inguidingindividualstoaspecificlocationon
(51.9%) also agreed that they are comfortable with voice-
campus.Inthesecondphaseoftheirexperiment,participants
based navigation assistants (Fig. 2c). Also, most (51.9%)
wereescortedtothestartingpositionoftheroute,whichdid
of the participants were frequent users of navigation apps
notoverlapwiththeassignedroutefortheexperiment.They
or took the help of verbal instructions during navigation
were then randomly assigned one of the three route descrip-
(Fig. 2d). All the participants were visiting the building
tions and instructed to study the printed route descriptions
wheretheexperimenttookplaceforthefirsttimeandnoneof
before initiating navigation. Participants were directed not
them had any previous knowledge of the environment. All
to seek external assistance during the task, while the ex-
the participants signed a consent form before participating
perimentermonitoredfromadistanceof5meters,recording
in the experiment and were presented with a small token of
instancesofthreebehavioralindicators:self-correctederrors,
appreciation as an acknowledgment of their participation.
experimenter-corrected errors, and stops. The duration and
locations of these indicators, along with the total navigation
C. Experiment site
time, were also documented.
We incorporate several elements from this procedure into Theenvironmentusedforthisstudywasanofficebuilding.
our study, including conducting a navigation task to assess This particular building was selected due to its unfamiliarity
route description efficacy, leading participants to the starting to the participants prior to the experiment. Four routes wereElementary Undergraduate Agree (51.9%) Very rarely
proficiency (3.7%) (44.4%) Strongly agree (3.7%)
P wr oo rf ke inss gi o pn roa fl i ciency Posgraduate (18.5%) Rarely (11.1%)
(59.3%) or above Neutral (22.2%) Occassionally
Full professional (55.6%) Disagree (25.9%)
proficiency (7.4%) Very Frequently
(22.2%) (51.9%)
Native / bilingual
proficiency (14.8%) Always (7.4%)
(a) English (b) educational (c) comfortable with voice based (d) frequency of using
proficiency qualification navigation assistance navigation app
Fig. 2: Statistics of participants’ background on various aspects.
Route
Definition generated for the same route using seven rules of chunking
name
Beginsattheentrancetothebuilding,goesupaflight derived from Klippel’s spatial chunking rules for outdoor
Route1
ofstairs,andendinfrontofadesignatedroomonthe environments [18], but modified to fit into the context of a
(R1)
firstfloor
complexindoorenvironment.Thegoalofapplyingchunking
Beginsinfrontofatrainingroomonthesecondfloor,
Route2 rules was to cluster some parts of a given route so as to
goes up six floors via the lift, and ends at the table
(R2)
tenniscourtontheeighthfloor. shorten it without losing important information needed to
Route3 Beginsinfrontofanofficespaceontheseventhfloor, reach the destination. The definitions of these rules in the
goesdownfourfloorsviathelift,andendsinfrontof
(R3) context of an indoor environment are listed below.
aserverroomonthethirdfloor.
Route4 Beginsinfrontofanofficespaceonthefifthfloor,goes 1) Numericalchunking:countsdecisionpointslikecorridor
uponeflightofstairs,andendsinfrontofadesignated
(R4) intersections or turns to summarize them into a single
officespaceonthesixthfloor.
instruction, e.g., “take the second turn”.
TABLE I: Four routes chosen for the experiment.
2) Chunking based on structural features: involves iden-
tifying and utilizing salient structural characteristics to
describe a route, e.g., “walk till the escalators”.
carefully selected, all of comparable lengths and complexi- 3) Local chunking based on point-like landmarks: uses dis-
ties, ensuring participants could be guided to their starting tinctive objects or points as a reference, e.g., “walk past
points without route overlap. As the current study aimed to the restroom”.
assesstheimpactofdifferentlengthsofroutedescriptionson 4) Local chunking based on linear landmarks: uses linear
navigationalperformanceforthesameroute,itwasnecessary features like hallways and designated pathways to guide
to ensure comparability across the four routes in several the navigation along a path, e.g., “follow the corridor”.
aspects. None of the routes traversed any floor or area more 5) Local chunking based on area-like landmarks along the
than once, each covering entirely distinct, non-overlapping route: involves using landmarks with area-like features
areas. Moreover, all routes involved a change in elevation, that spread along the route and are relevant for multiple
either through the use of stairs or elevators. The four routes decisionpoints,likehalls,atrium,lobbies,etc.,e.g.,“pass
chosen are described in (Table I). The time it took for the through the hallway”.
experimenter to walk each route from the starting point to 6) Global chunking based on point-like landmarks: involves
the destination at a normal pace ranged from 1 minute 15 providing route descriptions that do not fully specify the
seconds to 1 minute 30 seconds, without accounting for the entire route but rely on well-known or easily identifiable
wait time for the lift, if any, indicating a uniformity in the landmarkstoguidetheWayfinder,e.g.,“gotothesecond
lengths of these four routes. floor”.
7) Globalchunkingbasedonarea-likelandmarks:usesarea-
D. Creation of route descriptions
like landmarks to guide navigation and potentially allow
For each of the four routes, three route descriptions of for chunking large parts of the route without the need to
different lengths in terms of the number of route segments – announce intermediate decision points, e.g., “get to the
short, medium, and long, corresponding to 4, 6, and 8 route other side of the atrium”.
segments were created. Initially, the lists comprised 14, 11, 11, and 10 route
First,alistofallroutesegmentsdescribingtheentireroute segmentsforR1,R2,R3,andR4,respectively.Subsequently,
was generated. This was done in accordance with guidelines the chunking principles were employed to select 4, 6, and
proposedbyM.Denis[16],whichemphasizetheimportance 8 route segments corresponding to short, medium, and long
of – (a) limiting the number of statements, (b) avoiding route descriptions, respectively. This process yielded a total
redundancy and over-specification, (c) referencing visible, of 12 route descriptions. A video was created for each of
permanent, and relevant landmarks, (d) prioritizing deter- the 12 route descriptions, featuring an AI talking head 5
minate descriptions, and (e) clearly articulating associations deliveringnarrationinageneralAmericanaccent,commonly
between actions and landmarks.
Then, route descriptions of three different lengths were 5https://www.colossyan.com/recognizedbymostpeople.A2-secondpauseseparateseach they have reached the destination, and if they think they
routesegment,allowinglistenerstoperceivethemasdistinct are no longer able to recall the route and are simply going
chunks. These videos were stored in a tablet that the partic- around the building searching for the destination. They were
ipants used during the experiment. Each participant engaged informed that in case the navigation took more than 5 mins,
in three navigation tasks (trials) randomly selected from the the experimenter would say stop and halt the navigation.
12 route descriptions, such that each of them got one short, During navigation, the experimenter followed the par-
one medium, and one long route description corresponding ticipant at a distance of 5 m and noted any occurrences
to random routes in random order. As mentioned earlier, of the two behavioral indicators: stops and errors. A stop
eachtaskbeganbywatchingthecorrespondingpre-recorded was defined as a pause during walking, and an error was
video. defined as a deviation from the original route followed by
a return to the route. The duration and location of these
E. Questionnaire
indicatorswerenoted,alongsidethetotalnavigationduration
We designed a structured questionnaire to gather subjec- and success/failure status. After each trial, participants rated
tivefeedbackfromparticipantsregardingeachtrialandtheir the difficulty of following spoken route descriptions on a
overall experience comprising five sections. scale of 1 to 10 and their confidence levels on a scale of 1
• The initial section provides generic instructions to the to 5. Then the participant was taken to the starting point
participant, a consent form, and demographic questions of the next trial through a non-overlapping route. At the
covering age, gender, navigation app usage frequency, end of all three trials, the participant also provided their
comfort with navigation assistants, self-rated English subjective feedback on some questions comparing the three
fluency, etc. route descriptions and their relative difficulty and perceived
• The subsequent three sections were completed after length.
each trial, focusing on the participants’ subjective anal-
G. Hypothesis
ysis of the route description, including the perceived
difficulty level of the navigation and confidence levels The main hypotheses of this study are listed below.
experienced during navigation. • H1: Participants navigating using short route descriptions
• Thefifthsectionprovidedanoverallfeedbackform,en- will demonstrate higher successful completion rates com-
ablingparticipantstocomparethethreetrials,assessthe pared to those navigating using medium or long route
perceived difficulty in following the route descriptions, descriptions.
and compare the lengths of routes. • H2: Participants navigating using short route descriptions
will demonstrate shorter total navigation durations com-
F. Procedure
pared to those navigating using medium or long route
Each participant completed three trials involving short, descriptions.
medium,andlongroutedescriptionsforvariousroutes,with • H3: Participants navigating using short route descriptions
the order randomized. Routes for each trial were also ran- willexhibitshorterdurationsoferrorsandstopscompared
domlyassigned.Eachtrialinvolvedlisteningtotherecorded to those navigating using medium or long route descrip-
descriptions, navigating from start to finish, and providing tions.
feedback on the navigation experience. This resulted in • H4: Participants navigating using short route descriptions
threeexperimentgroups,eachwith27participantsfollowing will make a smaller number of errors and will stop fewer
different route lengths. timescompared tothosenavigatingusing mediumorlong
The experiment took place in a building next to the route descriptions.
workplace of the participants. The participants were guided
there by the experimenter. At the entrance of the building, IV. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
the participant was given a note to brief them about the As mentioned earlier, navigation tests were conducted for
experiment and what to expect. After reading and signing 27participants,eachcompleting3trials(oneshort,medium,
the consent form, the experimenter then took the participant and long route descriptions). Data for one medium-length
to the starting point of the route corresponding to the first trial was removed due to an interruption in the experiment,
trial.Heretheparticipantwaspositionedatthestartingpoint resulting in 80 total trials. Out of these, 58 trials resulted
in the pre-defined orientation, then informed of the name in successful navigation, while 22 were unsuccessful due to
and corresponding floor number of their starting position various reasons such as incorrect route selection or disorien-
(their current position) and the name of their destination. tation of the participants. Data from unsuccessful trials were
Theywerethengiventheroutedescriptionvideo,whichthey excluded from time measurements and behavioral indicators
watched only once. After listening to the route description, analysis.
the participant said ‘start’ and started navigating along the
A. Navigation success rate
route they had memorized. The participants were warned
not to ask for help either from the experimenter or from We ran a chi-square test to explore the potential rela-
otherpedestrians.Theparticipantswereinformedtheycould tionship between the length of route descriptions and the
say stop to halt the navigation in two cases – if they think success rate of navigation. Despite the lack of statistical% of unsuccesful navigations 200 60 100
1.00 % of succesful navigations
150 75
0.75 40
100 50
0.50 20 0.25 50 25
0.00 0 0 0
long medium short total long medium short long medium short long medium short
(a) navigation (b) mean total (c) mean total (d) mean actual
success rates duration of navigation duration of errors navigation times
Fig. 3: Plots of time measurements and behavioral indicators across different route description lengths.
significance revealed by the test χ2(2) = 3.30,p = .192, a lengths of route descriptions. No significant differences (Chi
closerexaminationrevealsinterestingpatterns.FromFig.3a, square=1.27, p=.53, df=2) were found among the three
it is apparent that short route descriptions exhibit a greater categories of route description lengths (short, medium, and
frequency of successful navigations relative to other route long). Interestingly, a comparison of the mean duration of
descriptions coupled with a lower frequency of unsuccessful errors for the three route description lengths [Figure 3c]
navigations. Specifically, short, medium, and long route showsthatthemeandurationoferrorsincreasedastheroute
descriptions resulted in success rates of 85%, 65%, and description length increased. Specifically, the mean duration
67%, respectively. Remarkably, the success rate of 85% for of errors for short route descriptions (M=37.03, SD=45.8)
short route descriptions surpassed the overall success rate was smaller than those for medium (M=43.23, SD=64.24),
of 72.5%. It is plausible that the ease of recall of short which was smaller than long (M= 51.59, SD=52.96) route
route descriptions contributes to the higher success rates of descriptions.Thesepreliminaryfindingssuggestthepossibil-
navigation, aligning with our hypothesis (H1). ity that short route descriptions are associated with shorter
durationsoferrors,potentiallymakingthemmoreconducive
B. Time measurements
toefficientnavigation.Theseemergingtrendsalignwithour
Here,theresultsrelatedtothetotaldurationofnavigation,
expectations (H3) and warrant further exploration in future
duration of errors, duration of stops, and actual navigation
studies.
times are listed.
3) Duration of stops: The data failed the Shapiro-Wilk
1) Totaldurationofnavigation: Aone-wayANOVA[19]
test of normality (p < .001), hence the non-parametric
performed to compare the effect of three different route
Kruskal-Wallis Test was conducted to examine the differ-
descriptions on total duration of navigation revealed that
ences in duration of stops for different lengths of route
there was a statistically significant difference in mean to-
descriptions. No significant differences (Chi square=.34,
tal duration between at least two groups (F(2, 59)=[7.15],
p=.845, df =2 ) were found among the three categories
p=.002). Tukey’s HSD Test [20] for multiple comparisons
of route description lengths (short, medium, and long).
found that the mean value of total duration was significantly
This was expected, as stopping behavior during navigation
different between the long & medium route descriptions
is subjective and may vary among individuals, potentially
(p=.015, 95% C.I.=[8.52, 93.27]), and the long & short
explaining the lack of significance in the results.
routedescriptions(p=.002,95%C.I.=[19.90,103.62]).There
was no statistical significance for the mean total duration 4) Actual navigation time: While the findings related to
of navigation between medium and short route descriptions the total duration of navigations and duration of errors align
(p=.812). with our expectations, it is possible that the variations in
According to an independent sample t-test, participants individuals’ walking speeds while navigating according to
took longer time to complete the navigation for long route route descriptions of varying lengths could impact this met-
descriptions (M=154.10, SD=83.69) than for medium route ric. To address this concern, potential differences in walking
descriptions(M=103.20,SD=28.10),t(39)=2.58,p=.014.The pace and their impact on navigational performance were
participantsalsotooklongertimeforlongroutedescriptions examined.Stopanderrordurationsforeachparticipantwere
(M=154.10, SD=83.69) than for short route descriptions calculated and these were subtracted from total navigation
(M=92.33, SD=40.44), t(40)=3.05, p=.004 (Fig. 3b). This duration. An ANOVA showed a significant effect of route
trend aligns with our hypothesis (H2) as short route descrip- description length on actual navigation times (F(2,58)=5.16,
tions correspond to the shortest durations of navigation. To p=.009), suggesting that differences in navigation durations
understand why participants who followed the long route couldbeattributednotonlytothedurationoferrorsbutalso
descriptions took longer than others, the time measurements tovariationsinwalkingpaces.Acomparisonofmeanactual
ofthedurationofstopsanddurationoferrorsareexamined. navigation times shows that participants tended to take less
2) Duration of errors: The data failed the Shapiro-Wilk time to navigate using short route descriptions (M=67.83,
test [21], [22] of normality (p < .001), hence the non- SD=24.45) than using medium (M=76.35, SD=23.67), or
parametric Kruskal-Wallis Test [23] was conducted to ex- long route descriptions (M=94.28, SD=30.86).
amine the differences on the duration of errors for different Additionally, there was a need to verify that these dif-
sdnoces
ni emiT
sdnoces
ni emiT
sdnoces
ni emiTRoute de-
Kruskal-Wallis Significance Wilk test of normality (p<.001). Kruskal-Wallis test to ex-
scription Parameter
length testresults result amine the differences in self-reported confidence ratings for
total duration of χ2=6.54, different lengths of route descriptions showed no significant
Short Significant
navigation p=.038,df=2 differences (Chi square=.95, p=.623, df=2). Interestingly,
(four
χ2=2.99, Not
chunks) durationoferrors mean confidence ratings decreased with route description
p=.225,df=2 significant
χ2=2.79 , Not length, suggesting higher confidence while following short
durationofstops
p=.247,df=2 significant route descriptions (M=4.09, SD=0.73) compared to medium
Medium total duration of χ2=3.17, Not (M=3.88, SD=0.99) and long route descriptions (M=3.78,
navigation p=.366,df=3 significant
(six SD=0.94).
χ2=3.68, Not
chunks) durationoferrors
p=.298,df=3 significant 2) Perceived difficulty ratings: These were on a scale of
durationofstops χ2=2.35, Not 1 to 10, where 1 for the least difficulty and 10 for the most
p=.504,df=3 significant
difficulty while navigating using the given route description.
total duration of χ2=6.87, Not
Long navigation p=.076,df=3 significant This data failed the Shapiro-Wilk test of normality (p <
(eight
χ2=4.85, Not .001). Kruskal-Wallis test to examine the differences in
chunks) durationoferrors
p=.183,df=3 significant
perceived difficulty ratings for different lengths of route de-
χ2=1.91 , Not
durationofstops p=.592,df=3 significant scriptionsshowednosignificantdifferences(Chisquare=.95,
p=.623, df=2). However, mean difficulty ratings increased
TABLE II: Statistical tests for effect of four routes on
with the length of route descriptions. The mean difficulty
different parameters.
rating for short route descriptions was smaller (M=4.52,
SD=0.64) than those for medium (M=4.64, SD=0.63) and
long (M=5.39, SD=0.69).
ferences in time measurements were not associated with
3) Number of errors: The data failed the Shapiro-Wilk
variationsbetweenroutes.Thegoalwastoassesstheimpact
test of normality (p < .001), hence the non-parametric
of different routes (R1, R2, R3, R4) on total duration, error
Kruskal-Wallis Test was conducted to examine the differ-
duration, and stop duration across all three route description
ences in the number of errors for different lengths of route
lengths. For this, the durations were separately analyzed for
descriptions. No significant differences (Chi square=5.65,
each route length category. A Kruskal-Wallis test performed
p=.059, df=2) were found among the three categories of
to compare the effects of only short route descriptions
route description lengths (short, medium, and long). Also,
corresponding to four different routes (R1, R2, R3, R4) on
out of 58 data points, 44 were zero values, indicating that
the total duration of navigation, in Table II, revealed that
mostparticipantsmadenoerrors,whichaccountsforthetest
there was a significant difference between the four routes.
results.
Note that no short descriptions for R3 were analyzed due to
4) Numberofstops: ThedatafailedtheShapiro-Wilktest
failed navigation attempts. This would have influenced the
of normality (p<.001), hence the non-parametric Kruskal-
differencesintotaldurationamongtheroutes.Incontrast,the
Wallis Test was conducted to examine the differences in the
Kruskal-Wallis tests (Table II) showed no significant effect
number of stops for different lengths of route descriptions.
of different routes on total duration, error duration, or stop
No significant differences (Chi square=.58, p=.748, df=2)
durationforroutedescriptionsofdifferentlengths.Basedon
were found among the three categories of route description
this analysis, this work establishes that differences in time
lengths (short, medium, and long). This outcome is not
measurementvalueswerenotduetodifferencesbetweenthe
surprising given the subjective nature of stopping behav-
four routes, suggesting their similarity.
ior during navigation. The lack of significance could be
Since the same participants were involved in all three
attributed to the inherent subjectivity of this trait.
experimentalgroups,thevariationsinactualnavigationtimes
cannot be attributed to individual differences in inherent D. Discussion
walking speeds. However, based on the results discussed
The results suggest that short route descriptions demon-
here,variationsinactualnavigationtimescanonlybelinked
stratedahigherfrequencyofsuccessfulnavigationcompared
to pace differences between the three groups. Hence, it
to the other two (H1). The analysis also revealed significant
seems plausible that participants walked faster while using
differencesintotalnavigationdurationamongthethreeroute
short route descriptions compared to long or medium route
description lengths, with short route descriptions showing
descriptions, despite navigating similar routes.
the shortest duration, as hypothesized (H2). The findings
from the duration of errors analysis suggest that short route
C. Behavioral indicators
descriptions are associated with shorter duration of error
Here the analysis of self-reported confidence ratings, per- (H3). The analysis of the number of stops and errors did not
ceived difficulty ratings, number of errors, and number of reveal any relationship with route description length, thus
stops are listed. our hypothesis (H4) could not be supported. Additionally,
1) Self reported confidence ratings: Participants rated our analysis of actual navigation times showed that partic-
their confidence levels while navigating with given route ipants navigated shorter routes more quickly compared to
descriptionsonascaleof1to5.ThisdatafailedtheShapiro- longer or medium routes. Analysis of perceived difficultyand confidence level suggest that short route descriptions these insights into the design of navigation systems could
were perceived as least difficult to follow and induced potentially enhance user experiences.
the most confidence in participants. This aligns with our
REFERENCES
expectation of a more favorable navigation experience with
short descriptions. [1] H. Ghamari and A. Sharifi, “Mapping the evolutions and trends of
literature on wayfinding in indoor environments,” European Journal
V. LIMITATIONSANDFUTUREWORK ofInvestigationinHealth,PsychologyandEducation,2021.
[2] S.Jamshidi,M.Ensafi,andD.Pati,“Wayfindingininteriorenviron-
One primary limitation of our study was the relatively ments:Anintegrativereview,”FrontiersinPsychology,2020.
small sample size, potentially reducing statistical power. [3] Viaene,Pepijn,“Indoorlandmarks:thestudyandimplementationof
wayfindingaids,”Ph.D.dissertation,GhentUniversity,2018.
Additionally, the lack of a fully controlled environment
[4] T. Meilinger and M. Knauff, “Ask for directions or use a map: A
for the experiment led to delays and external distractions, field experiment on spatial orientation and wayfinding in an urban
which could have increased the variability of data. Future environment,” Journal of Spatial Science, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 13–23,
2008.
studies could use more controlled settings like simulations
[5] P. Pramanick, C. Sarkar, and I. Bhattacharya, “Your instruction may
to ensure more accurate results. Our measurements were be crisp, but not clear to me!” in 2019 28th IEEE International
prone to experimenter biases and errors, given that a single Conference on Robot and Human Interactive Communication (RO-
MAN). IEEE,2019,pp.1–8.
experimenter was responsible for collecting all the data and
[6] P. Pramanick, C. Sarkar, S. Banerjee, and B. Bhowmick, “Talk-
all parameters were manually recorded by the experimenter. to-resolve: Combining scene understanding and spatial dialogue to
Future research could involve multiple experimenters or resolvegranulartaskambiguityforacollocatedrobot,”Roboticsand
AutonomousSystems,vol.155,p.104183,2022.
utilize automated data collection methods, such as sensors
[7] P. Pramanick, C. Sarkar, S. Paul, R. dev Roychoudhury, and
to accurately track distances walked, or cameras to record B.Bhowmick,“Doro:Disambiguationofreferredobjectforembodied
thenavigation.Anotherimportantdirectionforfuturestudies agents,” IEEE Robotics and Automation Letters, vol. 7, no. 4, pp.
10826–10833,2022.
would be to explore other experiment methods to comple-
[8] H.B.Barua,P.Pramanick,C.Sarkar,andT.H.Mg,“Letmejoinyou!
mentthefindingsofthenavigationexperiment.Onepotential real-timef-formationrecognitionbyasociallyawarerobot,”in2020
approach could be to incorporate a recall-only test to assess 29thIEEEInternationalConferenceonRobotandHumanInteractive
Communication(RO-MAN). IEEE,2020,pp.371–377.
participants’ ability to remember route descriptions under
[9] C.Mavrogiannis,P.Alves-Oliveira,W.Thomason,andR.A.Knepper,
normal circumstances. Future studies could also explore “Socialmomentum:Designandevaluationofaframeworkforsocially
measuring more parameters to judge the effectiveness of the competent robot navigation,” ACM Transactions on Human-Robot
Interaction(THRI),vol.11,no.2,pp.1–37,2022.
navigation. For example, the heart rate could be measured
[10] D. M. Daniel MP., “Spatial descriptions as navigational aids: A
to analyze the stress level or cognitive load during navi- cognitiveanalysisofroutedirections,”Kognitionswissenschaft,1998.
gation, and observable behaviors like changes in walking [11] D. Marie-Paule, A. Tom, E. Manghi, and M. Denis, “Testing the
value of route directions through navigational performance,” Spatial
speed, hesitation, facial expression, etc. could be measured
CognitionandComputation,vol.3,pp.269–289,122003.
to understand at what points participants are finding it [12] N.Cowan,“Themagicalnumber4inshort-termmemory:Areconsid-
difficult to navigate. Addressing these limitations will be erationofmentalstoragecapacity,”TheBehavioralandbrainsciences,
vol.24,pp.87–114;discussion114,032001.
crucialforadvancingourunderstandingofroutedescriptions
[13] A.D.BaddeleyandG.Hitch,“Workingmemory,”ser.Psychologyof
and navigational performances, ultimately leading to more LearningandMotivation,G.H.Bower,Ed. AcademicPress,1974,
effective navigation systems and strategies. vol.8,pp.47–89.[Online].Available:https://www.sciencedirect.com/
science/article/pii/S0079742108604521
VI. CONCLUSION [14] A. M. Hund, “Visuospatial working memory facilitates indoor
wayfinding and direction giving,” Journal of Environmental
The purpose of this study was to provide empirical data Psychology, vol. 45, pp. 233–238, 2016. [Online]. Available: https:
regarding the effects of route description lengths on naviga- //www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0272494416300081
[15] G.A.Miller,“Themagicalnumberseven,plusorminustwo:Some
tional performance. Route descriptions of different lengths
limits on our capacity for processing information,” Psychological
(short, medium, long) were created for routes of similar Review,1956.
lengths (R1, R2, R3, R4) comprising 4, 6, and 8 route [16] M. Denis, “The description of routes: A cognitive approach to the
production of spatial discourse,” Cahiers de Psychologie Cognitive,
segments, respectively. The results provided initial insights
vol.16,pp.409–458,081997.
and the emerging trends aligned with our expectation that [17] G.L.McLeanRS,“Effectsofinducedchunkingontemporalaspects
individuals following short route descriptions would exhibit ofserialrecitation,”JExpPsychol,1967.
[18] A. Klippel, S. Hansen, K.-F. Richter, and S. Winter, “Urban granu-
superior navigational performances. This implies that the
larities-adatastructureforcognitivelyergonomicroutedirections,”
expected ideal length of route descriptions could be four GeoInformatica,vol.13,pp.223–247,062009.
segments, corresponding to the short route descriptions. Our [19] E.R.Girden,ANOVA:Repeatedmeasures. Sage,1992,no.84.
[20] L.E.Toothaker,MultipleComparisonProcedures. SAGE,1993.
study also found that shorter route descriptions could be
[21] W. Y. B. Razali N. M., “Power comparisons of shapiro-wilk,
relatedtofasterwalkingpaces,alongwithhigherconfidence kolmogorov-smirnov, liliefors and anderson-darling test,” Journal of
andlowerdifficultyexperiencedbypeoplewhilenavigating. StatisticalModelingandAnalytics,2011.
[22] S. S. Shapiro and M. B. Wilk, “An analysis of variance test for
Overall, while further research is warranted to confirm our
normality(completesamples),”Biometrika,vol.52,1965.
findingsandexploreunderlyingrelations,theobservedtrends [23] P.E.McKightandJ.Najab,TheCorsiniEncyclopediaofPsychology.
provide foundations for future investigations. Incorporating JohnWiley&Sons,Ltd,2010,ch.Kruskal-WallisTest.