Musinger: Communication of Music over a Distance with Wearable
Haptic Display and Touch Sensitive Surface
Miguel Altamirano Cabrera, Muhammad Haris Khan, Ali Alabbas,
Luis Moreno, Issatay Tokmurziyev, and Dzmitry Tsetserukou
Abstract—This study explores the integration of auditory and
tactile experiences in musical haptics, focusing on enhancing
sensory dimensions of music through touch. Addressing the gap
intranslatingauditorysignalstomeaningfultactilefeedback,our
research introduces a novel method involving a touch-sensitive
recorder and a wearable haptic display that captures musical
interactions via force sensors and converts these into tactile
sensations. Previous studies have shown the potential of haptic
feedback to enhance musical expressivity, yet challenges remain
in conveying complex musical nuances. Our method aims to ex-
pandmusicaccessibilityforindividualswithhearingimpairments
and deepen digital musical interactions. Experimental results
reveal high accuracy (98% without noise, 93% with white noise)
in melody recognition through tactile feedback, demonstrating
effectivetransmissionandperceptionofmusicalinformation.The
findings highlight the potential of haptic technology to bridge
sensorygaps,offeringsignificantimplicationsformusictherapy,
education,andremotemusicalcollaboration,advancingthefield
of musical haptics and multi-sensory technology applications.
Index Terms—Musical Haptics, Human-Robot Interaction, Fig. 1: Wearable haptic display generating rhythm sensation
Wearable Haptic Display, and Haptic Interfaces on the user’s forearm. The independent contact-points are
generated by three inverse five-bar linkage mechanisms.
I. INTRODUCTION
Musical haptics has seen significant advancements as re-
searchers explore the intersection of auditory and tactile
control of musical gestures, further blurring the lines between
experiences in music performance and perception. Musical
physical and digital music-making [2]. Altukhaim et al. [3]
haptics is an interdisciplinary area that integrates principles
demonstrated that synchronized haptic feedback significantly
from haptic engineering, human-computer interaction (HCI),
strengthens the sense of ownership over virtual body parts.
applied psychology, and musical acoustics to enhance the
Similarly,convertingmusicintohapticfeedbackcoulddeepen
sensorydimensionsofmusicthroughtouchandproprioception
listeners’ connections to music, allowing them to feel the
[1]. This burgeoning field has led to the development of
music as well as hear it. This approach could revolutionize
innovativedevicesandsystemsthataimtoprovidemeaningful
how we experience music, making it more immersive and
hapticfeedbacktomusiciansandaudiences,therebyenriching
accessible, particularly for those with hearing impairments.
the overall musical experience.
Tivadar et al. [4] explore the effectiveness of digital haptic
Previous research in this domain has demonstrated the
technologies in enhancing visual search performance in dual-
potential of haptic feedback to improve the expressivity and
task settings. Their study demonstrates that haptic-only feed-
control of digital musical instruments (DMIs). For exam-
back on touchscreen tablets can significantly reduce reaction
ple, the Laptop Orchestra of Louisiana has employed force-
times in visual tasks without compromising accuracy. This
feedbackinstrumentstoprovideperformerswithprecise,phys-
finding is particularly relevant for applications where visual
icallyintuitive,andreconfigurablecontrols.Theseinstruments
attentioniscritical,suchasdriving,bysuggestingthathaptics
enable musicians to interact with digital music interfaces in
can alleviate visual overload. This underscores the potential
ways that closely mirror the tactile engagement of traditional
of haptic technology to improve user performance and safety
acoustic instruments, thus enhancing performance accuracy
in multitasking environments, paving the way for its broader
and expressiveness.
application in interactive systems, including music-to-haptics
The integration of force feedback into DMIs has also been
conversionwheretactilefeedbackcouldsimilarlyenhanceuser
shown to reduce reaction times and enable more precise
engagement and experience.
AlltheauthorsarewiththeIntelligentSpaceRoboticsLaboratory,Skolkovo The study conducted by Turchet et al. [5] effectively ad-
Institute of Science and Technology (Skoltech), Bolshoy Boulevard, 30, dresses several critical challenges in the domain of musical
p.1, Moscow 121205, Russia {haris.khan, m.altamirano,
haptics, particularly emphasizing the necessity for compact,
ali.alabbas, luis.moreno, issatay.tokmurziyev
d.tsetserukou@skoltech.ru unobtrusive, and efficient sensors and actuators capable of
4202
tcO
12
]CH.sc[
1v20261.0142:viXradelivering high-fidelity haptic feedback. By concentrating on five-bar linkages for tactile feedback, optimizing user safety
the translation of auditory signals into tactile sensations, the and interaction clarity during intensive VR applications.
research provides valuable insights into the ways haptic cues TouchVR is a novel wearable haptic interface designed
can shape the perception of music, especially in environments to enhance VR experiences by providing multimodal tactile
where auditory feedback is either absent or restricted. feedback to the palm and fingertips [13]. The device uses
Building on these foundational studies, the present research an inverted Delta mechanism to generate 3D force vectors,
seeks to advance the field of musical haptics by exploring the simulating sensations like pressure and texture, while vi-
conversion of auditory musical signals into haptic feedback. brotactile motors on the fingertips add realism. Integrated
Specifically, this study investigates a novel method where one with HTC Vive Pro and Leap Motion, TouchVR significantly
individual listens to music through headphones while simulta- improves immersion in VR through applications like BallFeel
neouslytappingonforcesensors.Simultaneouslysignalsfrom and RoboX. The research highlights its potential in fields
thesesensorsarethentransmittedtoawearableroboticdevice such as teleoperation and VR training, with future plans to
worn by another individual, who does not have access to the incorporate thermal feedback.
auditorycomponentofthemusic.Thissystemaimstotranslate On another spectrum HaptiHug is an innovative haptic
the auditory experience of music into a tactile one, thereby display designed to simulate the sensation of a hug over a
enabling the second individual to “feel” the music through distance, thereby enriching social interaction and emotional
haptic feedback alone. involvement in online communication [14]. The system inte-
The objective of this paper is to present a system that con- gratesthe3DvirtualworldSecondLife,whereitautomatically
vertsauditorymusicalsignalsintohapticfeedback.Thispaper recognizes and responds to ”hug” cues from text messages
is structured as follows: Section II reviews prior research, by triggering a realistic hug sensation through the HaptiHug
highlighting advancements and challenges in force-feedback device. The device uses soft materials and rotating motors to
instrumentsandhapticwearables.SectionIIIelaboratesonthe generate pressure on the user’s chest and back, closely mim-
system architecture, detailing the design and technical setup icking the experience of a human hug. User studies revealed
of the new haptic feedback system, including force sensors that the HaptiHug successfully increased the immersion and
andwearablerobotics.Theexperimentalevaluationiscovered emotional engagement of participants, making it a promising
in Section IV, where the methodology, data collection, and tool for enhancing the realism and emotional depth of online
analysisassessthesystem’seffectiveness.SectionVdiscusses interactions.
potentialapplicationswithafocusonitsuseinmusiccommu- For fingetip feedback, LinkTouch can be observed, a wear-
nication,performance,andaccessibility,whilealsoillustrating ablehapticdevicedesignedtodeliverhigh-fidelitytwo-degree-
the system’s broader impact across various domains. Finally, of-freedom (2-DoF) force feedback directly at the fingerpad
Section IV concludes the paper by summarizing the findings [15]. The device features an inverted five-bar linkage mech-
and contributions to the field and proposing directions for anism that enables precise control over the application of
future research. normalandtangentialforcesatanypointonthefingertip.This
innovativedesignfacilitatesarealisticsensationofmakingand
II. RELATEDWORK
breaking contact with virtual objects, significantly enhancing
A. Haptic Interfaces
the user’s tactile experience in virtual environments.
Haptic feedback and wearable devices have significantly Considering more the user’s state, iFeel IM is a system
enhanced interactive technologies, especially in fields requir- that enhances emotional communication in online interactions
ing precise human-robot interactions (HRI). One of such a through haptic feedback corresponding to detected emotions
system is a stylus-controlled musical interface that integrates [16]. While their work demonstrates the potential of affective
resistiveforcefeedbacktoenrichuserinteractionswithdigital haptics to deepen emotional experiences, Musinger applies
musical instruments by simulating different surface textures these principles to the domain of music. By translating audi-
[10]. This approach not only augments the tactile experience torysignalsintotactilesensations,Musingernotonlyenhances
but also improves the expressive capabilities of musicians in the expressivity of music but also broadens its accessibility,
live performances. offering a novel application of haptic feedback.
Building on the integration of haptic feedback in musical Lastly, the MoveTouch system can be analyzed, which
applications, a modular device offering rotary force feedback combines motion capture and vibrotactile feedback to ensure
for digital musical instruments was presented [11]. This inno- safety in HRI [17]. The device, fitted on the user’s wrist,
vation allows musicians to experience varying haptic effects features an adjustable fiducial marker visible to the motion
that mimic traditional musical interactions, thereby deepening capture system and uses vibration patterns to guide the user’s
the engagement with digital instruments through physical movements,therebypreventingpotentialcollisionsinashared
feedback. space with robots.
Meanwhile, another project focused on improving VR im-
B. Haptics in Music
mersion by developing RecyGlide, a forearm-worn haptic
display that aids in spatial awareness without interfering with Recent explorations at the intersection of music and hap-
hand-tracking systems [12]. Their design includes inverted tic feedback highlight innovative approaches to enhancingmusical experiences through tactile sensations. Papetti and multi-contacttactilesensations.Weuseadevicethatgenerates
Saitis [1] highlight the need for haptic feedback in digital three independent contact points, allowing for more complex
musical instruments (DMIs) to enhance performance control force vector sensations.
and expressivity, addressing a gap where most DMIs fall
III. SYSTEMARCHITECTURE
short. The present work directly responds to this by trans-
The proposed system consists of two main components.
lating auditory signals into multi-contact haptic feedback,
The first component is a touch-sensitive recorder that enables
improving both expressivity and accessibility in music. By
users to interact with music through tapping. It records these
advancinghapticfeedbacktechnology,Musingerbuildsonthe
interactions using an array of force sensors, which are then
challenges identified by Papetti and Saitis, offering a more
transmitted to the second component: a haptic display. The
immersive musical experience. Turchet et al. [5] introduce
haptic display is a wearable robotic device worn by a sec-
Musical Haptic Wearables for Audiences (MHWAs), which
ond user. The second user perceives the tactile sensations
enhance live music performances by providing audiences
transmitted from the touch-sensitive recorder in real-time
with vibrotactile feedback synchronized to the music. While
throughtactilepatternsrenderedontheirforearm.Thesystem
their work demonstrates the potential for increased engage-
architecture is illustrated in Fig. 2. The second user is located
ment and enjoyment, it also highlights challenges like the
in a remote environment, unable to see or hear the tapping
needforpersonalizedexperiencesandprecisesynchronization.
sounds made by the first user.
Musinger builds on these concepts by translating auditory
signals into customizable haptic feedback, aiming to offer a
more accessible and personalized musical experience beyond
live performance contexts.
Großhauser and Hermann [6] present a wearable multi-
modal sensor system designed for real-time audio-haptic
feedback, primarily aimed at enhancing motion and posture
sensing. Their work demonstrates the potential of integrat-
ing auditory and tactile feedback to improve user awareness
and performance across various activities. Building on this,
Musinger applies these principles specifically to music, where
it translates auditory signals into haptic feedback. This ap-
proachbroadenstheapplicationofhapticfeedbackbyfocusing
on the translation of musical qualities into tactile sensations,
thus enhancing the user experience in a novel context. In the
domainofmultisensorymusicexperiences,FridandLindetorp
Fig. 2: Musinger architecture.
[7] investigate the integration of whole-body vibrations in
musical installations. Their research indicates that preparatory
workshopsthatfamiliarizecomposerswithhaptictechnologies A. Touch-sensitive Recorder
can significantly enhance the effectiveness of these multi-
The touch-sensitive recorder comprises three single-point
sensory experiences, encouraging innovative compositional
touch paths. Each contact point utilizes a Force Sensitive
practices that incorporate both auditory and tactile elements.
Resistor(FSR)SP200-10fromPeratech.Theergonomicplace-
Armitage and Ng [8] explore the practical applications of
ment of the three FSRs enables intuitive interaction using the
designing haptic interfaces tailored for musical performance,
index, middle, and ring fingers. As the user listens to music,
highlighting the importance of synchronization between audio
theycantaptheFSRsinsyncwiththemusic.Theseelectrode
and haptic outputs. Their work presents a quantitative anal-
signals are then captured by an ESP32 microcontroller, which
ysis of motor types, optimizing haptic feedback to improve
records the data and subsequently transmits it to the wearable
the musical experience without distracting from the auditory
haptic display component.
elements. Lastly, Mazzoni and Bryan-Kinns [9] introduce the
B. Wearable Haptic Display
’Mood Glove’, a haptic wearable that enhances film music
perception by synchronizing vibrotactile feedback with audio The wearable haptic display aims to create the sense of
cues. This technology demonstrates the potential of haptic touch at three different points on the user’s forearm. The
feedback to enrich the emotional depth of film viewing, devicedesignisbasedontheinvertedfive-barlinkagemecha-
particularly for hearing-impaired audiences, by intensifying nism of M-shape, LinkTouch, introduced in [?] and further
the perceived moods conveyed by the soundtrack. developed in [18]. This mechanism enables sensations of
These studies highlight the wide-ranging possibilities of tapping and sliding along the trajectory of the end-effector
usinghapticfeedbackinmusicandperformancearts,opening created by the device, providing multi-contact tactile stimuli
up exciting opportunities to enhance auditory experiences on the user’s forearm.
through touch. While earlier research focused on vibrotactile To ensure a more natural experience, the device was
feedback, our study takes a different approach by utilizing ergonomically designed to wrap around the forearm. This(a)
Fig.4:Experimentalsetup(Wearablehapticdisplay).Theuser
is wearing the haptic device on the right forearm and telling
the patterns perceived.
forearm without noise cancellation. During the second part of
(b)
the experiment, the participants wore headphones with white
noise to cancel the noise produced by the device.
(c)
Fig. 3: 3D model of the haptic interface based on the inverted
five-bar linkage mechanism. (a) isometric view, (b) lateral
view, and (c) front view.
placement allows users to keep their hands free for other
activitieswhileinteractingwiththedeviceandreceivingtactile
musicsensations.Additionally,thevisiblenatureofthedevice Fig. 5: Experimental setup (Touch-sensitive recorder). The
allows external users to recognize that the user is engaged in user is performing the haptic patterns with their fingers in-
an interactive experience. teracting with the three touch sensors located on the table.
The system utilizes an array of inverted five-bar linkages to
Eight right-handed participants (three females) aged 22 to
simulateintricatetactileinteractionsontheuser’sforearm.As
47 (28.1 ± 8.09) years volunteering completed the evaluation.
showninFig.1,thethreeinversefive-barlinkagemechanisms
None of them reported any deficiencies in sensorimotor func-
arearrangedparalleltotheuser’sarm,enablingthesensations
tion.
to be delivered along the forearm.
Fourveryknownsongswereselectedtoberenderedbythe
IV. EXPERIMENTALEVALUATION hapticdevice:(a)BabyShark,(b)HappyBirthDay,(c)Jingle
We conducted a series of evaluations to determine the Bells, and (d) William Tell Overture Final (Horse melody).
human recognition of the bits from the local user while Before the study, the experimenter explained the purpose
performing the beats from different songs. of the multi-contact haptic device to each participant and
The experiment on tactile perception is centered on the demonstrated the tactile feedback provided by the device.
analysisofthehumanperceptionoftactilerendering.Tostudy A demonstration of the melodies was provided. During the
the interference of the noise produced by the servo motors experiment, the user was asked to sit in front of a desk and
while the wearable device is activated, during the first part to wear the haptic display on the right forearm as shown in
of the experiment, the remote users wore the device on the Fig. 4. Each melody was presented 3 times blindly in randomTABLE I: Confusion Matrix for Actual and Perceived
nificance in environments where auditory feedback is
Melodies Across All Subjects for Recognition without White
limited or inaccessible, as it provides a new modality for
Noise.
engagingwithmusic.Hapticfeedbacksystemscanbridge
Answers(PredictedClass) the gap between auditory and tactile perception, offering
%
A B C D an alternative way to experience and interact with music.
A 0.96 0.04 0.00 0.00
• Remote Music Collaboration: Haptic feedback facili-
B 0.00 1.00 0.00 0.00
Patterns C 0.00 0.04 0.96 0.00 tates real-time remote musical collaboration by transmit-
D 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 ting tactile cues between distant performers. Musicians
can feel the rhythm and dynamics of their collabo-
TABLE II: Confusion Matrix for Actual and Perceived
rators’ performances, enabling more synchronized and
Melodies Across All Subjects for Recognition with White
expressive interactions despite physical separation. This
Noise.
technology can be especially valuable in a globalized
Answers(PredictedClass) and digitally connected world, where remote collabora-
%
A B C D tions are increasingly common. By incorporating haptic
A 0.96 0.00 0.04 0.00
feedback,remotemusicalinteractionscanachievealevel
B 0.00 0.92 0.08 0.00
Patterns C 0.04 0.13 0.83 0.00 of immediacy and connectedness that closely mirrors in-
D 0.00 0.00 0.00 1.00 person performances.
• Accessibility for the Hearing Impaired: This technol-
ogy offers transformative potential in making musical
order, thus, 12 patterns were provided to each participant in
experiencesaccessibletoindividualswithhearingimpair-
eachevaluation,oncewithoutwhitenoiseandoncewithwhite
ments. By converting sound into vibrations and tactile
noise. Fig. 5 illustrates the Touch-sensitive recorder.
stimuli, haptic devices allow users to perceive music
Theresultsofthehumanperceptionevaluationbyrendering throughtheirsenseoftouch.Thisapproachenablesthose
the melodies are summarized in confusion matrices. Table I whoarehardofhearingtoengagewithmusicalelements
corresponds to the answers without white noise, and Table II such as rhythm, intensity, and emotional expression.
to the answers with white noise. The application of haptic feedback in this context not
In order to evaluate the statistical significance of the differ- only enhances inclusivity but also expands the sensory
ences between the perception of the haptic rendering of the possibilities for experiencing music.
melodies(4songs),weanalyzedtheresultsusingsinglefactor • Immersive and Multisensory Musical Experiences:
repeated-measures ANOVA, with a chosen significance level This technology can enhance the immersive quality of
of α < 0.05. The open-source statistical packages Pingouin musical experiences by adding a tactile component to
and Stats models were used for the statistical analysis. auditorystimuli.Invirtualreality(VR)environments,live
According to the ANOVA results, there is not a statistically performances,orinteractiveinstallations,hapticfeedback
significant difference in the recognition songs without white can simulate the physical sensations associated with mu-
noise F(3,28) = 0.666,p = 0.5795 neither with white noise sic,suchasthevibrationsofinstrumentsorthepulsations
F(3,28) = 0.9839,p = 0.4144. The ANOVA showed that of bass frequencies. This multisensory integration deep-
the music does not significantly influence the percentage of ens the user’s engagement with music, creating a more
correct responses separately, with and without noise. holisticandembodiedexperience.Bycombiningauditory
To evaluate the influence of the white noise in the per- and tactile inputs, haptic technology enriches the overall
ception of the music by listening to the servo motors mov- sensory impact of music.
ing in the device, we analyzed the results using two-factor • Tactile Music Perception and Education: Haptic feed-
repeated-measures ANOVA, with a chosen significance level back systems can be employed to convey musical infor-
of α<0.05. According to the results, there is no statistically mation through touch, allowing users to recognize and
significant difference in the recognition songs without white differentiate between various musical elements such as
noise F(3,57)=0.649,p=0.586 rhythm, tempo, and melody. This tactile approach to
The overall recognition rate is 98% without white noise musicperceptionhassignificantimplicationsforbothed-
and 93% with white noise, which means that the user can ucation and entertainment. In educational settings, haptic
distinguish the rhythms of the proposed melodies. feedbackcanbeusedasatooltoteachandreinforcemu-
sical concepts, particularly for students who may benefit
V. APPLICATIONS
from multisensory learning strategies. In entertainment,
• Music Communication through Tactile Feedback: it adds a new dimension to how music is experienced,
Haptictechnologycantransformauditorymusicalsignals making it more engaging and interactive.
into tactile sensations, allowing for innovative forms of
VI. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK
musicalcommunication.Bytranslatingsoundintotouch,
individuals can perceive rhythm and melody through This paper explored a novel system that translates au-
physicalsensations.Thisapplicationholdsparticularsig- ditory musical signals into haptic feedback, enabling usersto perceive music through tactile sensations. Through a se- [10] A.Mu¨ller,F.Hemmert,G.Wintergerst,andR.Jagodzinski,“Reflective
ries of evaluations, our study demonstrated that participants haptics:Resistiveforcefeedbackformusicalperformanceswithstylus-
controlled instruments,” in Proc. Int. Conf. on New Interfaces for
could effectively recognize and differentiate between familiar
MusicalExpression,(Sydney,Australia),pp.477–478,2010.
melodies using a wearable haptic device, even when auditory [11] M. Kirkegaard, M. Bredholt, C. Frisson, and M. M. Wanderley, “Tor-
feedback was absent. With experimental results showing high quetuner: A self contained module for designing rotary haptic force
feedbackfordigitalmusicalinstruments,”ininProc.Int.Conf.onNew
recognition rates of 98% without noise and 93% with noise,
InterfacesforMusicalExpression,2020
the system’s capabilities in conveying complex musical infor- [12] J. Heredia, J. Tirado, V. Panov, M. Altamirano Cabrera, K. Youcef-
mation are substantiated. Toumi, and D. Tsetserukou, “Recyglide: A forearm-worn multi-modal
hapticdisplayaimedtoimproveuservrimmersionsubmission,”inProc.
The findings have significant implications for various ap-
ofthe25thACMSymposiumonVirtualRealitySoftwareandTechnology,
plications, including enhancing music accessibility for indi- pp.1–2,2019.
viduals with hearing impairments, facilitating remote musical [13] D.TrinitatovaandD.Tsetserukou,“Touchvr:awearablehapticinterface
for vr aimed at delivering multi-modal stimuli at the user’s palm,” in
collaboration,andenrichingmultisensoryexperiencesinenter-
SIGGRAPHAsiaXR,p.42–43,2019.
tainmentandeducation.Bybridgingthegapbetweenauditory [14] D. Tsetserukou, “Haptihug: A novel haptic display for communication
andtactileperception,thisresearchcontributestothegrowing ofhugoveradistance,”inHaptics:GeneratingandPerceivingTangible
Sensations,pp.340–347,2010.
field of musical haptics and offers new possibilities for how
[15] D.Tsetserukou,S.Hosokawa,andK.Terashima,“Linktouch:Awear-
we engage with music. ablehapticdevicewithfive-barlinkagemechanismforpresentationof
Future work will focus on refining the system’s design two-dofforcefeedbackatthefingerpad,”inInProc.2014IEEEHaptics
Symposium(HAPTICS),pp.307–312,2014.
for broader usability and exploring its application in diverse
[16] D.Tsetserukou,A.Neviarouskaya,H.Prendinger,N.Kawakami,andS.
musical genres and performance contexts. Additionally, ex- Tachi,“Affectivehapticsinemotionalcommunication,”in3rdInt.Conf.
tending the research to more complex musical structures and onAffectiveComputingandIntelligentInteractionandWorkshops,pp.
1–6,2009.
longer compositions will help to further validate the system’s
[17] A. Alabbas, M. A. Cabrera, M. Sayed, O. Alyounes, Q. Liu, and
effectiveness. Efforts will be directed towards improving the D. Tsetserukou, “Movetouch: Robotic motion capturing system with
precision and range of the haptic feedback to enhance the wearabletactiledisplaytoachievesafehri,”inInt.Conf.EuroHaptics,
pp.1-6,2024
fidelityofmusicalreproduction.Additionally,weareplanning
[18] M. Altamirano Cabrera and D. Tsetserukou, “Linkglide: a wearable
to develop and implement the MusingerGPT system, which hapticdisplaywithinvertedfive-barlinkagesfordeliveringmulti-contact
will be based on a Large Language Model to generate dis- and multi-modal tactile stimuli,” in Haptic Interaction: Perception,
DevicesandAlgorithms3,pp.149–154,Springer,2019.
tinctivetactilepatternsformusicalcompositions.Lastly,more
extensive user studies involving diverse demographics will
provide deeper insights into the usability and overall impact
of the system in real-world settings.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
Research reported in this publication was financially sup-
ported by the RSF grant No. 24-41-02039.
REFERENCES
[1] S.PapettiandC.Saitis,MusicalHaptics:Introduction,pp.1–7.Cham:
SpringerInternationalPublishing,2018.
[2] E. Berdahl, A. Pfalz, M. Blandino, and S. D. Beck, Force-Feedback
InstrumentsfortheLaptopOrchestraofLouisiana,pp.171–191.Cham:
SpringerInternationalPublishing,2018.
[3] S. Altukhaim, D. George, K. Nagaratnam, T. Kondo, and Y. Hayashi,
“Enhancementofsenseofownershipusingvirtualandhapticfeedback,”
ScientificReports,vol.14,p.5140,Mar2024.
[4] R. I. Tivadar, R. C. Arnold, N. Turoman, J.-F. Knebel, and M. M.
Murray, “Digital haptics improve speed of visual search performance
inadual-tasksetting,”ScientificReports,vol.12,p.9728,Jun2022.
[5] L. Turchet, T. West, and M. M. Wanderley, “Touching the audience:
musical haptic wearables for augmented and participatory live music
performances,”PersonalandUbiquitousComputing,vol.25,pp.749–
769,2021.
[6] T. Grosshauser and T. Hermann, “Augmented haptics – an interactive
feedback system for musicians,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Haptic and Audio
InteractionDesign:HAID,pp.100–108,2009.
[7] E.FridandH.Lindetorp,“Hapticmusic:exploringwhole-bodyvibra-
tions and tactile sound for a multisensory music installation,” in Proc.
SoundandMusicComputingConference,pp.68–75,2020.
[8] J. Armitage and K. Ng, “Configuring a haptic interface for music
performance,” in Electronic Visualisation and the Arts (EVA), BCS
Learning&Development,2015.
[9] A.MazzoniandN.Bryan-Kinns,“Moodglove:Ahapticwearableproto-
typesystemtoenhancemoodmusicinfilm,”EntertainmentComputing,
vol.17,pp.9–17,2016.