Exploring users’ sense of safety in public using an
Augmented Reality application
Maurizio Vergari1, Tanja Kojic´1, Nicole Stefanie Bertges 1, Francesco Vona 3,
Sebastian Mo¨ller1,2, Jan-Niklas Voigt-Antons3
1Quality and Usability Lab, TU Berlin, Germany
2German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Berlin, Germany
3Immersive Reality Lab, Hamm-Lippstadt University of Applied Sciences
way to the destination is shown from the own point of view
using symbols and other visual information. For Dong et al.,
Abstract—Nowadays, Augmented Reality (AR) is available
thistypeofrepresentation“expressesgeographicalinformation
on almost all smartphones creating some exciting interaction
and relationships more specifically” [6] and reduces cognitive
opportunities but also challenges. For example, already after
the famous AR app Poke´mon GO was released in July 2016, effort, allowing people to pay more attention to others around
numerous accidents related to the use of the app were reported themcomparedtousinga2Ddigital/virtualmap.Unnecessary
byusers.Atthesametime,thespreadofARcanbenoticedinthe informationdoesnotneedtobedisplayedifthecorresponding
tourism industry, enabling tourists to explore their surroundings object is undetected or irrelevant. However, this requires pre-
in new ways but also exposing them to safety issues. This ciseplacementoftheaugmentedinformationintherealworld.
preliminary study explores users’ sense of safety when manip- Asidefromtheimportanceofaccurateinformationplacement,
ulating the amount and UI elements visualization parameters of
little research has been done on the User Interface of AR
Point of Interest (POI) markers in a developed AR application.
tourism applications, especially regarding hand-held devices.
The results show that the amount of POI markers that are
The main problem is the visualization and positioning of the
displayed is significant for participants’ sense of safety. The
virtual objects [7]. Depending on the number, size, and visu- influenceofmanipulatingUIelementsintermsof“transparency”,
“color”, and “size” cannot be proven. Nevertheless, most tested alizationoptions,largedisplaypartscanalsobeclutteredwith
people stated that manipulating transparency and size somehow virtualobjectsinanARapp.Withoutfilteringinformation,the
influences their sense of safety, so a closer look at them should relativelysmalldisplayofasmartphoneisquicklyoverloaded,
be taken in future studies. resulting in an obstruction of view of sights or even traffic,
pedestrians,andotherobjects.Researchersmentionedlimiting
Keywords—AugmentedReality,Safety,UserExperienceDesign,
the displayed content according to the distance between the
Visualization
userandthePOIasapossiblesolution.Othersdonotconsider
generalfilteringthesolution,astheusersmaywanttodiscover
the unfamiliar surroundings without pre-filtering [8], [9], [10],
I. INTRODUCTION&RELATEDWORK
[11]. Olsson et al. [5] name the importance of showing
In the last years, Augmented Reality (AR) experienced information sensitive to the context. A simple layout with a
increasing popularity. As AR is nowadays available for smart- balancedintegrationofvirtualcuesandrealityisalsorequired
phone usage, the number of applications exploiting AR in- [12]. For example, to make the best decision regarding the
creased, and it has become a technology for the mass market. colorschemeoftheannotations,someresearchsuggestsusing
At the same time, the tourism market is increasingly being billboard style. Here, the background color changes according
affected by the advent of new technologies [1]. It is not sur- to the real environment [13], [14]. Moreover, Bell et al. [15]
prisingthatnowadays,touristsexploreunknownenvironments suggested placing information automatically so that these do
using their smartphones instead of a guidebook. not occlude each other.
Unfortunately, it needs to be considered that there are
many accidents related to smartphone usage on the street All the areas above could affect users’ sense of safety.
[2]. In a study by the Pew Research Center in 2014, more Safety is the state of being safe and protected from danger
than half of the adult smartphone users reported that they or harm. In this paper, the concept of sense of “safety”
had already experienced collisions with other pedestrians due is defined somewhat broader, meaning to have a feeling of
to smartphone distraction [3]. The same problem can be enoughcognitiveworkloadlefttobeawareofthesurroundings
found in AR applications for tourism, where people have to andtobeabletodirectsufficientattentiontomoveawayfrom
look at their smartphone screens to interact with a Point of potentialobstaclesanddangers.Thesehazardscanbestaticas
Interest (POI). Thus AR applications can be very engaging, well as dynamic with moving objects or people. In addition,
but at the same time, this poses a risk regarding smartphone not only the own safety but also other peoples’ and objects’
usage [4][5]. Navigation is also another important area where should be considered safety-relevant. As Rovira et al. pointed
AR is applied. AR navigation aids have been designed and out,ARapplicationscanbeveryengaging,andthisisadesired
used mostly for pedestrian way-finding. Such AR navigation effectinotherdigitalmediabutariskwhenitcomestoARon
systems do not provide an overview of the entire route. The hand-held devices such as smartphones [4], [5]. Additionally,
©2023IEEE.Personaluseofthismaterialispermitted.PermissionfromIEEEmustbeobtainedforallotheruses,inanycurrentorfuturemedia,including
reprinting/republishing this material for advertising or promotional purposes, creating new collective works, for resale or redistribution to servers or lists, or
reuseofanycopyrightedcomponentofthisworkinotherworks.M.Vergari,T.Kojic,N.S.Bertges,F.Vona,S.Mo¨llerandJ.-N.Voigt-Antons,”Exploring
users’senseofsafetyinpublicusinganAugmentedRealityapplication,”202315thInternationalConferenceonQualityofMultimediaExperience(QoMEX),
Ghent,Belgium,2023,pp.193-196,doi:10.1109/QoMEX58391.2023.10178675.https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/10178675
4202
beF
12
]CH.sc[
1v88631.2042:viXratheymeasuredintheirworkthatparticipantsspent,onaverage,
86%oftimelookingattheirsmartphonescreenwhilewalking
[4]. Safety in terms of distraction and awareness of things
and people around has been barely researched, especially
for pedestrian safety. However, when designing mobile AR
applications, safety should be taken into account.
A. Objectives
The general objective of this study is to investigate how
different variables influence the users’ sense of safety when Figure 1: Examples of the Application GUI
using AR tourism applications. As shown by the presented
related work, the usage of smartphones on the streets may
pose risks for oneself and others. The expanding market
of mobile AR requires research to increase users’ safety. B. Procedure
Specifically,variationsinsize,transparency,color,andamount
A group of 25 people took part in the study. They were
ofPOImarkeroptionshavebeenevaluated.Thefollowingtwo
15menand10women.Theaverageagewas28.84(SD=9.31,
research questions arise:
min=20, max=59). The user study for this research was done
in a main public street of (removed - double-blind), where the
• How does the amount of shown information points
participants were invited, each at a different time slot. The
influence the users’ sense of safety?
moderator gave them an introduction to the topic and tasks.
• How do visual parameters (transparency, color, size) The main part of the study was the gameplay of 9 conditions,
influence users’ sense of safety? combining3UI-Elements(transparency,color,andsize)with3
differentamountsofmarkers(few,medium,many).Thepartic-
ipantswereaskedtoprovidesomegeneralinformationstarting
II. METHODS with demographics. Also, as part of the pre-questionnaire, the
participant’stendencytogenerallyengagewithtechnologywas
A. Design and Test setup recorded using the Affinity for Technology Interaction (ATI)
Scalequestionnaire[16].TheaveragemeasuredATIscorewas
The developed application aims to measure values for
4.03 (SD=1.001). To investigate the general safety related to
visual parameters considered important for the UI of an AR
smartphone behavior of the participant, a modified version of
experience. Therefore, the application allows to adjustment of
the Problematic Mobile Phone Use Questionnaire (PMPU-Q)
values for transparency, color, and size and shows different
was used, including only the danger dimension [17], [18](see
amounts of POI markers. All these elements are considered
Table I). The individual questions were adapted to address
relevant to users’ sense of safety, as they can alter users’
pedestrians rather than car drivers’ usage. The measurement
perception of the real environment. The application was de-
of the modified PMPU-Q resulted in a mean value of 2.28
veloped using Unity and AR Foundation. The test device was
(SD=0.566). This value is in the middle range of the scale of
anAndroiddevice-theSamsungGalaxyS7.Thesmartphone’s
thePMPU-Q.Highscoressuggestproblematic,dangeroususe.
display is 5.1 inches (130 mm). The graphical user interface
mainly consists of the sliders area (see Fig. 1). This allows TableI:ProblematicSmartphoneUseQuestionnaire-Modified
adjusting values for transparency, color, and size. Besides the version
sliders, there are only two unobtrusive buttons in the upper
corners that allow hiding the GUI and saving the values. 1.Iusemymobilephonewhilewalking.*
Different POI markers were placed in fixed positions and 2.Itrytoavoidusingmymobilephonewhenwalkingonthestreet.
3.Iusemymobilephoneinsituationsthatwouldqualifyasdangerous.*
evenlyonalengthofabout50metersineachcondition.Their
4.Whilewalking,Ifindmyselfindangeroussituationsbecauseofmy
positioning is based on a real street map downloaded from mobilephoneuse.*
“OpenStreetMap.org”.Intotal,nineconditionsaregivenbythe 5.Iusemymobilephonewhilewalking,eveninsituationsthatrequire
combination of the two independent variables “UI-Element” alotofconcentration.*
and “Amount” of the POI markers. The independent variables
Aftereachtask,thefollowingquestionnairesweregivento
had three levels each:
participants to measure the effect of each condition:
UI-Element: Transparency slider: the transparency of the Smartphone Distraction Scale (SDS): The scale is used to
POImarkercanbesetusingtheslider(0-1);Colorsliders:the evaluate how much people are distracted by their smartphones
three sliders can be used to manipulate color in terms of Hue, [19]. In this study, only the “Attention Impulsiveness” factor
Saturation, and Lightness; Size sliders: the two sliders can be was of interest and therefore adapted (see Table ??). Higher
used to manipulate height and width of the POI marker. values indicate more distraction.
Amount:FewMarkers:threemarkersplacedperroadside Smombie Scale: This questionnaire was designed to mea-
occupy about 55% of the screen width; Medium amount of sure pedestrians’ smartphone use and help prevent dangerous
Markers: five markers placed per roadside occupying 60% of behavior and to deal with risks [20]. In this study, only the
screen width; Many Markers: seven markers placed per road “Perceived risk” factor was used and modified (see Table II).
sides occupying 65% of screen width. Higher values indicate a higher perceived risk.noticeable (see Fig. 2) from the modified Smombie Scale
questionnaire (Few: M=1.842, SE=0.162; Medium: M=2.111,
SE=0.17; Many: M=2.291, SE=0.152). The pairwise com-
parison with the Bonferroni adjustment shows no significant
difference in users’ sense of safety between the amount levels
medium(M=2.111,SE=0.17)andmany(M=2.291,SE=0.152).
Based on the questionnaires, a difference in manipulating the
UI elements in separated conditions on Sense of Safety was
not noticeable.
Figure 2: Estimated Marginal Means for modified SDS (on From the analysis of the SUS [23] results, the developed
left)andSmombieScale(onright)foramountofmarkersand AR experience was rated with a score of 86 (SD = 6.20). The
UI Element score indicates that the application usability is above average
(>68), indicating a good usability level.
Table II: Smombie Scale - Modified version
1.Ithinkwhenusingtheappwhilewalkingoutside,itcould IV. DISCUSSION&CONCLUSION
causeatrafficcrash.
2.Ithinkwhenusingtheappwhilewalkingoutside,itwouldtakeme This research aimed to explore how different variables
longertonoticeabicycleorcar.
influence the users’ sense of safety when using AR tourism
3.Ithinkwhenusingtheappwhilewalkingoutside,Icouldbump
applications.Afterinvestigatingtheindependentvariables“UI-
intoanotherperson.
4.Ithinkwhenusingtheappwhilewalkingoutside,Icouldmiss Element” and “Amount” of the POI markers, the results
acrosswalksignal. determined the influence of the amount of POI markers on
5.Ithinkwhenusingtheappwhilewalkingoutside,Imightmiss the variable “Sense of Safety”. The SDS score showed an
anobstacleonmypath. influence on the “Sense of Safety” variable for different
6.Ithinkwhenusingtheappwhilewalkingoutside,Iwouldn’tnotice
amounts of POI markers. While the Smombie Scale was only
ifsomeoneistryingtogetmyattention.
significant for the pairwise comparison of the few-medium
andfew-manylevels.Resultsindicatenosignificantdifference
ShortUserExperienceQuestionnaire(UEQ-S):Itisaques-
betweenlevelmediumandmany,buttheaveragevalueforthe
tionnairetomeasureusers’subjectiveimpressionsofproducts’
mediumamountofmarkersisstillslightlylowerthanthemany
user experience [21].
markers. Therefore, a general influence of the amount of POI
Self-Assessment Manikin (SAM): It is an emotion assess- markerscanbeassumed.Fewermarkersmakeusersfeelsafer.
menttoolthatusesgraphicscalesdepictingcartooncharacters The decreasing value of the variable “Sense of Safety” for an
expressing three emotional elements: valence, arousal, and increasingamountofPOImarkerssuggeststhatahighamount
dominance [22]. of markers makes the display look cluttered and prevents an
unobstructed view. This explanation is supported by some
After testing all conditions, the participant completed the literaturethatshowsclutteringdisplaysandoverwhelmingAR
System Usability Scale (SUS) [23]. The tests took around cues as risky “distractions to relevant cues of the physical
60 minutes on average. The conditions were run using Latin environment” [25], [5], [10].
square randomization to avoid sequence effects [24].
When interacting with the UI elements, the users were
asked to adjust those elements to maximize their sense of
III. RESULTS
safety. The levels of “UI-Element” were 1) transparency,
A repeated measure Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was 2) color, and 3) size. A significant influence could not be
run to detect statistically significant differences. Table III measured using the questionnaires. This is probably due to
provides an overview of the significant effects found. changinglightingconditionsbecauseofweatherandshadowed
and sunny areas, which differ while walking in the pedestrian
zone.Inaddition,thebackground(e.g.,buildings,pedestrians)
TableIII:EffectsofdifferentamountofMarkers(Amount)on
changed while experimenting and could have influenced par-
modified SDS and Smombie Scale
ticipants’ choices [14]. In addition, 76% of the participants
reported that they think there is a difference in their sense
Effect Parameter dfn dfd F p η G2
of safety when using different values for transparency. 88%
Amount Safety SDS 2 48 18.674 <0.001 0.438 reported such an influence for the size.
Amount Safety Smombie 2 48 11.663 <0.001 0.327
Thisstudywasalimitedtoasinglepublicsetting;therefore
Overall, the results show a significant difference in users’ a possible extension would be to conduct field experiments in
sense of safety regarding the amount of POI markers. Signif- various public settings with a wider variety of spectators and
icant results were found for the modified SDS questionnaire different environmental elements. Also, varying noise levels
(see Fig. 2). It turns out that a higher amount of POI marker for a more authentic representation and testing it with a head-
leads to a higher mean value (Few: M=1.864, SE=0.141; mountedARdeviceorvaryingtheapp’skindofcontentcould
Medium: M=2.211, SE=0.136; Many: M=2.538, SE=0.135). bring interesting contributions to the topic. Finally, our study
The pairwise comparison with Bonferroni adjustment resulted suggested taking a closer look at the effect of UI element
in significance for each pair of levels. A similar trend is transparency and size should be considered in future studies.REFERENCES mean differences of the smartphone distraction scale (sds),” Frontiers
inpsychiatry,vol.12,p.199,2021.
[1] D. Buhalis, “Technology in tourism-from information communication
[20] S.ParkandB.Kim,“Developmentandvalidationofanovelinstrument
technologiestoetourismandsmarttourismtowardsambientintelligence
to measure pedestrians’ smartphone use: The smombie scale,” Trans-
tourism:aperspectivearticle,”TourismReview,2019.
portation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour, vol. 82,
[2] J.L.NasarandD.Troyer,“Pedestrianinjuriesduetomobilephoneuse pp.440–449,2021.
inpublicplaces,”AccidentAnalysis&Prevention,vol.57,pp.91–95,
[21] M. Schrepp, A. Hinderks, and J. Thomaschewski, “Design and evalu-
2013.
ation of a short version of the user experience questionnaire (ueq-s).”
[3] A. Smith, “More than half of cell owners affected by ‘distracted IJIMAI,vol.4,no.6,pp.103–108,2017.
walking’,”PewResearchCenter:Washington,DC,USA,2014.
[22] M.M.BradleyandP.J.Lang,“Measuringemotion:theself-assessment
[4] A. Rovira, A. Fatah gen Schieck, P. Blume, and S. Julier, “Guidance manikinandthesemanticdifferential,”Journalofbehaviortherapyand
and surroundings awareness in outdoor handheld augmented reality,” experimentalpsychiatry,vol.25,no.1,pp.49–59,1994.
PLOSONE,vol.15,no.3,pp.1–14,032020. [23] J. Brooke et al., “Sus-a quick and dirty usability scale,” Usability
[5] T.Olsson,E.Lagerstam,T.Ka¨rkka¨inen,andK.Va¨a¨na¨nen,“Expected evaluationinindustry,vol.189,no.194,pp.4–7,1996.
userexperienceofmobileaugmentedrealityservices:Auserstudyin [24] [Online].Available:https://online.stat.psu.edu/stat503/lesson/4/4.3
thecontextofshoppingcentres,”PersonalandUbiquitousComputing,
[25] R. Van Krevelen and R. Poelman, “A survey of augmented reality
vol.17,022011.
technologies, applications and limitations,” International Journal of
[6] W. Dong, Y. Wu, T. Qin, X. Bian, Y. Zhao, Y. He, Y. Xu, and VirtualReality(ISSN1081-1451),vol.9,p.1,062010.
C. Yu, “What is the difference between augmented reality and 2d
navigationelectronicmapsinpedestrianwayfinding?”Cartographyand
GeographicInformationScience,vol.48,no.3,pp.225–240,2021.
[7] Z. Yovcheva, D. Buhalis, and C. Gatzidis, “Smartphone augmented
reality applications for tourism,” e-Review of Tourism Research
(eRTR), vol. 10, no. 2, pp. 63–66, 2012. [Online]. Available:
http://eprints.bournemouth.ac.uk/20219/
[8] A. Ajanki, M. Billinghurst, H. Gamper, T. Ja¨rvenpa¨a¨, M. Kandemir,
S.Kaski,M.Koskela,M.Kurimo,J.Laaksonen,K.Puolama¨kietal.,
“An augmented reality interface to contextual information,” Virtual
reality,vol.15,no.2-3,pp.161–173,2011.
[9] S. Julier, M. Lanzagorta, Y. Baillot, L. Rosenblum, S. Feiner,
T.Hollerer,andS.Sestito,“Informationfilteringformobileaugmented
reality,” in Proceedings IEEE and ACM International Symposium on
AugmentedReality(ISAR2000). IEEE,2000,pp.3–11.
[10] A.Tang,C.Owen,F.Biocca,andW.Mou,“Comparativeeffectiveness
ofaugmentedrealityinobjectassembly,”inProceedingsoftheSIGCHI
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’03.
NewYork,NY,USA:AssociationforComputingMachinery,2003,p.
73–80.
[11] Z.Yovcheva,D.Buhalis,C.Gatzidis,andC.P.vanElzakker,“Empirical
evaluation of smartphone augmented reality browsers in an urban
tourism destination context,” International journal of mobile human
computerinteraction,vol.6,no.2,pp.10–31,2014.
[12] J. Bloksˇa, Design guidelines for user interface for augmented reality,
2017.
[13] J. Jankowski, K. Samp, I. Irzynska, M. Jozwowicz, and S. Decker,
“Integratingtextwithvideoand3dgraphics:Theeffectsoftextdrawing
styles on text readability,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
onHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,2010,pp.1321–1330.
[14] J.L.GabbardandJ.E.SwanII,“Usabilityengineeringforaugmented
reality: Employing user-based studies to inform design,” IEEE Trans-
actions on visualization and computer graphics, vol. 14, no. 3, pp.
513–525,2008.
[15] B.Bell,S.Feiner,andT.Ho¨llerer,“Viewmanagementforvirtualand
augmentedreality,”inProceedingsofthe14thannualACMsymposium
onUserinterfacesoftwareandtechnology,2001,pp.101–110.
[16] T.Franke,C.Attig,andD.Wessel,“Apersonalresourcefortechnology
interaction: development and validation of the affinity for technology
interaction (ati) scale,” International Journal of Human–Computer
Interaction,vol.35,no.6,pp.456–467,2019.
[17] J.Billieux,M.VanderLinden,andL.Rochat,“Theroleofimpulsivity
inactualandproblematicuseofthemobilephone,”AppliedCognitive
Psychology: The Official Journal of the Society for Applied Research
inMemoryandCognition,vol.22,no.9,pp.1195–1210,2008.
[18] D. J. Kuss, L. Harkin, E. Kanjo, and J. Billieux, “Problematic smart-
phoneuse:Investigatingcontemporaryexperiencesusingaconvergent
design,” International journal of environmental research and public
health,vol.15,no.1,p.142,2018.
[19] M.A.Throuvala,H.M.Pontes,I.Tsaousis,M.D.Griffiths,M.Ren-
noldson, and D. J. Kuss, “Exploring the dimensions of smartphone
distraction:development,validation,measurementinvariance,andlatent