1
InsigHTable: Insight-driven Hierarchical Table
Visualization with Reinforcement Learning
Guozheng Li, Peng He, Xinyu Wang, Runfei Li, Chi Harold Liu, Chuangxin Ou, Dong He, and Guoren Wang
Abstract—Embeddingvisualrepresentationswithinoriginalhi-
erarchicaltablescanmitigateadditionalcognitiveloadstemming
from the division of users’ attention. The created hierarchical
table visualizations can help users understand and explore
complex data with multi-level attributes. However, because of
many options available for transforming hierarchical tables and
selecting subsets for embedding, the design space of hierarchical
table visualizations becomes vast, and the construction process
turns out to be tedious, hindering users from constructing
hierarchical table visualizations with many data insights effi-
ciently. We propose InsigHTable, a mixed-initiative and insight-
driven hierarchical table transformation and visualization sys-
tem. We first define data insights within hierarchical tables,
which consider the hierarchical structure in the table headers. (a) (b)
Since hierarchical table visualization construction is a sequen-
tial decision-making process, InsigHTable integrates a deep
reinforcement learning framework incorporating an auxiliary
rewards mechanism. This mechanism addresses the challenge of
sparse rewards in constructing hierarchical table visualizations.
Within the deep reinforcement learning framework, the agent
continuously optimizes its decision-making process to create
hierarchical table visualizations to uncover more insights by
collaborating with analysts. We demonstrate the usability and
effectiveness of InsigHTable through two case studies and sets
of experiments. The results validate the effectiveness of the deep
reinforcement learning framework and show that InsigHTable
can facilitate users to construct hierarchical table visualizations
and understand underlying data insights.
(c) (d)
Index Terms—Hierarchical tabular data, table visualization,
Fig.1. (a)isanexampleofahierarchicaltable,while(b)providesannotations
reinforcement learning, data transformation.
forthekeyconstituentsofthishierarchicaltable,encompassingcells,blocks,
column headings, and row headings. (c) displays the corresponding flat
table counterpart of (a), where the contents of the hierarchical table are
I. INTRODUCTION
exclusivelypositionedwithinthefinalcolumn(value).(d)showsahierarchical
TABULARdataisaubiquitousformatthatplaysapromi- tablevisualization.Thisvisualizationinvolvestheincorporationofsummary
visualizationswithinacontiguousblock,alongsideunitvisualizationswithin
nent role in diverse applications [1]–[3]. For example,
individualcells.
financial analysts employ tabular data to record transactions
and researcher scientists frequently utilize tabular data for the
storageofexperimentaloutcomes[4],[5].Accordingly,tables The tabular technique [3] of table visualizations preserves
are widely used to represent tabular format data because they the tabular layout while embedding visual representations
can organize and convey information clearly and intuitively. within the underlying table to avoid additional cognitive
The pervasiveness and significance of tabular data make the load by splitting users’ attentions [14]–[17]. As illustrated
tableavitalapproachfordataorganizationandanalysisacross in Fig. 1b, the tabular technique generally employs two
variousdisciplines.Inparticular,hierarchicaltables[6],[7]are approaches: visualizing individual data items using a single
created with multi-level headers in contrast to flat tables, as visual element [18] within each cell [19]–[22] or integrating
shown in Fig. 1a. The hierarchical structure [8]–[10] of table summary visualizationsto reveal patterns within a block com-
headers enables the data organization in a compact approach prising a rectangular grouping of contiguous cells [3], [23].
for easy look-up and side-by-side comparison [11]–[13]. Through preserving the tabular layout, visualization results of
tabular techniques can serve as users’ navigational aids for
Guozheng Li, Peng He, Xinyu Wang, Runfei Li, Chi Harold Liu, and
exploring original datasets and comprehending the outcomes
Guoren Wang are with the School of Computer Science and Technology,
Beijing Institute of Technology. E-mail: {guozheng.li, hepeng, wang.xinyu, of analysis.
lirunfei, chiliu, wanggr}@bit.edu.cn. Chi Harold Liu is the corresponding One existing study, named HiTailor [7], has specified the
author.
manual process of embedding visual representations within
Chuangxin Ou and Dong He are with PICC Information Technology
CompanyLimited. hierarchical tables, involving table transformation, subset se-
4202
yaM
72
]CH.sc[
1v92271.5042:viXra2
lection, and visualization of the selected data. Such a pro- stage, we utilize an auxiliary reward to stimulate agent explo-
cess is tedious and time-consuming. Moreover, the manually ration, and employ a joint optimization method to balance the
constructed hierarchical table visualizations may not neces- extrinsic and auxiliary rewards. The agent within the DRL
sarily yield rich insights into the underlying data. Efficiently framework takes a series of actions to maximize rewards
constructinghierarchicaltablevisualizationsthatuncoversub- associated with discovering data insights. Through continuous
stantial insights is a challenging task. First, the creation of interaction with the environment, the agent optimizes its
hierarchical table visualizations entails multiple steps, each decision-making process of creating hierarchical table visual-
requiring a multitude of decision-making processes. Conse- izations from feedback, enhancing users’ capacity to discover
quently, the design space for such visualizations is vast. Sec- more insights from hierarchical tables.
ond,theunderlyingdataforhierarchicaltablevisualizationsis We conduct two case studies and quantitative experiments,
oftenintricateandmultifaceted,encompassingmanyvariables encompassing the evaluation of hyperparameters, ablation
andrelationshipsnecessitatingconsideration.Suchcomplexity studies, robustness testing, and comparisons with heuris-
presents significant challenges when endeavoring to generate tic methods. All experiments are conducted on real-world
insightful and meaningful interpretations of the data. datasets. The case studies demonstrate that InsigHTable can
Itistruethatallhierarchicaltablescanbeconvertedintoflat help data analysts understand and explore hierarchical tables
tables,suchasthehierarchicaltabledepictedinFig.1acanbe effectively. In addition, the results of quantitative experiments
transformed into a flat table (Fig. 1c). However, the flat table show the performance and superiority of the DRL framework
arranges the entire table content of a hierarchical table within utilized in InsigHTable.
a single column, which significantly constrains the diversity In summary, the main contributions are as follows:
of data selection and potential embedded visualizations. The • An insight formulation tailored to hierarchical tables, con-
headings within hierarchical tables achieve a more efficient sidering data insight within a single block and across
data organization, thereby supporting the incorporation of multiple blocks.
a range of visualization outcomes. Moreover, the distinct • A DRL framework to realize the mixed-initiative construc-
organization of data within the headings of hierarchical ta- tion of hierarchical table visualizations, which incorporates
bles also determines cells that correspond to specific entries, auxiliary reward mechanisms to enhance the agent’s ex-
contributing to the variety of data block selections within ploratory capabilities.
hierarchical tabular data. • The InsigHTable prototype system that assists users in
Previous research on the visual exploration and analysis of analyzing hierarchical tables and obtaining data insights.
tabular data can be categorized into two distinct groups. The
first category pertains to defining insights within the tabular II. RELATEDWORK
data[24]–[27],suchastheidentificationofoutliersandtrends.
This section reviews the literature on automatic insight dis-
The second category revolves around recommending visual-
covery of tabular data and reinforcement learning techniques
izations based on these insights, encompassing both single
for visualizations.
visualizations[28],[29]andsetsofrelatedvisualizations[30]–
[33]. Nevertheless, these categories primarily focus on flat
A. Automatic Insight Discovery of Tabular Data
tablesandgenerateindependentvisualizationresults.Assuch,
they are not directly applicable to our scenario of embedding Data insights, i.e., interesting data patterns, are critical
visualizations into hierarchical tables. in analyzing data and play a fundamental role in creating
In this paper, we propose InsigHTable, a mixed-initiative effective visualizations. Several studies have concentrated on
system for realizing Insight-driven Hierarchical Table visu- extracting data insights, which can aid users in gaining a
alization construction. To accomplish this, we first model the deeper understanding of the data. Top-k insights [24] focuses
construction process of hierarchical table visualizations as a on identifying outliers and trends in multidimensional data.
Markov Decision Process and introduce a deep reinforcement Microsoft Power BI’s QuickInsights [25] framework provides
learning (DRL) framework that integrates an auxiliary reward a complete system for insight discovery and representation,
mechanism. To tackle the unique challenges associated with supporting various types of insights. Furthermore, MetaIn-
hierarchical table visualizations, we first summarize the data sight [26] proposes a novel scoring function to quantify
insightsfromhierarchicaltablesthatarerelevanteitherwithin the usefulness of insights. BigIn4 [27] combines data cubes
asingleblockoracrossmultiplerelatedblocks,anddefinethe and the Approximate Query Processing technique to provide
number of data insights as the reward of the DRL framework. interactive insight recommendations for a large-scale dataset.
The DRL framework comprises two modules: feature ex- Additionally, DataSite [34] is a web-based platform that en-
traction module and action generation module. The feature ables automatic analysis and calculation while users visualize
extraction module employs Graph Convolutional Network and analyze data.
(GCN) to model the hierarchical structure of the table head- Recommendation systems for visualizations have been a
ings and Multi-Layer Perceptron (MLP) as well as Bidi- popular topic in several studies. Some of these studies focus
rectional Long Short-Term Memory (Bi-LSTM) to represent on recommending visualizations for individual charts based
the data content. The action generation module encompasses on insights extracted from data. For example, Foresight [28]
two stages, table transformation and visualization embedding. uses insight indicators to recommend visualization, while
Considering no rewards provided in the table transformation DataPrep.EDA [29] provides programming interfaces for this3
functionality in Python. In contrast, some studies have fo- tables, some studies [32], [33], [46]–[48] employ deep neural
cused on the significance of recommending multiple related networks that enable the agent to learn state abstractions
visualizations rather than one single chart. Datashot [30], for and policy approximations directly from the input data. Hu
instance, automatically generates fact sheets for tabular data et al. [46] utilized the DRL [49] and pointer network [50]
using extracted insights. Calliope [31] builds on Datashot’s algorithm to address the coordinate ordering problem in star-
automaticinsightgenerationtechniquetogeneratedatastories glyph sets. Additionally, several research efforts have focused
in a logical sequence to enhance users’ comprehension. In a onvisualizationgenerationandrecommendation.Forexample,
different approach, Voder [35] combines the natural language Table2Charts[47]employsdeepQ-learningwithacopymech-
generation technique with insight calculation to derive corre- anismandheuristicsearchtogeneratetable-to-chartsequences
spondingdatafacts,aimingtoenhancedatacomprehensionby following a chart template. Similarly, DashBot [32] generates
presentinginsightsinamoreaccessibleformat.Together,these analytical dashboards that leverage established visualization
studies offer various ways to explore and visualize insights knowledge and the estimation capacity of DRL. ATENA [33]
in data, highlighting the importance of considering multiple models exploratory data analysis as a control problem and
visualizations and techniques for practical data analysis. designed a novel DRL architecture to optimize the generation
Previous research has primarily focused on analyzing and of analysis notebooks. The latest Visail [51] can support
visualizing simple flat tables rather than hierarchical tables. the exploratory visual analysis of time-series data, generating
Some studies have explored interactive approaches for con- exploratory visual analysis sequences consisting of multiple
structing hierarchical table visualizations [7] and collected steps. In addition to chart generation and recommendation,
hierarchicaltables[12],butdidnotinvestigatethedatainsight PlotThread [48] uses a DRL framework to train an agent
extraction. Additionally, existing research has predominantly that assists users in exploring the design space of storyline
concentrated on generating independent visualizations rather visualizations and generating well-optimized results.
than embedding visualizations into tabular data, which often While many studies have employed reinforcement learning
requireseveralstepsaboutdatatransformationsandvisualiza- to address challenges in the visualization community, these
tions. Our work addresses this gap by exploring techniques applications encounter difficulties in constructing hierarchical
for extracting insights from hierarchical tabular data and table visualizations. This is attributed to the process’s two
efficiently constructing table visualizations. distinct stages, and one stage is characterized by sparse
rewards. In response to this challenge, this work employs
a novel reinforcement learning framework with two distinct
B. Reinforcement Learning for Visualizations
stages, incorporating auxiliary rewards to address the issue.
Reinforcementlearningisamachinelearningapproachthat
allows agents to learn by interacting with an environment
III. PRELIMINARIES
throughtrialanderror,whichcanbecategorizedintotwomain
branches:classicalreinforcementlearningandDRL.Classical This section introduces the background of reinforcement
reinforcement learning methods, such as Q-learning [36] and learning techniques utilized in this work and then formulates
SARSA, are based on dynamic programming. DRL algo- the task of constructing hierarchical table visualizations as a
rithms, such as Deep Q-Networks [37] and Policy Gradi- sequential decision-making problem.
ent [38], incorporate deep neural networks to handle high-
dimensional state and action space and have achieved impres-
A. Background on Reinforcement Learning
sive results in various domains including Go [39], real-time
strategy games [40], and nuclear fusion [41]. Reinforcement learning explores how intelligent agents can
Reinforcement learning techniques have been applied in learn to maximize rewards in uncertain environments, which
some visualization research. Some studies [42]–[45] use clas- involvesbothanagentandanenvironment.Theagentisadeep
sical reinforcement learning, which does not incorporate deep neuralnetworkthatlearnsatargettask,whiletheenvironment
neural networks, to tackle problems with limited state func- is the scene in which the agent operates. Throughout the
tion mappings. For instance, MobileVisFixer [42] employs a reinforcementlearningprocess,theagentandtheenvironment
reinforcement learning framework to automate the redesign continually interact. When the agent obtains a certain state
of mobile-friendly visualizations, while Vizlinter [43] helps in the environment, it outputs an action, also known as a
users detect and correct defects in existing visualizations. decision. This action is then executed in the environment,
In contrast, El-Assady et al. [44] proposed a modularized and the environment outputs the next state and the reward
visualization analysis framework that leverages a user-driven associated with the action taken by the agent. The reward
reinforcement learning process to address the interpretabil- is a scalar feedback signal given by the environment, which
ity and adaptability issues of topic models. While these indicates how well the agent performed a specific strategy in
approaches focus on optimizing and revising visualizations, a given step. The purpose of the agent is to obtain as much
classicalreinforcementlearningmethodscanprovideeffective reward as possible from the environment. The formula for
solutions within a limited state space and action space. calculating the cumulative reward R is as follows:
t
Comparing to classical reinforcement learning, DRL holds
∞
the potential to address more intricate visualization problems. (cid:88)
R =r +γr +γ2r +···= γkr
t t t+1 t+2 t+k
To handle high-dimensional input data, such as images and
k=04
whereγ representsthediscountfactorthatcontrolstheweight on a single data block. A data block can be treated as a
of future rewards during the calculation of the R . A value of data subspace [24], enabling the use of existing methods for
t
γ ∈ [0,1] is commonly used, where a value of γ close to 1 insight extraction. However, unlike flat tables, hierarchical
indicates that future rewards have more influence. table headers exhibit a multi-level structure, introducing cor-
relations between different data blocks. Consequently, for the
B. Problem Formulation task of insight extraction in hierarchical tables, we account
for the relations between data blocks, including name-based
A hierarchical table is a common data format that often
and topology-based relations. Details of these relations are
requires manual exploration to discover data insights. The
explainedinSec.IV-A2.Thisconsiderationextendstheinsight
construction of hierarchical table visualizations is a time-
extraction from a single block to multiple blocks.
consuming and laborious process. InsigHTable is designed
1) Single-block Insight: The data insights derived from
to reduce the efforts of human operations for visualization
a single block are interesting data patterns calculated from
construction.WedefinetheoperationsproposedinHiTailor[7]
these data items. Our consolidation of single-block insights
for interactive hierarchical table transformation, including
draws from established works such as QuickInsights [25],
transpose, tolinear, and swap, as actions of the agent in the
Foresight [28], and Top-k insights [24]. These insights are
DRLframework.Aftertabletransformationsandvisualization
classified into three categories: point insight, shape insight,
embedding,itisrequiredtomeasurethequalityofhierarchical
and compound insight.
table visualizations. Previous work on insight extraction [24],
Point insight refers to the characteristic of having several
[25] and the design principles [32] inspire us to evaluate the
prominent data values within a data block. It consists of four
entire table transformation and visualization for hierarchical
insight types, outlier, dominance, outstanding top two, and
tables.
outstanding negative.
Insight-driven hierarchical table transformation and visu-
(1)Outlierindicatesthatdataitemsaresignificantlydiffer-
alization consist of two challenges. First, hierarchical tables
ent from the majority within the data block [25], [30]. This
are complex because of the presence of multi-level headings,
insight corresponds to the Finding Anomalies task within a
and each arrangement of table headings corresponds to a
given set of data cases [52], which is significant and often
unique table layout. Second, the operations of table heading
providesabasisforfurtherexplorations.Weemploytwometh-
transformation and selection influence the visualization pro-
ods for detecting outliers. The first method uses interquartile
cess, making the hierarchical table visualization construction
ranges to determine the upper and lower bounds [35]. More
a sequential decision-making problem. Furthermore, selecting
specifically,weconsiderthedatapointsthatfalloutsideofthe
data from hierarchical tables needs to determine the row and
range defined by Q3+3×IQR or Q1−3×IQR as outliers.
column headings, and the multi-level characteristic of table
As shown in Fig. 2(a), we visualize outliers using a box plot.
headings also results in numerous possibilities.
Theotherapproachistofitapower-lawfunctiontothedata
andthencalculatetheprobabilityofavaluebeingsignificantly
IV. METHODS
larger than other values based on the predicted error [24].
A. Insight Formulation
These outliers can be visualized using a bar chart.
The insight formulation of this paper is grounded by the (2) Dominance refers to the degree of superiority that one
existing studies for insights within flat tables and primitive random variable has over one or more others [25]. In other
analytical tasks. Previous studies, exemplified by QuickIn- words,onevariablehasasignificantadvantageovertheothers
sights [25], Top-k insights [24], and DataShot [30], have for- (e.g., at least 50%), which is related to the Finding Extremum
mulatedmetricsforextractinginsightsinflattables.Theabove task [52]. We use the pie chart or the radial plot to visualize
work defines the data subspace for extracting data insights the dominance insight, as shown in Fig. 2(b).
and then visualizes the extracted data insights independently (3) Outstanding Top Two refers to two variables having
fromtheoriginaltable.Somestudies[52]–[54]alsosummarize an advantage over the others (e.g., both ≥ 34%) [25]. The top
primitive analytical tasks in information visualization, which 2 insight can also be visualized using a pie chart or a radial
serve as a common language for information visualization plot, as shown in Fig. 2(c).
systems and provide the groundwork for developing insight (4) Outstanding Negative refers to the pattern where the
taxonomy.Inparticular,theinsightformulationinthisworkis most negative value is significantly lower than all remaining
tailored to integrate visual representations directly into hierar- values [25]. We employ the bar chart to visualize this insight,
chicaltables.Therefore,itisimperativetoensurethatthedata as shown in Fig. 2(d).
subspace comprises continuous table cells under the current Shape insight characterizes the general trends or distribu-
hierarchicaltablearrangement.Thearrangementofmulti-level tions within a specific data block and consists of five insight
headings in hierarchical tables dictates the corresponding data types: trend, change point, evenness, skewness, and kurtosis.
content.Inthiscontext,HiTailor[7]definesablockasacluster (1) Trend refers to the presence of a consistent upward
of cells in hierarchical tables uniquely determined by row and or downward pattern in the data items, especially within the
column entries. Consequently, we adopt the data block as the context of time series data [24], [25]. We can employ the
primary unit for insight extraction and computation. following formula to detect trends:
The extraction and calculation of insight in hierarchical trend(b)=r2·(1−p)
tables can be divided into two types. The first type is based wherer2isthecoefficientofdeterminationandpisthep-value5
Fig. 2. Insight classifications for hierarchical tabular data. The left part shows the single-block insights, encompassing point insights, shape insights,
and compound insights. The right part shows the multiple-block insights, which is defined through both name-based recommendation and topology-based
recommendationmechanisms.Theselectedentrieswithinthetableheadingsarehighlightedingreen.
that indicates the likelihood of observing slope values equal value indicating a sharper distribution [28]. The following
to or greater than the slope of the ascending or descending formula can be employed to calculate kurtosis:
trend. The above formula is applicable for both upward and κ (b)=n−1(cid:80)n(b −µ )4/σ4 ,
2 i i b b
downward trends. This insight corresponds to the Finding We also visualize the kurtosis insight using a density plot, as
Temporal Relations task from the target perspective [53]. We shown in Fig. 2(i).
can visualize trends using either a horizon graph or a line The above three insights (Evenness, Skewness, and Kurto-
chart, as shown in Fig. 2(e). sis) are related to the Characterizing Distribution task in the
(2) Change Point refers to identifying a notable shift or low-level task taxonomy [52].
transitioninthebehaviororvaluesofarandomvariablewithin
Compound Insight refers to the insights with different
a data block [25]. This insight involves pinpointing a specific
groups of data items within a data block and consists of three
pointatwhichthevariable’sbehaviororcharacteristicsnotice-
insighttypes:dependence,correlation,andcross-measurecor-
ably deviate from its previous pattern. Such a deviation often
relation.
suggestsachangeintheunderlyingdata-generatingprocessor
(1)Dependenceinsightinvolvesdividingthedatasetbythe
external conditions influencing the variable. The change point
row or column attributes, treating the row and column of the
insight can provide valuable information about critical shifts
blocks as two categorical variables [28], and verifying their
in trends, distributions, or relationships within the data. We
independence using the Chi-square test by calculating the p-
can visualize the change point insight using a line chart or a
value. The results of the chi-square test are visualized using
horizon graph, as shown in Fig. 2(f).
the normalized stacked bar chart in Fig. 2(j).
(3) Evenness refers to the degree of similarity among
(2) Correlation insight also divides the data set into dif-
variables and can be measured using the coefficient of varia-
ferent groups. Unlike the dependence insight, it is specifically
tion [25], which is calculated by dividing the standard devia-
designed to verify the pairwise correlations between different
tion σ of the variable by its mean µ. A lower coefficient of
groups [25], [28], [30], [34]. When most groups exhibit a
variation indicates a more uniform distribution of variables.
significantcorrelation(p-value<0.05),weconsiderthisblock
We employ a bar chart for visualizing evenness, as shown in
with multiple rows to consist of a correlation insight. We
Fig. 2(g).
utilize the multi-series line chart to visualize the correlation
(4) Skewness measures the degree of asymmetry in
insight, as shown in Fig. 2(k).
the distribution of values [28], with larger absolute values
indicating greater deviation from symmetry. The following (3) Cross-measure correlation insight defines the rela-
formula can be applied to detect skewness: tionships between two measures [25] using the magnitude
κ (b)=n−1(cid:80)n(b −µ )3/σ3 , of the Pearson correlation coefficient |ρ(x,y)|, where ρ(x,y)
where µ
b
is the
m1
ean of the
dai
ta,
σi
b
isb
the
stab
ndard deviation is equals to
(cid:80)n
i=1(x i−µ x)(y i−µ y)/(σ xσ y). This insight is
of the data, n is the number of data points, and b is the ith visualizedusingascatterplotvisualizationapproach,asshown
i
data point. We can visualize skewness using a density plot, in Fig. 2(l).
as shown in Fig. 2(h). The above three insights (Dependence, Correlation, and
(5) Kurtosis measures the degree of peakedness of the Cross-measure correlation) are related to the Correlate task
valuedistributionwithinthedatablock,withalargerabsolute in the low-level task taxonomy [52].6
2) Multiple-blockInsight: Multiple-blockinsightsarecom-
puted across data blocks, with users selecting a specific data
block and determining other related data blocks through the
name-basedandtopology-basedmechanisms.Asshowninthe
right part of Fig. 2, a data block is jointly determined by
two entries in hierarchical tables’ row and column headings.
For related data blocks, one entry is the same, and the other
entries have the same name or are topologically related, such
as parent-child or sibling relations.
The computation of multiple-block insights is grounded
in single-block insights, introduced in Sec. IV-A1. When
recommended data blocks share the same structure, high-
level insights can be extracted by comparing insights across
different related blocks. The right part of Fig. 2 illustrates
these two types of insights for multiple blocks. The first type,
as shown in Fig. 2(m), indicates that all data blocks contain
identical insight. The second type, as shown in Fig. 2(n),
is that the insight of one data block significantly differs
from the others among related data blocks. The resulting
visualizations are embedded in all recommended blocks, with
the red background color indicating the data block that does
not contain the specific data insight.
B. Markov Decision Process
Theconstructionofhierarchicaltablevisualizationsinvolves
a sequential decision-making process, where each state de- Fig. 3. The actions conducted by the agents of the reinforcement learning
pends only on the previous state. Therefore, we formalize model are divided into two groups, the transformation action of the hierar-
chicaltable,andtheselectionactionofdataitemstobevisualized.
the transformation and visualization of hierarchical tables
as a Markov Decision Process [55], defined as a tuple
(S,A,T,R,γ), consisting of a state space S, an action space
we divide the actions into two categories: transformation and
A,atransitionfunctionT,arewardfunctionR,andadiscount
selection. The transformation type in action space consists of
factor γ. The transition function T defines the probability of
five actions, shown in Fig. 3. The transpose action exchanges
moving from one state to another given an action.
the row and column headings of the entire hierarchical table.
By formulating the problem as a Markov Decision Process,
The aggregate action is designed to derive some values based
we propose a DRL framework to learn an optimal policy
onmultiplerowsorcolumnsunderaspecificcategory,suchas
for hierarchical table transformation and visualization. Note
sum and average. The stack action moves the innermost level
that the DRL framework only selects the data blocks to be
in the column heading to the innermost level in the row head-
embeddedwithvisualizationsbyprovidingoperationsfortable
ing. Conversely, the unstack action moves the innermost row
transformation and table heading selection, and then heuristic
heading to the innermost column heading. The swap action
methods are used to extract different types of insights and
exchanges two levels in the row or column headings, where
determine the corresponding visualization.
usersspecifywhichtwolevelstoswap.Basedontheseactions,
1) State Space: The state space S includes all possible
users can transform the heading structures and select specific
states of the hierarchical table heading’s structure and their
dataitemsflexibly.However,sometransformationactionsmay
corresponding tabular data and is defined as follows,
result in empty cells in the hierarchical table because the
∆ corresponding data items for these heading combinations do
S ={s =(H ,D )}
t t t not exist. The transformation process still continues in such
where H represents the hierarchical structure of table head- cases, but visualization actions cannot be performed.
t
ingsatthet-thtimestep,whichcontainsmultiplelevelsofrow Theselectiontypeofactionsisdesignedtolocateaspecific
andcolumnheadings,andD representsthenumericalcontent datablockwithinhierarchicaltabulardatabymanipulatingthe
t
of tabular data, along with a specialized mask indicating selected entries of row and column headings. These actions
whether the cells are embedded with visualizations. involvemovingtheselectedentry,whichisinitiallypositioned
2) Action Space: Considering the headings of hierarchical at the top-left corner. The actions for both row and column
tables determine how the inner data items are organized, headingsareidenticalandincludefourdirections:up(row ),
up
we define the action space A based on the table headings, down (row ), left (row ), and right (row ). As shown
down left right
as shown in Fig. 3, where each action a ∈ {transpose, in Fig. 3, the selected entry in the row and column headings
t
aggregate, stack, unstack, swap , swap , row , row , uniquelydeterminesadatablockthatcanbemodifiedbymov-
row col up down
row , row , col , col , col , col }. Furthermore, ingtheentries.Forthediscoveredinsightsduringtheselection
left right up down left right7
process, the agent utilizes the corresponding visualizations to Toencouragetheexplorationofdiverseinsights,wepropose
present the data blocks. the use of diversity rewards denoted as rd:
t
In particular, our framework prohibits the repeated visual- rd =η ∆IR +η ∆ER
ization of data items from the same cells to avoid the overlap t 2 t 3 t
∆IR =IR −IR
ofembeddedvisualizations.Asaresult,eachactiongenerated t t t−1
by the agent undergoes validation, preventing the selection ∆ER t =ER t−ER t−1
of the same regions for embedding visualizations. However,
whereIR andER denotetheinsightratioandevennessratio
t t
over multiple iterations of the hierarchical table visualization
at the t-th time step. The diversity reward is a metric utilized
construction process, data items from the same region may
to evaluate the diversity of generated results, with a higher
be visualized using diverse charts. This approach promotes
value indicating the discovery of multiple insights.
diversity in visualization results rather than constraining them Bycombiningrcandrddefinedabove,wedefinethereward
t t
to a fixed visualization outcome.
as:
3) Reward Function: The reward function is pivotal in
r =rc+rd
shaping the learning process for the agent. In defining the t t t
reward function, we have established three metrics—Area =η ∆AR +η ∆IR +η ∆ER
1 t 2 t 3 t
Ratio, Insight Ratio, and Evenness Ratio—to evaluate the
which represents the reward that the agent can receive from
quality of the eventual discovery of data insights.
the environment at the t-th time step.
Area Ratio (AR). After the agent completes the visualiza-
tion generation, we calculate the percentage of data cells in
C. Model Architecture
the agent’s visualization:
The DRL model comprises two modules: the agent module
AR= A v andthecuriositymodule.Theagentmoduletakeshierarchical
A tables as input and generates an action. The curiosity module
d
isasupplementarycomponentdesignedtoencouragetheagent
where A denotes the number of cells within the region that
v to explore the novel states. In this section, we introduce the
has been visualized by the agent, and A denotes the number
d architecture of the deep neural network. First, we explain the
of cells in the whole table.
two parts of the agent module: feature extraction and agent
InsightRatio(IR).Wehavedefinedascaletorepresentthe
networkarchitecture.Next,weintroducethecuriositymodule,
percentageofthetotalinsighttypesthathavebeendiscovered
especially the auxiliary reward mechanism.
by the agent:
1) Feature Extraction: The data representation module is
N
IR= d a crucial part of deep neural networks. Efficient data rep-
N t resentation can improve the training effectiveness of neu-
ral networks and achieve improved performance. Previous
whereN isthenumberofdiscoveredinsighttypes,N isthe
d t
studies, such as VizML [56] and DashBot [32], have pri-
total number of insight types.
marily focused on flat tables, addressing the challenge by
Evenness Ratio (ER). To balance the impact of various
computing numerous handcrafted features and inputting them
insights, we calculate the Shannon entropy based on the
intothenetworkforvisualizationrecommendations.However,
specific region of the visualization for each type of insight,
representing hierarchical tables is a more challenging task.
aiming to balance the quantity of insights and produce a
Considering the states of hierarchical table headings undergo
diverse visualization result:
continuous transformations, it is crucial to capture changes in
(cid:88)Nt the state of hierarchical table heading structures and the state
ER=− p iln(p i) of embedding visualizations.
i=1 Inourstudy,wehavecraftedamodelstructuretotacklethe
challenge of representing hierarchical tables. Specifically, we
where N is the number of insight types discovered and p
t i
partition the hierarchical table into two distinct parts, the hi-
represents the probability of each insight covering a certain
erarchical heading and the tabular data content. Subsequently,
number of cells.
we represent the hierarchical heading structure and input it to
The reward function R evaluates the quality of the hierar-
the GCN [57] Encoder. As for the table content, we adopt a
chical tabular visualization after an action is performed. To
network design inspired by the TabularNet approach. Two Bi-
find more insights as defined in Sec. IV-A, we define rc as
t LSTM layers are employed to capture the table content, and
follows:
the resulting output is then passed to an MLP Encoder.
rc =η ∆AR The embedding of hierarchical table heading structure.
t 1 t
∆AR =AR −AR We adopt a tree-based representation approach [11] to model
t t t−1
the heading structure of hierarchical tabular data, as shown
where η indicates the weight and ∆AR denotes the ratio of in the heading structure of Fig. 4. Under this approach, each
1 t
cells containing insights that were discovered and visualized node in the tree is denoted as x using its node index i. In
i
at the t-th time step. This reward serves as motivation for the contrast, the edges connecting the nodes represent the parent-
agent to actively seek out and discover more insights. child relationships between entries in the headings and are8
Fig. 4. The construction process of InsigHTable involves two stages: transformation and visualization. These stages perform different operations on the
hierarchical table.During the transformation stage,the table headersand content are updatedaccordingly. In the visualization stage, data blockswithin the
hierarchical table are identified, and visualization results are inserted. state0 represents the input table, while statem denotes the transformation results.
statem+n correspondstothevisualizationresults.Themodel’sstructureremainsthesameinbothstages,exceptfortheactionoutputbytheagentmodule,
whichisindicatedbyanellipsewithadottedbordertohighlighttheirdifferences.Thebottompartofthemodelstructureconsistsoftheagentmoduleand
thecuriositymodule.
labeled as e , indicating that node i is the parent of node j. and is defined as follows:
i,j
Additionally, three virtual nodes are incorporated: the whole  
r oo fot con lo ud me n, th he ear do io nt gsn .od Te heo sf ero nw odh esead coin ng ns e, ca tn td hethe hiero rao rt cn ho icd ae
l
h( il) =MLPh( il−1)+ (cid:88) w i,jh( jl−1) 
j∈N(i)
structures present in the row and column headings, thereby
facilitating the integration of the two hierarchical structures. whereh(l) isthefeaturevectorofnodeiatthel-thlayerofthe
i
In addition, the DRL framework employs a pre-trained graph convolution, and N(i) is the set of neighbors of node
BERT [58] model to obtain the content information of table i. The graph-level representation is obtained by performing a
headings, denoted as ch i. Additionally, the representation of readoutoperation,wherewechoosetousethemeanoperation:
hierarchical table headings reflects the current selection status
N
of the visualization area using the selection status of the node h = 1 (cid:88) h(L)
denoted as cs , where 1 denotes that the node is selected in H N i
i
i=1
thecolumnheading,and2denotesthatthenodeisselectedin
therowheading,and−1denotesthatthenodeisnotselected, where L is the number of graph convolution layers, and h H
indicating that the cells underlying this node are not involved isthefinalrepresentationoftheentireheadingstructure.Note
in the visualization results. that any transformation actions performed on a hierarchical
table change the state of the headings. Consequently, the
Thefeaturerepresentationc foreachnodex isobtainedby
i i
connectivity status of the edges in the table headings is
contacting the semantic information ch of the corresponding
i
affected, resulting in changes of the headings’ features.
tableheadingandtheheaderselectionstatecs .Thefirst-level
i
The embedding of hierarchical table content. In addition
node feature for each element in the heading x is defined as
i
toembeddingtheheadingstructures,itisessentialtorepresent
follows:
the visualization embedding status and the table content as
h(0) =ReLU(MLP(c )) inputs to the MLP module. We adopted a representation
i i
approachinspiredbyTabularNet[6]forunderstandingtabular
data.ThisapproachemploysBi-GRUtoaggregateinformation
where ReLU is the activation function. Besides node features,
from each cell, along with its corresponding row and column.
we define edge features for each parent-child relationship e
i,j
Moreover, our framework improves TabularNet by employing
as a one-hot encoding vector to obtain the adjacency matrix:
aBi-LSTMonrowsandcolumns,enablingtheaggregationof
information for the entire table, as shown in Fig. 4.
w =OneHot(e )
i,j i,j We utilize a Bi-LSTM along the rows to gather feature
information for each row. Subsequently, the information from
After performing multiple rounds of graph convolution, the each row is consolidated to derive the overall information for
featurevectorofnodex aggregatesthefeaturesofeachnode the entire table. Likewise, a similar procedure is conducted
i
and its neighbors based on the sum of their feature vectors alongeachcolumntoobtaincomprehensivetableinformation.9
Thisaggregatedinformationservesasinputforthesubsequent discovered, with no rewards if no insights are found. This
MLP,facilitatingourmodel’sabilitytohandlevariationsinthe poses a challenge for the agent in determining which actions
number of data cells. to take to potentially obtain rewards that may occur several
As the positions of the tabular data items change with the steps later. Numerous studies have leveraged reinforcement
table transformations in the first stage, it becomes imperative learning techniques for visualization authoring [32], [33],
to update their positions accordingly. To guarantee that the [48]. However, these studies often neglect the issue of sparse
dataitemsarearrangedbytheiroriginalnumbering,eachinput rewards in reinforcement learning, wherein the agent receives
tabular data is assigned a unique identifier. This arrangement rewards infrequently from the environment.
ensuresthatevenifthepositionofthedatachanges,theitems We introduce an auxiliary (intrinsic) reward mechanism to
can still be organized based on their original numbering and assist the agent in exploring new and unknown states in the
then sent to the MLP module to derive the feature vector h environment, including new heading structures and visualiza-
D
for the data. tionstates.Toaccomplishthis,wehaveemployedtherandom
Consequently,thefeaturevectorh isobtainedforthetable network distillation technique [59], which predicts the errors
H
headings, and the feature vector h is obtained for the table in the environmental state and steers the agent’s exploration.
D
contents. After concatenating them along the last dimension, The state of the hierarchical tables encompasses both the
thefeaturevectorh =cat(h ,h )isobtainedfortheentire heading structure and the visualization state, as explained
T H D
hierarchical table. in Sec. IV-C1, where GCN and Bi-LSTM networks were
2) Agent Network Architecture: After obtaining the rep- utilized. In this context, two distinct networks are deployed
resentation of hierarchical tables, a series of actions related to predict the modifications in the hierarchical structure and
to table transformation and visualization region selection are the visualization state.
performed on the table. As depicted in the agent module AsillustratedinFig.4,bothGCNandBi-LSTMoftheCu-
presented in Fig. 4, the features extracted from hierarchical riosity Module consist of two identical networks with distinct
tables are concatenated and fed into an Actor and a Critic parameters,generatingdifferentfeaturerepresentationsforthe
network.TheActornetworkgeneratesactionsthatmanipulate sameenvironmentalstate.Forrepresentingtableheadings,we
the hierarchical table, represented by a 1 and a 2. The Critic employ two networks: f H : H → Rk and fˆ H : H → Rk,
network evaluates the system’s current state and assesses its where the target network f is utilized to provide a fixed
H
quality, represented as v. This evaluation is utilized for loss representation for headings, while the predictor network fˆ
H
computationandmodeltraining.TheActor-Criticarchitecture is trained to learn the embedding of headings. Similarly, f
D
serves as a classic approach that has formed the basis for the and fˆ represent the target network and predictor network,
D
developmentofnumeroussubsequenton-policyreinforcement respectively,forthecorrespondingtablecontent.Uponobtain-
learning algorithms. ingthefeaturevectorsembeddedbythefourneuralnetworks,
The actions generated by the Actor are then applied to the the intrinsic reward is computed as the mean squared error
environment, where they lead to modifications in the table. betweenthesefeaturevectors.Specifically,theintrinsicreward
Visualizinghierarchicaltabulardataencompassesasubstantial for the table heading rint and for data items rint in the table
H D
action space, as explained in Sec. IV-B2, and the visualiza- content are defined as follows:
tion process relies on the results of table transformations.
rint =∥fˆ (x)−f (x)∥2
Therefore, we divide the training process into two stages, the H H H
table transformations in the first stage and the visualization rint =∥fˆ (x)−f (x)∥2
D D D
embeddinginthesecondstage,asshowninFig.4.Theentire
episode length is fixed. We define the stage ratio (SR) as the where fˆ H(x) and fˆ D(x) are the feature vectors obtained by
ratio between the steps of two stages to control the number of the predictor networks for headings and content, f H(x) and
steps within each stage. Specifically, the actions—transpose, f D(x) are the feature vectors obtained by the target networks
aggregate, stack, unstack, swap—are actions associated with for headings and content.
the transformation stage, and they are masked during the The target networks contain parameters that are randomly
secondstage.Similarly,{row ,row ,row ,row ,col , initialized and remain fixed during training, whereas the pre-
up down left right up
col ,col ,col }areregardedasactionsintheselection dictor networks have parameters that are randomly initialized
down left right
stage, which are masked during the first stage. Consequently, and get updated during training. Throughout the training
the Actor network with two action heads outputs actions for process, the predictor networks encounter more unexplored
thetwostages,asa anda ,representingtabletransformation states, and their state representations gradually converge to-
1 2
and visual region selection operations, respectively. ward the fixed representation of observations provided by the
3) Auxiliary Reward: Based on the aforementioned defini- target networks. Consequently, the intrinsic reward computed
tion of hierarchical table visualization and the reward design, between these two representationsdiminishes. In other words,
thetwostages,whichencompasstransformationandvisualiza- when a state is visited less frequently, the difference between
tion, employ different reward mechanisms. In the first stage, the representations of this state by the predictor networks
tabular data transformation lacks a reward system, making it and target networks is pronounced, thereby yielding a larger
challenging to evaluate the quality of the resulting transfor- intrinsic reward to promote explorations.
mations. Furthermore, even in the visualization stage, rewards In addition, we employ a joint optimization technique
are sparse because they are only acquired when insights are Extrinsic-Intrinsic Policy Optimization [60] that combines10
auxiliary rewards to mitigate the necessity for manual ad- users[31],[32],[42].Moreover,users’interestsmayevolveas
justments to the relative importance of intrinsic and extrinsic theyexplorethedata.Hence,itisessentialtoallowinteractive
rewards during the training process. In some cases, incorpo- steering to influence the visualization generation process [62],
rating intrinsic rewards can stimulate exploration, guiding the [63]. More specifically, the system should provide flexible
agent to discover unexplored states. However, in other cases, interactionstoallowuserstoremove,add,andupdateinsights
it might interfere with the primary optimization objectives. based on the generated hierarchical table visualizations [61].
Optimizing mixed objectives does not necessarily produce DC2: Clearly and effectively present multiple insights
the optimal policy solely based on extrinsic rewards. The extracted from data in the visualization results. The data
following outlines the optimization objective: visualizations are collaboratively crafted with input from both
theintelligentagentanddataanalystsratherthanbeingcreated
max J (π ) s.t., J (π )−maxJ (π )=0
πE+I∈Π E+I E+I E E+I πE E E manually. Therefore, it is crucial for the system to ensure
(cid:34) ∞ (cid:35) that the generated visualizations clearly convey the extracted
where J (π )=E (cid:88) γt(cid:0) rE +λrI(cid:1) , data insights and avoid ambiguity [31], [47]. Additionally,
E+I E+I πE+I t t
t=0 sincehierarchical tablevisualizationsembed manyvisualrep-
(cid:34) ∞ (cid:35) (cid:34) ∞ (cid:35) resentations into original tables, navigating through multiple
(cid:88) (cid:88)
J E(π E+I)=E πE+I γtr tE , J E(π)=E π γtr tE visualizationscanbecognitivelydemanding[62],[63].Hence,
t=0 t=0 the system should strive to keep visualizations as simple as
where E and I denote extrinsic and intrinsic, π represents possibletopreventvisualclutterandreducethecognitiveload
a policy to output action, π represents a mixed strat- of exploring multiple insights on a single screen.
E+I
egy policy, π represents an extrinsic strategy policy, J DC3: Maintain working memory for constructing hier-
E E+I
represents a mixed optimization objective, J represents an archical table visualizations. Systems should retain a mem-
E
extrinsic optimization objective, γ represents a discount rate ory of recent interactions and offer mechanisms that enable
(set to 0.99), t represents the time step, and rE and rI denote users to locate specific visual elements efficiently [61]. This
t t
extrinsic and intrinsic rewards. constructionprocessofhierarchicaltablevisualizationscanbe
The objective is to optimize a mixed policy based on the broken down into multiple steps, with each step representing
joint optimization approach that consists of both intrinsic a distinct state. Therefore, it is essential to illustrate the
and extrinsic rewards. To ensure the extrinsic optimality, an intermediate states.
extrinsicoptimalityconstraintisimposed,whichdemandsthat
the mixed policy outperforms the extrinsic policy in terms of
B. User Interface and Interaction
theextrinsicrewardobjective.Inotherwords,themixedpolicy
optimized with mixed rewards must be at least as effective as Driven by the above design considerations, we design and
aregularextrinsicpolicy.Asaresult,thelosscomputationand develop the InsigHTable system to support users in exploring
model training are conducted based on the model’s output of the hierarchical tabular data interactively.
rint, rext, v, a , and a . InsigHTable presents the raw hierarchical tables uploaded
1 2
by users within the hierarchical table visualization panel at
V. THEINSIGHTABLESYSTEM thebeginning.Afterusersclickthe“insightrecommendation”
button , the DRL model generates hierarchical table visu-
We have designed and developed the InsigHTable system
alizations with abundant data insights. InsigHTable employs
basedontheexistingHiTailorsystemtosupportuserstocreate
a mixed-initiative approach based on DRL to construct hier-
hierarchical table visualizations with abundant data insights
archical table visualizations. The construction process is dis-
effectively.Morespecifically,weborrowthehierarchicaltable
played in the insight list panel (DC3). This approach involves
visualizationpanel(Fig.5(A))andthevisualizationconfigura-
two user interactions designed to enhance and refine the gen-
tion panel (Fig. 5(D)) from HiTailor, and further complement
erated results (DC1). First, once users find certain generated
the insight list panel (Fig. 5(B)) and the alternative insight
data insights unsatisfactory, they are able to remove them
panel (Fig. 5(C)). In addition, we also design different visual
from the insight list panel and replace them with manually
cues in the hierarchical table visualization panel to facilitate
created insights. In the insight list panel, the generated data
users understanding the extracted data insights.
insights generated by the intelligent agent and constructed
manually are encoded with different icons (DC3). Second,
A. Design Considerations
InsigHTablecanprovidemultipletypesofdatainsightsrelated
We identified the following three design considerations for to the same data cells. When users click on one data insight,
theInsigHTablesystem.Theseconsiderationsarederivedfrom otherinsightsextractedfromthesamedatablockarepresented
existing studies about visualization authoring [32], [42] and inthealternativeinsightpanel.Userscanthenchooseinsights
visual data storytelling [31], [47] driven by DRL, as well as from the panel and replace them with the original data insight
the mixed-initiative visualization systems [61]–[63]. in the hierarchical table visualization. Subsequently, the DRL
DC1: Enable interactive steering to guide the construc- framework updates the generated data insights accordingly.
tion of hierarchical table visualizations. While the intel- Through these iterative processes, users can get a satisfying
ligent agent of the DRL algorithm autonomously generates hierarchical table visualization. In particular, considering the
visualization results, it may not always meet the needs of all limitedspace,thesystemdoesnotprovidetheaxesandlegend11
fortheembeddedvisualrepresentationstoavoidvisualclutter Tobegintheexplorationprocess,thedataanalystclickedthe
and complements this information in the alternative insight “insight recommendation” button in the insight list panel
panel (DC2). (Fig.5(B)),andthevisualizationscorrespondingtotheinsights
The constructed visualizations consist of both single-block arethendirectlyembeddedintothecorrespondingcells/blocks
and multiple-block insights. Different from single-block in- within the table content. Additionally, the data analyst clicked
sights, multiple-block insights are related to data items ob- the “previous” and “next” buttons located on the left
tained through recommendations. InsigHTable incorporates of the insight list to update the insights displayed within the
various visual cues to indicate related data blocks (DC2). hierarchical table visualization panel.
For the name-based recommendation mechanism, the system Thevisualizationresultsconstructedbythedataanalystare
recommends multiple data blocks with the same label in showninFig.5.Thesevisualizationsrevealmultipleintriguing
the heading. Because these blocks may not be adjacent to data insights. First, the visualization in Fig. 5(c) demonstrates
each other, a light-gray background is added to mark them. the proportion of PlayStation 3’s sales in 2015, and the sales
Conversely, data blocks determined by the topology-based in Europe are dominant among all regions, which is different
mechanism are adjacent. The system adds rectangular corner from the sales of PlayStation 4. Fig. 5(e) indicates that only
markers to denote these related blocks. Based on the Japan did not have an outlier for the sales of Xbox 360 in
insight explanations provided in Sec. IV-A, multiple-block 2016. The data analyst further checked its alternative insights,
insights are derived from insights detected based on a single includingchangepointinsight(shapeinsight),outstandingtop
block and whether insights in the same category exist in all two insight (point insight), and correlation insight (compound
recommended data blocks. Therefore, to indicate data blocks insight).Itfoundthatthesales’trendinJapanaresignificantly
that have a distinct insight compared to others, a light-red different from the other regions.
background is utilized. From the insight list panel, users can AsshowninFig.5(a),thesalestrendsin2017aredifferent
quickly locate the insight of interest by clicking on the icon. from those in other years. Notably, a sharp rise in sales of the
For each visualization embedded in the table content, the data WiiUconsoleinJapanduringthisperiod.Uponinvestigation,
analyst can check the underlying data attribute by hovering thedataanalystdiscoveredthatthissurgewasattributedtothe
over the visual elements. For example, when hovering over a cessation of Wii U console production at that time, leading
visualelement,thecorrespondingrowishighlightedinyellow, to a substantial increase in demand for memory in Japan.
as demonstrated in Fig. 5(c). Furthermore, as illustrated in Fig. 5(f), the sales distribution
in 2013 deviates notably from the patterns observed in other
VI. EVALUATION years. After analyzing the underlying data, the data analyst
found that this discrepancy was primarily because of the
To evaluate the effectiveness of InsigHTable, we conduct
distinctsalesperformanceoftheXboxOneinAmericaduring
two case studies and quantitative experiments. The quantita-
thatyear.Theanalysts’discoverypromptedthemtodetermine
tive experiments encompass hyperparameter tuning, ablation
thattheinitialresponsetotheXboxOneinAmericawasfairly
studies, and comparisons with heuristic methods.
unenthusiastic. However, after establishing a gaming console
We train the reinforcement learning model based on the
ecosystem,thesalesofXboxOneexhibitedsignificantgrowth.
HiTab [12] dataset, which is utilized for question answering
Based on the constructed hierarchical table visualizations,
and natural language generation over hierarchical tables. The
the data analyst also created data visualizations manually,
parameters for the training reinforcement learning model are
which is shown at the end of the insight list panel. The
asfollows:thelearningrateis2×e−4,thenumberofparallel
visualization in Fig. 5(d) is to explore the difference between
environments is 128, the interval for updating parameters is
PlayStation 3 and PlayStation 4. Fig. 5(b) indicates that the
64 steps, the mini-batch size is 512, the number of total time
salesofPlayStation3amongdifferentregionshavecorrelation
steps is 500M, the clip coefficient for PPO is 0.2, and the
data insights. However, after creating the visualization in
value coefficient is 0.5. The stopping condition for the DRL
Fig. 5(d), the data analysts found that the correlation insight
framework is when the episode exceeds the threshold, which
does not exist in PlayStation 4. Such a difference inspires the
we set to 200 in our experiment, or when all cells within
data analysts to explore the different strategies of these two
tabular data are embedded with visualizations.
products in different regions.
2) Case Study 2: Insurance Statistics Data Analysis: We
A. Case Studies
conducted the second case study with data analysts in a well-
The case studies illustrate two real-world examples of known insurance company that heavily relies on hierarchical
insight extraction and visualization using InsigHTable, one tabular data. The findings demonstrate that InsigHTable can
console sales dataset, and one insurance statistical dataset. significantly facilitate the extraction of valuable insights from
1) Case Study 1: Console Sales Data Analysis: In the first these tables, enabling data analysts to work efficiently and
case study, we collaborated with a data analyst to analyze resulting in rich data insights.
market sales data. The constructed visualizations are depicted The analysts chose one hierarchical tabular dataset related
in Fig. 5. The underlying data of this result is about the sales topremiumstatistics,whichcontainsinformationonpremium
of console, including sales data for gaming consoles from income and growth rate for each province. The attributes
differentbrands,categories,andregions.Thedataalsoconsists in the headings of this hierarchical table include province,
of sales across various regions and time periods. premium type, classification of sales channel, time range, and12
Fig.5. ThehierarchicaltablevisualizationisbasedonadatasetofconsolesalesandiscreatedusingtheInsigHTableprototypesystem.Thisdataisabout
sales data for Nintendo, Sony, and Microsoft, and encompasses generated visualizations that are embedded in the table content. The InsigHTable prototype
systemconsistsoffourpanels:(A)tablevisualizationpanel;(B)insightlistpanel;(C)alternativeinsightpanel;and(D)visualizationconfigurationpanel.
type of statistic value (total amount or growth rate). Fig. 6 Inadditiontothat,Fig.6(b)depictstheskewnessinsightre-
shows an example of hierarchical table visualization, which latedtofourrecommendeddatablocksbasedonthetopology-
demonstrates the extracted insights by InsigHTable. based mechanism. Among these four data blocks, the analyst
For single-block insights, as shown in Fig. 6(a), the total found that the first block has a data distribution that is not
amount of the long-term insurance in p1 (province 1) is an significantly skewed, while the remaining three blocks exhibit
outlierwithinthesinglecolumn,whichexceedsthepower-law strong skewness. This suggested that the data distribution is
distribution of the column. This insight is visualized using a largeinscalebutishighlyconcentratedwithinanarrowrange.
bar chart visualization. As shown in Fig. 6(c), one data item Thisinformationinformedtheanalystthatthetotalamountof
is much smaller (less than Q1−3×IQR) than the others the sale channels under the major insurance category is more
within the single column. After checking the underlying data, balanced, whereas the other channels need to be improved.
the analyst finds that the total amount of the medium-term Furthermore,Fig.6(e)showsthedatablocksdeterminedby
insurance in p3 is an outlier. Fig. 6(f) presents a data block the topology-based mechanism. The multi-series line chart on
with a dominance insight. Within the data block, the data theleftblockillustratesthecorrelationbetweenthesumofthe
items are aggregated by computing the average value along insurance sale channels under the major insurance category,
the column (indicated by the downward-pointing arrow ). whereas, on the right, no such correlation exists. This insight
This insight is visualized using a radial plot visualization. encouragedtheanalysttoanalyzetheunderlyingrelationships
The analyst finds that the service marketing channel category between these sale channels and improve the strategies, for
represents the largest proportion of channels. example, avoiding the interrelated effects between different
The visualization results comprise various insights across types of insurance.
multiple blocks. Fig. 6(d) demonstrates three recommended Moreover, upon aggregating the data items within multiple
data blocks through the name-based mechanism. These data blocks along the row in Fig. 6(h), the analyst identifies
blocks share identical labels except for the top level in the the evenness insight. The left block exhibited the evenness
columnheadings,whichrepresentthecurrentyear,month,and characteristic, while the chart on the right does not, implying
day. The analyst discovered that both data blocks correspond- that the growth rate of the “major insurance” in p5 is similar,
ing to the current day and month contain an outlier, whereas whereas the difference in “non-major insurance” is significant
thedatablockcorrespondingtothecurrentyeardoesnot.This at the current month. Therefore, it is necessary to specify
suggested that the growth rates of the four different insurance policies to improve the efficiency of non-major insurance.
types have displayed increasing variability in recent times. Similarly, Fig. 6(g) presents four data blocks, each com-13
Fig. 6. One hierarchical table visualization generated by InsigHTable: the premium statistical data of an insurance company with various visualizations
correspondingtodifferentinsightsembeddedinthehierarchicaltabulardata.Severalvisualcuesindicatetherelatedblocks:therectangularcornermarkers
indicate whether the data blocks are recommended using the topology-based mechanism, and the light-gray background indicates that the data blocks are
recommendedusingthename-basedmechanism.Thelight-redbackgroundindicatesadistinctinsightexistswithintheblock.Thebottomofthefigureshows
thegeneratedinsightlist.
prising an aggregation insight. The top two data blocks are is essential to achieve optimal results and enhance the overall
a set of recommended insights, while the bottom two data learning process.
blocks are another set. All four insights belong to the top two The ratio between the number of executed steps in the
or dominance category and are visualized using radial plot transformation and the whole visualization stages denoted as
visualization.Theanalystfoundthatdistributionsofmajorand SR is a crucial hyperparameter in the DRL framework. In
non-major insurance categories vary significantly between p5 our experiment, we carefully adjusted these hyperparameters
andp6.Specifically,underthemajorinsurancecategory,short- and conducted cross-validation experiments to ensure optimal
terminsuranceandmedium-terminsuranceofp5andp6have performance. The results of these experiments are presented
the largest and second-largest values, while the relative sizes in Table I. Adjusting the value of SR is to strike a balance
are different. Under the non-major insurance category, the between the two stages. A small value limits the number of
dominancecategoryisshort-terminsuranceinp5,whereasthe transformationsteps,resultinginanineffectivetransformation
dominance category is the medium category in p6. This data of the hierarchical table and notably inferior performance.
insightsuggestedtheanalystsanalyzethevarianceofstrategies Conversely, a large value increases the number of transforma-
in detail between p5 and p6 to realize complementary. tionactions,resultinginfewerdataselectionandvisualization
embedding actions by the agent and diminished performance.
The experiment results show that the model performances are
B. Quantitative Experiments
optimal when the SR value is assigned as 0.04.
We perform four experiments to validate the effectiveness
The number of GCN layers denoted as L also affects the
of the InsigHTable system, including a hyperparameter tuning
performance of the model. More specifically, a small number
experiment, an ablation study, a robustness evaluation, and a
ofGCNlayersmightdiminishthemodel’sabilitytorepresent
comparison with heuristic insight extraction methods to show
the tabular data’s hierarchical structure. Conversely, many
thesuperiorityandnecessityoftheDRLframework.Allexper-
GCN layers lead to an increase in network parameters, which
imentsareconductedusingthethreediversitymetrics(IR,AR,
makesthelearningofthemodelchallenging,resultinginpoor
andER)definedinSec.IV-B3.Theexperimentsareconducted
performance. Therefore, choosing the appropriate number of
on a machine equipped with an Intel(R) Xeon(R) Platinum
layers is crucial to ensure optimal performance. The experi-
8280 CPU@2.70GHz featuring 112 cores, 8 NVIDIA RTX
ment demonstrates that a moderate number of three layers is
A6000 GPUs, and 754GB of memory.
appropriate.Notethatreinforcementlearningisdifferentfrom
1) Hyperparameter Tuning: In the context of DRL, the
supervised learning in that an excessive number of network
effectiveness of neural network models heavily relies on
parameters can lead to great difficulties for model training.
hyperparameters, which are crucial settings influencing the
model’s performance. Properly tuning these hyperparameters14
TABLEI TABLEII
Impactoftwohyperparameters.TheIR,AR,andERindicateInsight Ablationstudyresults.Theitalicsintheheadersandthecontentindicate
Ratio,AreaRatio,andEvennessRatio,respectively.Theitalicsinthe theoptimalparametersandresults.
headersandthecontentindicatetheoptimalparametersandresults.
InsightRatio AreaRatio EvennessRatio
GCNLayer(L) L=1 L=2 L=3 L=4 L=5 InsigHTable 0.7 0.714 0.691
StageRatio IR 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 0.2 Ablation w/oGCN 0.2 0.694 0.298
=0.01 AR 0.425 0.403 0.337 0.290 0.031 w/orint 0.2 0.409 0.271
ER 0.276 0.301 0.301 0.299 0.276 w/otwostage 0.2 0.178 0.301
StageRatio IR 0.6 0.6 0.7 0.6 0.6
=0.04 AR 0.637 0.604 0.714 0.674 0.628
ER 0.674 0.560 0.691 0.618 0.573
Consequently, it is essential to divide the construction process
StageRatio IR 0.4 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.2
=0.08 AR 0.504 0.664 0.694 0.361 0.389 of tabular data visualization into two stages. In the ablation
ER 0.486 0.558 0.645 0.587 0.301 study, we do not differentiate the transformation stage and
StageRatio IR 0.3 0.5 0.5 0.4 0.4
visualization stage, as shown in Fig. 4. More specifically,
=0.12 AR 0.396 0.365 0.563 0.301 0.250
ER 0.311 0.537 0.672 0.561 0.487 the transformation and visual region selection actions may
StageRatio IR 0.5 0.4 0.3 0.3 0.2 be executed at any step, which could significantly impact
=0.16 AR 0.283 0.053 0.285 0.419 0.371
the final tabular data visualization results. In particular, one
ER 0.426 0.301 0.301 0.301 0.268
transformation action is designed to clear all embedded visual
representations because continuous data cells within a data
block may become disjointed after transformations. Without
2) Ablation Study: We designed an ablation experiment to
the two-stage mechanism, the model will lead to inefficient
compare the effectiveness of the modules about GCN feature
explorations of agents. The experimental findings reveal that
extraction, auxiliary reward methods, and two-stage action
the model without a two-stage mechanism yields significantly
selection used in the model separately, and the results are
inferior results compared to other two-stage models, confirm-
shown in Table II.
ing the mechanism’s effectiveness.
The first part is about the impact of the GCN module. The
ablation study is to remove the GCN model and does not
differentiate the table headers and table content, as shown
in the Agent Module and Curiosity Module in Fig. 4. The
GCN module of the DRL framework enables the structure
and content of the hierarchical tables’ multi-level headers are
inputted into the model, which improves the effectiveness
accordingtotheexperimentresults.WithouttheGCNmodule,
the model cannot properly understand heading structures to
perform transformation actions. Although the MLP mod-
ule can still retrieve table contents from the input without
distinguishing between headers and content, it prevents the
agent from exploring various hierarchical table organizations.
Consequently,themodel’sperformancewillbeworsethanthat Fig.7. ThebarchartindicatestheInsightRatio,AreaRatio,andEvenness
of InsigHTable. Ratio results, with error bars indicating the degree of the variance with
randomlyinitializedstatesoftableheadings.
The second part is about intrinsic rewards. The ablation
study is to remove the Curiosity Module of the DRL frame- 3) Robustness Testing: To assess the robustness of our
work, as depicted in Fig. 4. The exclusion of the curiosity method, we conducted an experiment using several hierar-
module and the consequent lack of intrinsic rewards have a chical tables with different numbers of table cells ranging
deleteriousimpactontheresults.Moreover,therewardsduring from 224 to 1344. This experiment is to evaluate the quality
the hierarchical table visualization construction are sparse, of the hierarchical table visualization results with setting
withnorewardbeingprovidedduringthestageofhierarchical various heading structures of hierarchical tables. Specifically,
table transformation despite the existence of numerous states weappliedrandomtransformationactionstothesehierarchical
concerning the structure of the hierarchical tables. Without tables and used the transformation results as inputs to the
theintrinsicreward,theagentcannotcomprehensivelyexplore model. For each hierarchical table, we selected 10 different
differenthierarchicaltableorganizationsforembeddingvisual initial states. As illustrated in Fig. 7, the results demonstrate
representations. Therefore, the performance of the model is thattheDRLmodelexhibitsrobustnessbyconsistentlyachiev-
also worse than that of InsigHTable. Furthermore, when the ing satisfactory outcomes across various indicators (IR, AR,
visualization stage fails to yield any insights, the reward is and ER) even when the hierarchical table’s heading structure
also absent. The experimental findings indicate that intrinsic is randomly initialized.
rewards can effectively facilitate exploration. 4) Comparison with Baselines: We conducted the compar-
The transformation results serve as the foundation for em- ative analysis with three heuristic methods employed for au-
bedding visual representations, and the transformation actions tomatic insight extraction: PowerBI QuickInsights [25], AWS
ofhierarchicaltablemaydestroytheembeddedvisualizations. QuickSight [64], and DataPrep.EDA [29]. In this experiment,15
cases, including point insights, shape insights, and compound
insights. Furthermore, InsigHTable enables the extraction of
multiple-block insights based on the data item relationships.
Secondly, in terms of the quantity of extracted insights, AWS
QuickSight is able to identify a larger number of insights, but
it requires lots of users’ interactive operations, for example,
users need to select the interested entries from data rows
and columns interactively. Conversely, DataPrep.EDA only
identified few data insights. Based on the experiment results,
thequantityanddiversityofinsightsextractedbyInsigHTable
are better than existing insight extraction methods.
Compared to heuristic methods, InsigHTable demonstrates
superiority in insight extraction within the context of hierar-
chicaltabulardatatransformationsandvisualizationscenarios.
Fig. 8. The experiment results are compared to three heuristic insight
VII. DISCUSSIONANDFUTUREWORK
extractionmethods,includingPowerBIQuickInsights,AWSQuickSight,and
DataPrep.EDA, with a metric that measures the number of insights for
Scalability. The insight formulation relies on established
each insight category type. The labels a-l indicate Outlier, Dominance,
Outstanding top two, Outstanding negative, Trend, Change point, Evenness, research and the expertise of domain experts who are famil-
Skewness,Kurtosis,Dependence,Correlation,andCross-measurecorrelation, iar with exploring hierarchical tables. Given the prevalence
respectively.
of hierarchical tables in various application scenarios, some
insights related to hierarchical tables may have yet to be
considered. Nevertheless, the reinforcement learning model
we utilize hierarchical tables from real-world applications,
of InsigHTable is scalable, enabling the seamless integration
including console sales and insurance statistics, as explained of new insights and visualizations (e.g., hierarchical data
inthecasestudies.Morespecifically,QuickInsightsonPower
visualizations[8],[65],[66])intothesystemwithoutchanging
BI and QuickSight on AWS do not require programming;
the system’s architecture. In the future, we plan to deploy our
users only need to upload the tabular data and generate the
system online and collect more feedback to improve our in-
insight list directly. On the contrary, Dataprep.EDA based
sight formulation for hierarchical table data. Additionally, we
on Python requires users to install the dataprep library and
aim to enhance the visualization results corresponding to the
run the codes to get the generated insight list. Based on the
newly discovered insights. For the size of hierarchical tables,
extracted insights, we computed the number corresponding to
implementing the InsigHTable system is based on Scalable
each insight category to evaluate the performance.
Vector Graphics, and the performance will decrease due to
The findings demonstrate the effectiveness of the In- many DOM elements. We plan to improve the scalability by
sigHTable system in extracting data insights from hierarchical enabling users to filter and select subregions to narrow the
tables. First, it is important to note that none of the three exploration [67].
heuristic methods are capable of the analysis of hierarchical Interpretability. The InsigHTable system utilizes a rein-
tabulardatabecausetheyareprimarilydesignedforflattables. forcement learning neural network to represent hierarchical
In addition, InsigHTable allows the integration of data and tabular data and produce actions for the transformations and
visualization results by embedding visualization results into visualizations. However, the reinforcement learning model is
hierarchical tables, whereas the other methods generate inde- a black box for users, making it challenging to understand
pendent visualization results. This highlights the superiority or explain how the agent makes these decisions. This issue
of our approach in the context of hierarchical tabular data is especially critical in finance application scenarios, where
scenarios. However, as explained in Sec. I, all hierarchical understandingthedecision-makingprocesscanincreaseusers’
tables can be converted to flat tables after transformations. acceptance of the visualization results and enable them to
Therefore, we take these flat tables as input for the traditional identify potential errors or issues promptly. In addition, it can
insight extraction method. also facilitate users in adjusting parameters and optimizing
The results, depicted in Fig. 8, demonstrate the number of algorithms more effectively, thus improving the model’s per-
insightscorrespondingtoeachcategory.First,theinsighttypes formance. The lack of interpretability is a common problem
identifiedbythethreeheuristicmethodsarerelativelylimited. for reinforcement learning, and some studies [68]–[70] on
Specifically, QuickInsights primarily focuses on (a)-outlier, visualization for reinforcement learning aim to explain the
(b)-dominance, (e)-trend and (g)-evenness insight types, and decision-makingprocess.Theseareasarealsoworthexploring
DataPrep.EDAidentifiesadditionalinsighttypesincluding(h)- in our future research.
skewness,thepercentageofzeros,andthepercentageofnega- Human-AI interaction. The insights generated by In-
tivenumbers.AWSQuickSightalsoidentifiesinsightsofonly sigHTable are based on pre-designed patterns and do not
three types: (c)-outstanding top two, (d)-outstanding negative, account for users’ intentions or interests. Although users have
and(h)-skewness.However,InsigHTableiscapableofextract- theabilitytoviewandmodifytheresultsintheuserinterface,
ing various insight types, as depicted in the above two use the reinforcement learning model may need to comprehend16
their intentions more effectively. Recent advancements in [8] H.-J.Schulz,“Treevis.net:Atreevisualizationreference,”IEEECom-
human-AI interaction techniques, such as ChatGPT driven by puterGraphicsandApplications,vol.31,no.6,pp.11–15,2011.
[9] G. Li, M. Tian, Q. Xu, M. J. McGuffin, and X. Yuan, “GoTree: A
large language models, have shown significant progress [71],
grammaroftreevisualizations,”inProc.ACMConf.HumanFactorsin
[72].Thistechniqueleveragesthereinforcementlearningfrom ComputingSystems(CHI),2020,p.1–13.
humanfeedback(RLHF)technique,whichemphasizestherole [10] G.Li,Y.Zhang,Y.Dong,J.Liang,J.Zhang,J.Wang,M.J.Mcguffin,
and X. Yuan, “BarcodeTree: Scalable comparison of multiple hierar-
of humans in machines and has extensive applications. In the
chies,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics,
future, we plan to explore the potential of ChatGPT or RLHF vol.26,no.1,pp.1022–1032,2020.
toimprovetheinteractionbetweenusersandthereinforcement [11] Z.Wang,H.Dong,R.Jia,J.Li,Z.Fu,S.Han,andD.Zhang,“TUTA:
Tree-based transformers for generally structured table pre-training,” in
learningmodelandtoenhancethequalityofextractedinsights.
Proc. ACM Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining (SIGKDD),
2021,pp.1780–1790.
VIII. CONCLUSION [12] Z. Cheng, H. Dong, R. Jia, J. Guo, Y. Gao, S. Han, J.-G. Lou, and
D. Zhang, “HiTab: A hierarchical table dataset for question answering
In this work, we propose InsigHTable, an insight-driven and natural language generation,” in Proc. Annual Meeting of the
method for authoring hierarchical table visualizations with AssociationforComputationalLinguistics(ACL),2022,pp.1094–1110.
[13] G. Li, R. Li, Y. Feng, Y. Zhang, Y. Luo, and C. H. Liu, “CoInsight:
rich data insights based on DRL. InsigHTable realizes the
Visualstorytellingforhierarchicaltableswithconnectedinsights,”IEEE
mixed-initiativeapproachforhierarchicaltabletransformation TransactionsonVisualizationandComputerGraphics,pp.1–11,2024.
and visual representation embedding. We extend the insight [14] P.Ginns,“Integratinginformation:Ameta-analysisofthespatialconti-
formulation for flat tabular data to hierarchical tabular data
guityandtemporalcontiguityeffects,”LearningandInstruction,vol.16,
no.6,pp.511–525,2006.
and define metrics to validate the quality of visualization
[15] A. Paul and S. John, “The split-attention principle in multimedia
results. The DRL framework of InsigHTable utilizes a two- learning,” The Cambridge Handbook of Multimedia Learning, vol. 2,
stage approach that combines a graph neural network to pp.135–146,2005.
[16] J.Sweller,“Implicationsofcognitiveloadtheoryformultimedialearn-
represent hierarchical structure states and an auxiliary reward
ing,”TheCambridgeHandbookofMultimediaLearning,vol.3,no.2,
mechanism to encourage exploration. We evaluated the per- pp.19–30,2005.
formance of the reinforcement learning model using two case [17] J.Sweller,J.J.VanMerrienboer,andF.G.Paas,“Cognitivearchitecture
andinstructionaldesign,”EducationalPsychologyReview,vol.10,no.3,
studies and quantitative experiments. The results demonstrate
pp.251–296,1998.
the effectiveness of InsigHTable. [18] D. Park, S. M. Drucker, R. Fernandez, and N. Elmqvist, “ATOM: A
grammar for unit visualizations,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
andComputerGraphics,vol.24,no.12,pp.3032–3043,2018.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
[19] S. Gratzl, A. Lex, N. Gehlenborg, H. Pfister, and M. Streit, “LineUp:
We sincerely thank Prof. Michael McGuffin at ETS for his Visual analysis of multi-attribute rankings,” IEEE Transactions on
VisualizationandComputerGraphics,vol.19,no.12,pp.2277–2286,
great help on this work. This work is supported by National
2013.
Key R&D Program of China (2021YFB3301500), NSFC [20] Z.Gu,R.Eils,andM.Schlesner,“Complexheatmapsrevealpatternsand
(62302038, U2268205), Young Elite Scientists Sponsorship correlationsinmultidimensionalgenomicdata,”Bioinformatics,vol.32,
no.18,pp.2847–2849,2016.
Program by CAST (2023QNRC001), China Railway Group
[21] C.Perin,P.Dragicevic,andJ.Fekete,“RevisitingBertinMatrices:New
Co. Ltd. Science and Technology Research and Development interactions for crafting tabular visualizations,” IEEE Transactions on
Program (N2022J014), and the Center of National Railway VisualizationandComputerGraphics,vol.20,no.12,pp.2082–2091,
2014.
IntelligentTransportationSystemEngineeringandTechnology
[22] R.RaoandS.K.Card,“Thetablelens:merginggraphicalandsymbolic
(RITS2022KF03). representationsinaninteractivefocus+contextvisualizationfortabular
information,”inProc.ACMConf.HumanFactorsinComputingSystems
(CHI),1994,pp.318–322.
REFERENCES
[23] A. Lex, H.-J. Schulz, M. Streit, C. Partl, and D. Schmalstieg, “Vis-
[1] C. Scaffidi, M. Shaw, and B. Myers, “Estimating the numbers of bricks: Multiform visualization of large, inhomogeneous data,” IEEE
end users and end user programmers,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Visual TransactionsonVisualizationandComputerGraphics,vol.17,no.12,
Languages and Human-Centric Computing (VL/HCC), 2005, pp. 207– pp.2291–2300,2011.
214. [24] B. Tang, S. Han, M. L. Yiu, R. Ding, and D. Zhang, “Extracting
[2] W. Dou, S. Han, L. Xu, D. Zhang, and J. Wei, “Expandable group top-k insights from multi-dimensional data,” in Proc. Int. ACM Conf.
identificationinspreadsheets,”inProc.ACM/IEEEInt.Conf.Automated ManagementofData(SIGMOD),2017,pp.1509–1524.
SoftwareEngineering(ASE),2018,pp.498–508. [25] R.Ding,S.Han,Y.Xu,H.Zhang,andD.Zhang,“Quickinsights:Quick
[3] K. Furmanova, S. Gratzl, H. Stitz, T. Zichner, M. Jaresova, A. Lex, and automatic discovery of insights from multi-dimensional data,” in
and M. Streit, “Taggle: Scalable visualization of tabular data through Proc.Int.ACMConf.ManagementofData(SIGMOD),2019,pp.317–
aggregation,” Information Visualisation, vol. 19, no. 2, pp. 114–136, 332.
2019. [26] P. Ma, R. Ding, S. Han, and D. Zhang, “Metainsight: Automatic
[4] Q.Yang,Y.Cao,H.Li,andP.Luo,“Numericalformularecognitionfrom discovery of structured knowledge for exploratory data analysis,” in
tables,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Knowledge Discovery and Data Mining Proc.Int.ACMConf.ManagementofData(SIGMOD),2021,pp.1262–
(SIGKDD),2021,pp.1986–1996. 1274.
[5] Q. Yang, Y. Cao, and P. Luo, “Numerical tuple extraction from tables [27] Q.Lin,W.Ke,J.-G.Lou,H.Zhang,K.Sui,Y.Xu,Z.Zhou,B.Qiao,
withpre-training,”inProc.ACMConf.KnowledgeDiscoveryandData and D. Zhang, “BigIN4: Instant, interactive insight identification for
Mining(SIGKDD),2022,p.2233–2241. multi-dimensionalbigdata,”inProc.ACMConf.KnowledgeDiscovery
[6] L.Du,F.Gao,X.Chen,R.Jia,J.Wang,J.Zhang,S.Han,andD.Zhang, andDataMining(SIGKDD),2018,pp.547–555.
“Tabularnet: A neural network architecture for understanding semantic [28] C. Demiralp, P. J. Haas, S. Parthasarathy, and T. Pedapati, “Foresight:
structures of tabular data,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Knowledge Discovery Recommendingvisualinsights,”Proc.Int.Conf.VeryLargeDataBases
andDataMining(SIGKDD),2021,pp.322–331. (VLDB),vol.10,no.12,pp.1937–1940,2017.
[7] G.Li,R.Li,Z.Wang,C.H.Liu,M.Lu,andG.Wang,“HiTailor:In- [29] J.Peng,W.Wu,B.Lockhart,S.Bian,J.N.Yan,L.Xu,Z.Chi,J.M.
teractivetransformationandvisualizationforhierarchicaltabulardata,” Rzeszotarski,andJ.Wang,“Dataprep.eda:task-centricexploratorydata
IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 29, analysis for statistical modeling in python,” in Proc. Int. ACM Conf.
no.1,pp.139–148,2022. ManagementofData(SIGMOD),2021,pp.2271–2280.17
[30] Y. Wang, Z. Sun, H. Zhang, W. Cui, K. Xu, X. Ma, and D. Zhang, [50] O. Vinyals, M. Fortunato, and N. Jaitly, “Pointer networks,” Proc.
“Datashot:Automaticgenerationoffactsheetsfromtabulardata,”IEEE AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS),vol.28,
Transactions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 26, no. 1, pp.2692–2700,2015.
pp.895–905,2019. [51] Y.Shi,B.Chen,Y.Chen,Z.Jin,K.Xu,X.Jiao,T.Gao,andN.Cao,
[31] D. Shi, X. Xu, F. Sun, Y. Shi, and N. Cao, “Calliope: Automatic “Supporting guided exploratory visual analysis on time series data
visual data story generation from a spreadsheet,” IEEE Transactions with reinforcement learning,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 27, no. 2, pp. 453–463, ComputerGraphics,vol.30,no.1,pp.1172–1182,2024.
2020. [52] R. Amar, J. Eagan, and J. Stasko, “Low-level components of analytic
[32] D.Deng,A.Wu,H.Qu,andY.Wu,“Dashbot:Insight-drivendashboard activityininformationvisualization,”inProc.IEEESymp.Information
generationbasedondeepreinforcementlearning,”IEEETransactionson Visualization(InfoVis),2005,pp.111–117.
VisualizationandComputerGraphics,vol.29,no.1,pp.690–700,2022. [53] H.-J. Schulz, T. Nocke, M. Heitzler, and H. Schumann, “A design
[33] O. Bar El, T. Milo, and A. Somech, “Automatically generating data space of visualization tasks,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
exploration sessions using deep reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int. ComputerGraphics,vol.19,no.12,pp.2366–2375,2013.
ACMConf.ManagementofData(SIGMOD),2020,pp.1527–1537. [54] M. Tory and T. Moller, “Rethinking visualization: A high-level taxon-
omy,” in Proc. IEEE Symp. Information Visualization (InfoVis), 2004,
[34] Z. Cui, S. K. Badam, M. A. Yalc¸in, and N. Elmqvist, “DataSite:
pp.151–158.
Proactive visual data exploration with computation of insight-based
[55] R. Bellman, “A markovian decision process,” Journal of mathematics
recommendations,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
andmechanics,pp.679–684,1957.
Graphics,vol.18,no.2,pp.251–267,2019.
[56] K. Hu, M. A. Bakker, S. Li, T. Kraska, and C. Hidalgo, “VizML: A
[35] A. Srinivasan, S. M. Drucker, A. Endert, and J. Stasko, “Augmenting
machine learning approach to visualization recommendation,” in Proc.
visualizations with interactive data facts to facilitate interpretation and
ACMConf.HumanFactorsinComputingSystems(CHI),2019,pp.1–
communication,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and Computer
12.
Graphics,vol.25,no.1,pp.672–681,2018.
[57] T.N.KipfandM.Welling,“Semi-supervisedclassificationwithgraph
[36] C.J.WatkinsandP.Dayan,“Q-learning,”Machinelearning,vol.8,pp.
convolutional networks,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learning Representation
279–292,1992.
(ICLR),2017.
[37] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. A. Rusu, J. Veness, M. G. [58] J.D.M.-W.C.KentonandL.K.Toutanova,“Bert:Pre-trainingofdeep
Bellemare, A. Graves, M. Riedmiller, A. K. Fidjeland, G. Ostrovski bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” in Proceedings
et al., “Human-level control through deep reinforcement learning,” ofNAACL-HLT,2019,pp.4171–4186.
Nature,vol.518,no.7540,pp.529–533,2015. [59] Y.Burda,H.Edwards,A.Storkey,andO.Klimov,“Explorationbyran-
[38] R.S.Sutton,D.McAllester,S.Singh,andY.Mansour,“Policygradient dom network distillation,” in Proc. Int. Conf. Learning Representation
methodsforreinforcementlearningwithfunctionapproximation,”Proc. (ICLR),2019,pp.1–17.
AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS),vol.12, [60] E. R. Chen, Z.-W. Hong, J. Pajarinen, and P. Agrawal, “Redeeming
pp.1057–1063,1999. intrinsic rewards via constrained optimization,” in Proc. Advances in
[39] D. Silver, A. Huang, C. J. Maddison, A. Guez, L. Sifre, G. Van NeuralInformationProcessingSystems(NeurIPS).
Den Driessche, J. Schrittwieser, I. Antonoglou, V. Panneershelvam, [61] E.Horvitz,“Principlesofmixed-initiativeuserinterfaces,”inProc.ACM
M.Lanctotetal.,“Masteringthegameofgowithdeepneuralnetworks Conf.HumanFactorsinComputingSystems(CHI),1999,pp.159–166.
andtreesearch,”Nature,vol.529,no.7587,pp.484–489,2016. [62] K. Wongsuphasawat, D. Moritz, A. Anand, J. Mackinlay, B. Howe,
[40] O. Vinyals, I. Babuschkin, W. M. Czarnecki, M. Mathieu, A. Dudzik, and J. Heer, “Voyager: Exploratory analysis via faceted browsing of
J.Chung,D.H.Choi,R.Powell,T.Ewalds,andP.Georgiev,“Grand- visualization recommendations,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization
master level in starcraft ii using multi-agent reinforcement learning,” andComputerGraphics,vol.22,no.1,pp.649–658,2015.
Nature,vol.575,no.7782,pp.350–354,2019. [63] K. Wongsuphasawat, Z. Qu, D. Moritz, R. Chang, F. Ouk, A. Anand,
[41] J. Degrave, F. Felici, J. Buchli, M. Neunert, B. Tracey, F. Carpanese, J. Mackinlay, B. Howe, and J. Heer, “Voyager 2: Augmenting visual
T.Ewalds,R.Hafner,A.Abdolmaleki,andD.deLasCasas,“Magnetic analysis with partial view specifications,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Human
control of tokamak plasmas through deep reinforcement learning,” FactorsinComputingSystems(CHI),2017,pp.2648–2659.
Nature,vol.602,no.7897,pp.414–419,2022. [64] A. W. Services, “Amazon quicksight,” https://aws.amazon.com/
[42] A. Wu, W. Tong, T. Dwyer, B. Lee, P. Isenberg, and H. Qu, “Mobile- quicksight.
visfixer: Tailoring web visualizations for mobile phones leveraging an [65] G. Li and X. Yuan, “GoTreeScape: Navigate and explore the tree
explainable reinforcement learning framework,” IEEE Transactions on visualization design space,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
VisualizationandComputerGraphics,vol.27,no.2,pp.464–474,2020. ComputerGraphics,vol.29,no.12,pp.5451–5467,2023.
[66] G.Li,M.Tian,Q.Xu,M.J.McGuffin,andX.Yuan,“TreeIllustrator:
[43] Q.Chen,F.Sun,X.Xu,Z. Chen,J.Wang,andN.Cao,“Vizlinter:A
Interactiveconstructionoftreevisualizations,”inExtendedAbstactsof
linter and fixer framework for data visualization,” IEEE Transactions
ACM Conf. Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI EA ’20,
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 28, no. 1, pp. 206–216,
2020,pp.1–4.
2021.
[67] M. Lu, J. Liang, Y. Zhang, G. Li, S. Chen, Z. Li, and X. Yuan,
[44] M. El-Assady, R. Sevastjanova, F. Sperrle, D. Keim, and C. Collins,
“Interaction+: Interaction enhancement for web-based visualizations,”
“Progressivelearningoftopicmodelingparameters:Avisualanalytics
in Proc. IEEE Pacific Visualization Symposium (PacificVis), 2017, pp.
framework,”IEEETransactionsonVisualizationandComputerGraph-
61–70.
ics,vol.24,no.1,pp.382–391,2017.
[68] J. Wang, L. Gou, H.-W. Shen, and H. Yang, “Dqnviz: A visual
[45] J.-F.KasselandM.Rohs,“Onlinelearningofvisualizationpreferences
analyticsapproachtounderstanddeepq-networks,”IEEETransactions
throughduelingbanditsforenhancingvisualizationrecommendations.”
on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 25, no. 1, pp. 288–298,
in Proc. Eurographics / IEEE VGTC Conference on Visualization
2018.
(EuroVis),2019,pp.85–89.
[69] Y. Metz, U. Schlegel, D. Seebacher, M. El-Assady, and D. A. Keim,
[46] R. Hu, B. Chen, J. Xu, O. Van Kaick, O. Deussen, and H. Huang, “A comprehensive workflow for effective imitation and reinforcement
“Shape-drivencoordinateorderingforstarglyphsetsviareinforcement learningwithvisualanalytics,”inProc.Int.EuroVisWorkshoponVisual
learning,”IEEETransactionsonVisualizationandComputerGraphics, Analytics(EuroVA),2022,pp.19–23.
vol.27,no.6,pp.3034–3047,2021. [70] A. Mishra, U. Soni, J. Huang, and C. Bryan, “Why? why not? when?
[47] M.Zhou,Q.Li,X.He,Y.Li,Y.Liu,W.Ji,S.Han,Y.Chen,D.Jiang, visual explanations of agent behaviour in reinforcement learning,” in
andD.Zhang,“Table2Charts:recommendingchartsbylearningshared Proc.IEEEPacificVisualizationSymposium(PacificVis),2022,pp.111–
table representations,” in Proc. ACM Conf. Knowledge Discovery and 120.
DataMining(SIGKDD),2021,pp.2389–2399. [71] W. Yang, M. Liu, Z. Wang, and S. Liu, “Foundation models meet
[48] T.Tang,R.Li,X.Wu,S.Liu,J.Knittel,S.Koch,T.Ertl,L.Yu,P.Ren, visualizations: Challenges and opportunities,” Computational Visual
and Y. Wu, “Plotthread: Creating expressive storyline visualizations Media,vol.10,pp.399–424,2023.
usingreinforcementlearning,”IEEETransactionsonVisualizationand [72] G.Li,X.Wang,G.Aodeng,S.Zheng,Y.Zhang,C.Ou,S.Wang,and
ComputerGraphics,vol.27,no.2,pp.294–303,2020. C. H. Liu, “Visualization generation with large language models: An
[49] I. Bello, H. Pham, Q. V. Le, M. Norouzi, and S. Bengio, “Neural evaluation,”2024,.
combinatorial optimization with reinforcement learning,” in Proc. Int.
Conf.LearningRepresentation(ICLR),2016.18
IX. BIOGRAPHYSECTION Chi Harold Liu received his B.Eng. degree from
Tsinghua University, Beijing, China, in 2006, and
thePh.D.degreefromtheImperialCollegeLondon,
London, U.K., in 2010. He is currently a Full
Professor and the Vice Dean with the School of
ComputerScienceandTechnology,BeijingInstitute
ofTechnology,China.BeforemovingtoAcademia,
hejoinedIBMResearch,China,Beijing,asaStaff
Researcher and a Project Manager, after working
as a Post-Doctoral Researcher with the Deutsche
GuozhengLireceivedhisPhDdegreeinComputer TelekomLaboratories,Berlin,Germany,andaVis-
SciencefromtheschoolofEECS,PekingUniversity itingScholarwiththeIBMT.J.WatsonResearchCenter,YorktownHeights,
in2021.Heiscurrentlyanassistantprofessorwith NY,USA.Hehaspublishedmorethan90prestigiousconferenceandjournal
the School of Computer Science and Technology, articles and holds more than 14 EU/U.S./U.K./China patents. His current
Beijing Institute of Technology, China. His major researchinterestsincludethebigdataanalytics,mobilecomputing,anddeep
research interests include information visualization, learning.Dr.LiuisafellowofIET.
especiallyhierarchicaldatavisualizationandvisual-
izationauthoring.
ChuangxinOuisadatascientistwithPICCInfor-
mation Technology Company Limited., China. His
researchinterestsincludefinancialintelligence,data
cleaningandvisualization.
Peng He received his BS degree in Computer Sci-
encefrom BeijingInstituteof Technologyin 2021.
He is currently a master student at the School of
Computer Science and Technology at the Beijing
Institute of Technology, China. His major research
interests include reinforcement learning and infor-
mationvisualization.
Dong He isadatascientistwithPICCInformation
TechnologyCompanyLimited.,China.Hisresearch
interestsincludedatamanagement,dataminingand
visualization.
Xinyu Wang received his BS degree in Computer
Science from Beijing Institute of Technology in
2022.HeiscurrentlyaPh.D.studentattheSchool
ofComputerScienceandTechnologyattheBeijing
Institute of Technology, China. His major research
interestsincludeinformationvisualization.
Guoren Wang received the BSc, MSc, and PhD
degreesincomputersciencefromNortheasternUni-
versity,China,in1988,1991,and1996,respectively.
Currently, he is a professor with the Beijing In-
stitute of Technology, China. His research interests
Runfei Li received her BS degree in Computer
include XML data management, query processing
Science from Beijing Institute of Technology in
and optimization, bioinformatics, high-dimensional
2022. She is currently a master student at the
indexing, parallel database systems, and P2P data
SchoolofComputerScienceandTechnologyatthe
management.
Beijing Institute of Technology, China. Her ma-
jor research interests include data visualization and
human-computerinteraction.