The computational power of a human society:
a new model of social evolution
David H. Wolpert
Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM, 87501
http://davidwolpert.weebly.com
Kyle Harper
University of Oklahoma, 660 Parrington Oval, Norman, OK 73069
Santa Fe Institute, 1399 Hyde Park Road, Santa Fe, NM, 87501
http://kyleharper.net
August 19, 2024
Abstract
Social evolutionary theory seeks to explain increases in the scale and
complexity of human societies, from origins to present. Over the course of
thetwentiethcentury,socialevolutionarytheorylargelyfelloutoffavorasa
wayofinvestigatinghumanhistory,justasadvancesincomplexsystemssci-
enceandcomputersciencesawtheemergenceofpowerfulnewconceptions
ofcomplexsystems, andinparticularnewmethodsofmeasuringcomplex-
ity. We propose that these advances in our understanding of complex sys-
tems and computer science should be brought to bear on our investigations
intohumanhistory. Tothatend, wepresentanewframeworkformodeling
how human societies co-evolve with their biotic environments, recogniz-
ing that both a society and its environment are computers. This leads us
to model the dynamics of each of those two systems using the same, new
kind of computational machine, which we define here. For simplicity, we
construeasocietyasasetofinteractingoccupationsandtechnologies. Sim-
ilarly,undersuchamodel,abioticenvironmentisasetofinteractingdistinct
ecologicalandclimaticprocesses. Thisprovidesnovelwaystocharacterize
social complexity, which we hope will cast new light on the archaeological
and historical records. Our framework also provides a natural way to for-
malize both the energetic (thermodynamic) costs required by a society as
it runs, and the ways it can extract thermodynamic resources from the en-
1
4202
guA
61
]AM.sc[
1v16880.8042:viXravironment in order to pay for those costs — and perhaps to grow with any
left-overresources.
1 Introduction
How and why have human societies grown in scale and complexity over time?
When H. sapiens emerged around 300,000 years ago, humans lived in small
bands of hunter-gatherers; energy harvest per capita was of the order of bodily
metabolism (i.e. a small multiple of 2000 kC/per capita/per day); global popu-
lation was low (∼ 104); and social roles were relatively unspecialized. The first
humans had technology (fire, stone tools) and impressive cognitive abilities. To-
day, however, with essentially identical cognitive capacity, H. sapiens numbers 8
billion individuals; we consume ∼ 104−5 kC/per capita per day; and we inhabit
globe-spanningsocialnetworksthatfacilitateextremespecialization[60,61].
Social evolutionary theories attempt to explain this growth over time in uni-
versalcross-culturalterms[14,76]. Here,weproposeanewframeworkforsocial
evolutionary history grounded in the theory of computation. While existing theo-
riesofsocialevolutionemphasizegainsinfreeenergyharvesting(largelyaccom-
plished with improved technology) as the crucial factor in human expansion, we
arguethatcoupledincreasesinenergyharvestingandinformationprocessingbet-
ter describe the success of our species. Our first goal is to construct a framework
that could provide a more fundamental definition of what human social complex-
ity is, grounded in theories of algorithmic and / or computational complexity.
Another goal is to provide a richer model of the dynamics of growth, seen as the
interplayofinformationprocessingandenergyharvesting.
Our idea is motivated by the success of computation-centered approaches in
biology. Already Erwin Schroedinger, several years before the discovery of the
DNA molecule, recognized that living systems must maintain themselves away
from thermal equilibrium by consuming free energy and processing information
(following an “elaborate code-script,” as he put it) [78]. He also intuited the ne-
cessity of an “aperiodic crystal” for the storage of biological information that
guides this process. In addition, the theory of “Major Evolutionary Transitions”
(METs [85, 40]) in the history of life provides an important paradigm in which
radical changes in biological information storage and processing led to major
leaps in the complexity of the biosphere. More generally, there have recently
been approaches to theoretical biology grounded in computer science, which are
providing new insights into what life is and how it operates [42, 2]. The modern
viewisthatorganismsandbiologicalsystemscanbeviewedasessentiallycompu-
tationalmachines,whichprocessinputstoproduceoutputs. Thenetresultofthat
processing is forms of biological organization that reliably transmit information
2tofuturegenerations.
In light of this work in evolutionary biology, we view the emergence of the
social systems of modern humans in the Holocene as an ongoing MET. In this
current MET, human culture represents a new medium, complementary to DNA,
for the accumulation and transmission of information about the external environ-
ment. A human society uses information, acquired and stored over the current
and previous generations, to process inputs from its environment and to pro-
duce outputs, which are actions that it takes on that environment. In this sense,
a human society is fundamentally a computer. We describe social evolution as
the growth of humanity’s collective metabolic-computational capacities. We are
pursuing Schroedinger’s observation that “living matter, while not eluding the
‘laws of physics’ as established up to date, is likely to involve ‘other laws of
physics’ hitherto unknown, which, however, once they have been revealed, will
form just as integral a part of this science as the former.” Those laws, we believe,
requireaccountingforincreasingcomplexityviatheinterplayofcomputationand
metabolism—onscalesrangingfromcellstosocieties.
Whatisthe“information”storedinahumansocietyandhowisitusedtoper-
form“computations”ontheenvironment? Wearguethatthisinformationisgiven
bythealgorithmicinstructionsthatthesocietyrunsinordertopropagateitselfinto
the future. More concretely, we propose that computation in social systems is the
interaction of social agents with each other and with the environment to harvest
energy,toreshapetheenvironment,toreproduce,andtoacquirenewinformation.
Over time, human societies have grown in scale and complexity because (to bor-
row terms from the economics literature) the collective “stock of knowledge” or
“stockofideas”storedinhumanculturehasgrown.
In essence, we propose to formalize the stock of knowledge as “information.”
In this view, ultimately it is not our brainpower nor our sociality (both of which
are important to human success) that accounts for the apparent exceptionalism of
H. sapiens in the stream of evolution. Rather it is our use of symbolic language,
computationally powerful enough to support recursion and self-reference. So-
phisticated verbal language, later amplified by information technology like writ-
ing and digital computers, allows the accumulation of information over time in
culture [71, 39]. Culture, here, is the totality of the rules, recipes, blueprints, and
instructionsoperatedbyasociety.
As one strategy for identifying and measuring the stock of information in
human societies, we propose here a proxy: occupational specialization. Since
Adam Smith, specialization has been acknowledged as a main feature of eco-
nomicgrowth. InSmith’swords,“Itisthegreatmultiplicationoftheproductions
of all the different arts, in consequence of the division of labor, which occasions,
inawellgovernedsociety,thatuniversalopulencewhichextendsitselftothelow-
est ranks of the people” [84]. An occupation is like an ensemble of algorithms, a
3set of programs for how to interact with other agents and ultimately the external
environment. An occupation is in essence a work tape, encoding instructions for
performingcomputations. Occupationalspecializationhasdramaticallyincreased
over the course of human history, as societies have grown and learned to perform
a greater variety of operations on the environment. We propose that occupational
specialization offers a practical, coarse-grained way to define and measure social
complexity in computational terms, and it might simultaneously illuminate the
dynamicsofgrowthovertime.
Incaseitisnotapparent,wedonotproposetotakeafinishedbodyofthought
and apply it to the domain of human cultural evolution, then emerge with neat
answers. We think that ultimately models of information and computation might
also gain by greater dialogue with the social sciences, which present important
real-world applications (but resist the sort of clean mathematization favored in
textbooksoninformationtheoryandcomputation). Ifweareright,theroadahead
isarduous. Butbecauseinformationprocessingissofundamentaltotheuniverse,
and to the nature of complexity, it is worth trying to reimagine the evolution of
humansocietiesasastoryinwhichcomputationiscentral.
1.1 Where we are and where we want to be
In conventional historical social sciences, or some climate change time-series
analysis, or some time-series analysis of epidemics, or even in vast swathes of
evolutionary biology and allometric scaling theory, one can write down an ex-
tremely flexible set of parameterized equations for the dynamics of the variables
that one is interested in (and can measure). Then one fits the parameters of those
equations to a data set of observations, to infer the dynamic laws governing the
system. Atroot,suchanapproachisphenomenological,consideringobservations
ofhowvariousaspectsofthesystems(andofhumansocietiesinparticular)evolve
over time, and using statistical analyses to provide insight into this phenomenol-
ogy.
We think that it would be extremely useful to pursue such approaches fur-
ther,tailoredtoinvestigatingthedynamicsofhumansocietiesrangingacrosspre-
history (early Holocene) through the modern era. (Arguably, that is precisely the
goaloftheongoingresearchintheSeshatproject[94,80].)
However, such a phenomenological approach cannot give us any insight into
the otherMETs notinvolving humansocieties; most ifnot alldeeper understand-
ingarisingfromapplyingthisapproachwouldbe“one-off”,notdirectlytransfer-
able to different situations. And perhaps most importantly, there is no sense in
which either information theory or computation modeling per se can play a role
in this approach. Under such a phenomenological approach, the only role that
the computation performed by a human society might play is to provide a moti-
4vationforahandfulofdefinitionsof“complexitycharacteristics”(tousetheterm
in the Seshat project, which is distinct from the use of the term in computer sci-
ence theory). Quantifying systems in terms of such complexity characteristics is
analogous to characterizing a modern digital computer into three levels: strong,
moderate or weak. It does not say anything specific about what computation is
actuallybeingperformedonthatdigitalcomputer.
While we think it will be productive to pursue the conventional, phenomeno-
logical approach, we also hope to make progress on a fundamentally more chal-
lengingmodelingexercise.
Nobody at present has a clear idea of how best to model computational sys-
temsoutsideofthepurelymathematical,non-physicalstructuresconsideredinCS
theoryortheirdirecttranslationsintostatisticalphysicsmodels. (See[103]forthe
former and see [102] for further discussion of the latter point.) But at the same
time, with a few exceptions focusing on biology (work by Gershenson, Zenil and
Chaitininparticularcomestomind),therehasneverbeenaconcertedefforttotry
to figure out just how to do that. Certainly it has never been extensively pursued
inthecontextofdeephistory.
This essay maps out how such a project might be envisioned. In the next
section (Section 2), we briefly discuss existing definitions of social complexity
and introduce our own approach, grounded in computational terms. Next (Sec-
tion 3), motivated by considerations of what data sets are available, we propose
a novel proxy for the “computational complexity” of human societies over time,
taking occupational diversity as a metric. In the final five sections (4-8), we in-
troduceafirst-principlesmodelofhumansocietiesascomputersandsuggesthow
we might capture the dynamics of social evolution, considered as the growth of
computational-metaboliccapacities.
We emphasize that the goals of this exploratory paper are to stimulate con-
versation about a research agenda rather than provide conclusive answers. We
wouldexpectpursuingsuchresearchmightreviseorfillout(orreplace)theideas
sketchedinpreliminaryformhere.
2 Framing Social Complexity
What is social complexity? A full discussion lies beyond the scope of this essay,
butwedowishtoretracesomestepswheresocialtheorycouldhavetakenadiffer-
ent path inthe 20th century. We willalso introduce and discussa new framework
for considering human social complexity. The hope is that a formal definition of
social complexity, along with the associated framework that involves both com-
putation and the harvesting of free energy by human societies, could address the
deepmysteriesofthegrowthofhumansocietiesinaricherway.
5Tobegin,weobservethattwocrucialintellectualdevelopmentshaveunfolded
since the middle of the twentieth century. First, evolutionary models of human
history went mostly out of favor. This happened because the historical sciences
turned away from hopes for unity with the natural sciences [35, 62]. Second,
theoretical computer science (CS) took shape as a scientific field, with major ad-
vances in the definition and understanding of complexity [55, 81, 3, 52]. While
there has been important cross-fertilization between CS, physics, and biology, to
date there has been little overlap between the study of complex systems from a
computationalperspectiveandtheevolutionarystudyofhumansocieties. Wewill
argue that social complexity is a quantity proportionate to a society’s computa-
tionalpower.
2.1 A brief intellectual history of social evolution
Inlargepart,thislackofcontactbetweenthesefieldsisduetotheconfigurationof
academicdisciplines. Whenthemodernresearchuniversitytookshapeinthelate
19thcentury,anenduringdivisionoflabortookholdinthewaythepastisallotted
to different fields [82]. The pre-human past was allotted to scientists (e.g. geolo-
gists,paleontologists,andbiologists). Theprehistorichumanpastwasassignedto
anthropologists, who would specialize in the study of “primitive” societies either
through ethnography or archaeology. Meanwhile, the last few thousand years –
the period of governments and writing – became the domain of historians. This
arbitrarydivisionstillaffectsthestudyofsocialevolution.
Initsearlydecades,anthropologywasdominatedbysocial-evolutionarymod-
els [95, 59], which proposed a progression from simple or primitive society to
moreadvancedcivilization. Fromthefirstpartofthe20thcentury,anthropologists
reactedagainstexistingstadialmodelsofsocialevolution. Therewere,tobesure,
western imperialist biases baked into this normative, progressive model of social
evolution, which was sometimes influenced by crude social Darwinism [49]. In
reaction, Franz Boas and his influential students proposed relativist definitions
of culture. The anti-evolutionary stance was then reinforced by the ascendancy
of hermeneutic methods in anthropology and the humanities more generally. It
would be hard to overstate the influence of the so-called “linguistic turn” in pro-
fessional, academic fields such as anthropology and history. The idea that the
study of the humanities was a pursuit apart from the study of nature was not new
(atthebeginningofthecentury,WilhelmDiltheyhadarguedformethodsspecific
to Geisteswissenschaften apart from the Naturwissenschaften). But the linguistic
turncementedtheideathatthehumanitieswereconcernedwiththeinterpretation
of each culture in all its particularity. In this view, developed in the work of Clif-
fordGeertz,humancultureisawebofmeaning,andtheobjectiveofanthropology
or history is to interpret culture – to understand rather than to explain sequences
6of cultural development over time [31]. Qualitative methods were ascendant over
quantitative ones, while paradigms drawing inspiration from the natural sciences
werebrandedas“reductionist” [35].
As has been pointed out ( [60], among others), this work criticizing social
evolution does nothing to invalidate the possibility of an objective and neutral
measurement of social complexity. A more complex society is not intrinsically
“higher” or “better.” But it is more complex. While research on the dynamics of
social complexity has survived (and thrived) in pockets of anthropology, in the
discipline of academic history, formal, mathematical frameworks were banished
withalmostreligiouszeal. Overthesecondhalfofthetwentiethcentury,academic
history, as a field, came to prefer qualitative over quantitative methods, to reject
scientific models of explanation (on the ground that they are reductionist), and to
focus on particularities over generalities. As Ian Morris has noted, whereas most
social-sciencefieldsmaintainahealthytensionbetweeninterpretiveandexplana-
tory approaches, the commitment of historians “to humanistic and particularistic
questionsandmethodsvergedonmonomaniacal”[62].
As a lingering consequence of the 19th-century division of labor, anthropol-
ogists still tend to study relatively small-scale, simple societies, and this is espe-
cially true of anthropologists who are most open to evolutionary thinking. “Cul-
turalevolutionists”incontemporaryanthropologyuserigorousevolutionarymod-
elstohelpilluminatethewaysinwhichcultureisadaptiveandmightbetransmit-
ted; in particular, “cumulative cultural evolution” helps to explain how foraging
societies can solve complicated problems via the accumulation and transmission
ofknowledge,storedinculture[38,83,12]. Historians,bycontrast,mostlystudy
the last few thousand years of the past, and since evolutionary models are effec-
tively taboo, there are few evolutionary models that try to account for the spec-
tacular growth of human societies in the late Holocene. The net result is that
evolutionary models of human history have been nurtured mostly on the margins
of anthropology, or within other fields altogether (such as economic history, or
the “big history” which is mostly written by physicists and biologists), or among
dissidentslikeMorris.
Thus,someonenaivelyinterestedinhowhumansocietieshavegrowninscale
and complexity would be surprised to learn that there does not exist a terribly ro-
bustliteratureonwhatsocialcomplexityisorhowwehaveachievedit. Thereare
of course exceptions . Even as Boasian relativism was ascendant, the anthropol-
ogist Leslie White sought to reformulate an evolutionary model on more neutral
grounds, centered on energy (his model is focused on the following “equation”:
culture=energytimestechnology)[98]. OtherssuchasElmanServicedeveloped
a definition of social complexity based on “levels of hierarchy,” (e.g. band, tribe,
chiefdom, state) [79]. A handful of efforts over the decades have also tried to
measure social complexity in terms of interaction, differentiation, or simple scale
7(e.g. thesizeofthelargestsettlement)[63,15,22,30].
The paradigm of Big History addresses the question of social complexity and
very often focuses on energy capture and exchange [16, 87]. However, it has so
far not deeply engaged with informational or computational measures of system
behavior, or models of dynamics grounded in information theory and / or CS the-
ory(thoughsee[17]forthoughtsinthisdirection). Aparalleleffortisrepresented
bycliodynamics. Cliodynamicshasinspiredanambitiousresearchagendaaround
socialcomplexity,notablytheSeshatproject[94]. Whilemostofitspractitioners
are amenable to evolutionary models, cliodynamics has so far not engaged exten-
sively with CS theory or information theory. Most work in this vein, moreover,
has so far focused on the development of agrarian societies; the Seshat data go
as late as 1900 in some cases, but it is fair to say that the dataset is not designed
to offer insights into the dramatic increases in the complexity characteristics of
modern industrial and post-industrial societies. In many world regions, maximal
complexitywasreachedhundredsorthousandsofyearsago.
The study of modern growth has largely been the domain of economics, and
here there are many potential points of engagement. First, there is the literature
on economic complexity, which, while not historical in its orientation, provides
richmodelsanddatasetsforcontemporaryeconomies[37]. Morehistorically,the
“newinstitutionaleconomics”highlightstheimportanceof(formalandinformal)
rules in shaping exchange and production [64]. We would simply translate these
insightsintothetermsofCStheory,tosaythatinstitutionsorrulesarepartofthe
way that agents interact to process information. Much work in growth theory has
underscored the importance of ideas and innovations in increasing productivity.
Joel Mokyr, for instance, traces the breakthrough to modern growth back to the
spread of practical, empirical science [56]. “Unified growth theory” focuses on
thedynamicalfeedbacksthatencouragetheformationofhumancapitalandleads
to the economic-demographic transition from a Malthusian regime to a regime
of growth [29]. Paul Romer won a Nobel Prize for his seminal contribution to
endogenous growth theory, the “nonrivalry of ideas” [75]. Unlike other goods
that contribute to productivity, ideas are not diminished in being replicated. The
Haber-Bosch process, for example, is based on a chemical reaction for synthesiz-
ing reactive nitrogen; it has contributed as much or more to human well-being as
any innovation, and yet it is a simple recipe or idea that once discovered could be
disseminatedandreplicatedeasily. Mostrealgrowthcanbeattributedtoincreases
in such a stock of knowledge or ideas. We see our proposal as compatible with
these versions of growth theory, but we seek to formalize the nebulous stock of
knowledgeorideasasinformation.
82.2 Computational approaches to complexity in biology
One consequence of the separation of the historical sciences from the natural sci-
ences is that the study of human social evolution has been largely out of touch
with developments in the field of complex systems science. Social evolutionary
models operate with an informal version of what “complexity” is - taking a “you
know it when you see it” approach. But from the 1970s on, important develop-
mentshavehelpedclarifywhatcomplexitymeansinvariousdomains. Acomplex
system is characterized by the interaction of parts, such that the dynamical prop-
erties of the system are emergent from the interaction itself rather than reducible
to the properties of the system’s subcomponents. It should be emphasized that
thereisnoconsensusdefinitionormodelofcomplexity. However,muchprogress
has focused on a cluster of related ideas centered around algorithmic complex-
ity (sometimes called “Kolmogorov complexity,” after the Soviet scholar Andrey
Kolmogorov)andcomputationalcomplexity.
First, CS theory developed the concept of the “algorithmic (Kolmogorov)
complexity of an object (represented as a bit string)”, defining it as the short-
est program one could write in some fixed programming language like Python
that would reproduce that object and then halt. Algorithmic complexity provides
a way to formally capture how much effort needs to be expended in providing
instructionstoacomputerforhowtoconstructanobject.
Complementing this kind of complexity, computational complexity consid-
ers how difficult the actual construction process is [58, 55, 81, 3, 52]. Whereas
algorithmic complexity concerns an individual object (bit string), computational
complexity involves problems, which are defined as (usually) an infinite set of
questions of the form, “What is the optimal value of {...} in situation {...}?”, us-
ing some pre-defined notion of “optimal”. A famous example is the “traveling
salesman” problem (TSP), defined as all instances of the question, “What is the
shortest possible route a salesman could follow that connects a set of cities at the
following coordinates?” [58, 81, 55, 3]. Computational complexity asks, “As the
numberofbitsittakestospecifythesituationgrows,howfastmusttheresources
required by a program to answer the associated question increase?” As an ex-
ample, if we take “resources” to mean the time the program takes, computational
complexitywouldconsiderquestionslike,“AsIincreasethenumberofcitiesina
TSP question, how much extra time must be taken by any program to answer the
questioncorrectly?”
Whilethesenewideasofcomplexityhaveleftlittle(ifany)impactonthestudy
of human social evolution, they have had a deep impact in evolutionary biology.
The discovery of DNA in the 1950s confirmed Schroedinger’s intuition, and the
flowering of genetics has underscored that information is central to life. Biologi-
cal inheritance is the transmission of information about the environment and how
9to do computations in the environment in a molecular substrate. In the words of
Richard Dawkins, “what lies at the heart of every living thing is not a fire, not
warmbreath,notasparkoflife... itisinformation,words,instructions”[21]Se-
lection ultimately acts on information [1]. The potential of information-theoretic
notions of complexity inspired Eo¨rs Szathma´ry and John Maynard Smith’s influ-
ential model of METs [89, 88]. These transitions are characterized by changes
in the way that biological information is stored, exchanged, and transmitted. The
canonical METs includes the emergence of life, protocells, genes, the eukaryotic
cell,plastids,multicellularity,eusociality,andhumanlanguage. Thepreciselistis
debated and debatable, but the concept is invaluable, foregrounding the interplay
ofmetabolicandcomputationalcapacitiesinthehistoryoflife.
The eukaryotic cell - arguably the most important development in evolution
after the emergence of life itself, and the basis for all complex organisms - is
a perfect example. In its mature form, the eukaryotic cell combines revolution-
ary increases in information storage and processing with much more powerful
metabolic systems (epitomized by the mitochondrion). This is illustrated by the
leapinpowerharnessedperunitofinformationinthetransitionfromprokaryotes
toeukaryotes(Fig. 1).
The computation-centered view of biology helps to explain what is, from a
physics perspective, the central conundrum of life: how, in a universe dominated
bytheSecondLawofThermodynamics,livingsystemsreducelocalentropy,cre-
ating order and organization [32]. The growth of the biosphere is driven by cou-
pled increases in the metabolic-computational capacities of living systems; evo-
lutionisakindof“Maxwell’sdemon”thatsievesforinformationthatcanexploit
free energy to reproduce itself [48]. The information stored in living systems is
information about the external environment. It is “how-to” information, ensem-
bles of algorithms for how to self-assemble, how to observe the external envi-
ronment, how to harvest free energy, how to act in and modify the environment,
how to interact with other agents (conspecifics, predators, prey, etc.), and how to
reproduce. For example, oxygenic photosynthesis, from this perspective, is an
algorithm, a supremely successful set of step-by-step instructions for operating a
chemical transformation that turns carbon dioxide, water, and sunlight into sugar.
The “idea” of photosynthesis, which can be translated into chemical or even bi-
narysymbols,isinformation(6CO +6H O → C H O +6O mayindeedoffer
2 2 6 12 6 24
more“bangperbit”thananyothergeneticalgorithmonEarth).
Needless to say, informational and computational approaches to biology are
not always appropriate or useful at a given level of investigation. But they are
truly fundamental, related to the deep connection between the rules of the living
worldandthephysicaluniverse. Theyhelptoaddressthebiggestquestionsabout
the expansion of life. The “other laws of physics” that Schroedinger foresaw are
thelawsofcomplexity-ofemergenceandinteraction,shapedandconstrainedby
10a
10-10
. •
•
•
--- •
•
..--
I
Q)
10-13� LanaenM da rEtuikna rAyvoetrea ge
C
Q)
s--0)
1o- 16
[ L anaenM da rPtrionk aArvyeortaeg e
Q)
C
Q)
(9 10-19� •
.
PrediMcatxeidmS uimz e
L.
Q)
a.
L.
Q)
3: 10-22
0 � :O bserMviendi mSuimz e
a..
10 22 10-20 10-18 10-16 10-14
3
)
CelVlo lu(mme
Figure 1: Scaling of metabolic rate to cell volume. The y-axis represents the
power harnessed per unit of information, in watts per gene, with prokaryote and
eukaryoteaveragesingreylines. Figurefrom [45].
theinterplayofmetabolismandcomputation. Weproposethattheseotherlawsof
physicsbeextendedtohumansocialevolution.
Just as the long-run growth of the biosphere (measured in biomass, energy
harvestingandexchange,andcomplexity)isacentralquestionofmacroevolution,
sothelong-rungrowthofhumansocieties isthecentralquestionofhumansocial
evolution. We agree with Maynard Smith and Szathma´ry that the emergence of
humans marks a MET and that language is central to this transmission. Yet it
is not just the emergence of our species that requires exploration in these terms.
The last 300K years of human history can be considered an ongoing MET. We
take growth - in scale, metabolism, and computational complexity - as the proper
explanandumsocialevolutionarytheory.
In the sequel we present a mathematical definition of a new kind of computa-
11tionalmachine,andourframeworkformodelingtheco-evolutionofasocietyand
its environment as the joint dynamics of two of these machines. We had several
goals when constructing this framework, which in some senses were at cross-
purposes. Foremost,wewanttheframeworktobewell-suitedtoinvestigatingthe
issuesdescribed. Inadditionthoughwewantittobepossible(oratleastconceiv-
able) to gain insight into its behavior using purely mathematical analysis, e.g., by
appropriately extending CS theory. We also tried to ensure that the framework
can be gainfully applied to investigate multiple METs, not just the current one.
These goals drove us to try to formulate as simple a framework as possible, i.e.,
as“coarse-grained”aframeworkaswecould. Ontheotherhand,anothergoalwe
hadwasthatitbepossibletoreadilytailortheframeworktothespecialcaseofthe
development of human societies. In particular, we want it to be possible to tailor
the framework to incorporate the kinds of data sets we either now have or will in
the near future. This drove us to try to formulate as rich a framework as possible,
i.e., as “fine-grained” a framework as we could. Trying to meet these opposing
goals led us to a framework that is “moderate-grained”, in the same sense as the
frameworksin[96,97,25,10,11,5]
3 Measuring Computational Complexity in Human
Societies: A New Proxy
Thereisastraightforwardreasonwhyenergyharvestinghasbeenanappealingin-
dexofsocialevolution. Energyharvestingcanbemeasuredinobjective,quantifi-
able units (calories or joules) which are physically constant over time and space,
permitting direct comparison: 500 kC of antelope meat on the African savan-
nah 100Kya can be directly compared with 500kC of quinoa salad in a Santa Fe
bistroin2023. Butwhatismeasurableisnotnecessarilywhatisimportant-orin
thiscase,isnotthewholestory. Eventhoughinformationisalsoafundamentally
physicalentity,quantifiableinbits,itismuchmorechallenginginpracticetomea-
sure information storage and processing outside of simple systems or mechanical
computing devices. It is far from clear how much computation is occurring even
in simple cellular operations that can be directly observed in laboratory condi-
tions. Measuring information and computation in human societies is a daunting
challenge. Forpastsocieties,yetmorechallengingstill.
Variousproxiesforcomputationcouldbeenvisioned. Previouseffortstomea-
suresocialcomplexityhavefocusedonhierarchy,interaction,differentiation,and
scale. Seshat amalgamates these kinds of measures, rigorously assembling cross-
cultural data while leaning informally on the intuition that more interaction and
larger scale means higher complexity. Indeed, we believe that all of these indices
12correctlypointtowardamorefundamentalrealitythatliesincomputationalcom-
plexity.
3.1 Occupations as (computing) machines
Motivated by considerations of what data sets are available, part of our focus in-
volves using occupational specialization, as a novel proxy for the computational
power of a human society. (Though see [37], who in a similar spirit suggest
thinking of the knowledge or expertise employed by an individual in terms of
“personbytes”). Anoccupationisajoboraprofession. Itisasocialrolecentered
on labor, irrespective of the extent to which that labor is implicated in market ex-
change. Occupations can be more or less specialized and require higher or lower
degreesofskilland/ortraining. SinceAdamSmith,thedivisionoflaborhasbeen
recognizedasahallmarkofeconomicgrowth. Smithemphasizedthatthedivision
oflaborislimitedbytheextentofthemarket,butasGaryBeckerandKevinMur-
phy long ago observed, specialization is also constrained by coordination costs
and—crucially—thetotalstockofknowledge[8]. Thelastisaparticularlypro-
found insight, although remarkably it has had little influence. We wish to build
on it by leveraging the fact that occupational specialization therefore reflects the
stock of knowledge. Ceteris paribus, the occupations that exist in a given soci-
ety embody the totality of what a society knows how to do. Thus, occupational
specialization reflects both diversification (the expansion of the number of things
thatasocietyknowshowtodo)anddivisionoflabor(thefiner-grainedseparation
of functions and tasks in an economy, as in Smith’s pin factory). Occupational
specializationoffersthepotentialtogetatthetotalinformationstoredinaculture
andtheprocessingofthatinformation,i.e. computation.
The importance that we assign to occupational specialization as an index is
compatible with theories of economic growth that emphasize the total stock of
knowledge or ideas (ultimately turned into innovations) as the most fundamental
cause of long-term gains in productivity (e.g. [24, 41, 47]). In this view, ad-
vances in the Scientific Revolution (e.g. Newtonian mechanics) were ultimately
translatedbyengineersandentrepreneursintousefulproductivity-enhancingtech-
nological innovations like steam engines (and there are extensive literatures on
how discoveries become innovations, who mediates this process, the extent to
which innovation is evolutionary, etc.). The Industrial Revolution was transfor-
mationalnotbecausecoalwassuddenlyavailable(itwasalwaysthere),butrather
because societies learned how to exploit fossil energy by creating blueprints of
steamenginesthattransformedthemining,textile,manufacturing,andtransporta-
tion sectors. The Industrial Revolution was, in our terms, a revolution that cou-
pled increases in information processing and energy harvesting; for the first time
in our history, these increases were of a speed and magnitude to permit escape
13from the Malthusian trap. The Second Industrial Revolution (ca. 1880-1930)
wasspurredbybasicdiscoveriesinchemistryandelectromagnetism,whicheven-
tually produced massive innovation (light bulbs, electricity, telecommunications,
fertilizersynthesis,polymers,pharmaceuticals,internalcombustionengines,etc.)
that spread to scale worldwide over the 20th century. In recent decades, the mass
production of microprocessors has been arguably the most important innovation.
We imagine that the aggregate stock of information encompasses the basic sci-
ence (e.g. Maxwell’s equations) and practical implementation (silicon is a good
material for circuits); this aggregate stock of information is then reflected in the
composition of an economy’s occupations (e.g. research chemist, software pro-
grammer). AsHayeksaw,perhapsthemostamazingthingthateconomiesdoisto
coordinatevastamountsofknowledge,eventhoughindividualagentsthemselves
onlyhaveaccesstoatinyproportionofthatknowledge.
In our formal model (presented in the following sections) each occupation
(along with each technology) is considered a distinct machine. A society is con-
sidered a computational agent comprised of multiple interacting machines. Any
human society is running numerous distinct algorithms simultaneously at each
timestep. The reason why occupational specialization is appealing for our pur-
poses is straightforward: an occupation can be considered an ensemble of algo-
rithmsforinteractingwiththeenvironmentandwithothersocialagents. Consider
inaqualitativewaysomeoftheoperationsentailedbyfamiliaroccupations:
Hunter:
-Ifitisspring,hideupwindofnarrowdefilewherepreypasses
-Aimarrowtowardcentralchestcavityoflarger,olderprey
-Cleanpreytoconsumemuscleandorgans
-Leavemuscletissuesoversmokeforhourstoreserveforlaterconsumption
Farmer:
-IfPleiadesarestillinvisibleatdawn,plantwheat
-Manure,weed,harvest,winnow
-Allocategrossharvestbetweentaxes,consumption,seed,andstorage
Chemicalengineer:
-If market signals indicate demand for fertilizer, start by creating iron-based
catalyst
-Extracthydrogenfrommethane
-Circulate nitrogen and hydrogen over catalyst at high pressure and tempera-
turetoproduceammonia
Severalcategorizationsofoccupationalspecializationsalreadyexist[86]. Each
oftheseschemaisorganizedhierarchically,withvaryingresolution(e.g. theU.N.
scheme recognizes 436 occupations at the most detailed level, the E.U. scheme
3008); each also includes a description of the tasks or skills involved in each oc-
cupation. There is also a classification known as HISCO (Historical International
14Standard of Classification of Occupations), developed by researchers interested
in the history of occupations [51]. Building on these existing efforts, we propose
to develop a cross-cultural ontology categorizing occupational specialization, to
allowcomparisonandmeasurementovertimeandspace.
Theideaofalgorithmiccomplexitywouldsuggestthatasociety’scomplexity
isrelatedtothelengthinbitsoftheshortestprogramrequiredtoexecutethecom-
putations necessary for the society to maintain and reproduce itself. In practice,
algorithmic complexity is almost always impossible to measure, and our case is
noexception. Wewouldneedtoaccountfortheprograms,circuits,andstrategies
through which these occupational algorithms interact. But as a first approxima-
tion, we propose that the number of distinct occupations necessary to maintain
andreproduceasocietyisareasonablemeasureofasociety’scomplexity.
Weimmediatelyseenon-trivialwaysinwhichthismeasurementmightbetoo
limited even on its own terms. First, not all occupations are created equal, and
some occupations are presumably more computationally complex than others. A
nuclear physicist may execute more algorithms, and more complex algorithms,
than a beet farmer. It would be fruitful to explore this possibility by considering
proxies for the computational complexity of a given occupation, such as years of
training required. Second, two identical sets of occupations might interact in dif-
ferentways,permittingmeaningfullymoreorlesscomplexcomputations. There-
fore, the density and nature of interactions between occupations are important, as
are the network structures that reflect how occupations communicate. Third, dif-
ferent algorithms, singly or in combination, may offer greater “bang per bit.” In
otherwords,somealgorithms(orsomeoccupations)mayhaveadisproportionate
thermodynamiceffectonasociety.
3.2 Specialization, scaling, and change
We observe two stylized facts that support the use of occupational specialization
as a proxy. First, in the present, occupational specialization is strongly correlated
withpercapitawealth,underscoringthelinkbetweenproductivityandspecializa-
tion(Figure2).
Second,occupationalspecializationincreasesovertime,mirroringothermea-
sures of social complexity such as largest city-size, levels of hierarchy, etc. We
also believe that our proxy has the potential to capture recent (last 200 years)
increases in social complexity in a more fine-grained way than existing measure-
ments. Consider, as a first approximation, the number of unique words used by
census respondents to describe their occupation between 1850 and 1940 in U.S.
cities(Figure3).
Citiesaresocialreactors,creatingdensenetworksfortheflowofinformation.
It has been observed that most socio-economic metrics of modern cities (from
15Occupations and Average Income, US Cities
100000
90000
80000
70000
60000
50000
40000
30000
20000
10000
0
0 100 200 300 400 500 600 700 800 900
Number of Distinct Occupations (US-SOC)
Figure 2: Average income rises with occupational specialization. US Metropoli-
tan Statistical Areas, 2021; US-SOC classification, BLS data; three outliers
(Odessa,SanJose,Midland)omitted.
income to creativity to crime) scale according to a power law, whereas occupa-
tional diversity scales logarithmically, “illustrating the crucial role that diversity
has in fostering a strong economy” [9, 105]. This is an important insight, and
indeed it suggests that occupational diversity is a critical ingredient in the growth
of cities and the complexity of human societies more generally. In turn, occu-
pational specialization is constrained by various factors, including the extent of
the market and coordination costs (both of which are shaped by variables such as
institutions,technology,andtransportationinfrastructurethatarehighlypertinent
to understanding how a society processes information), in addition to what inter-
estsusmostimmediately,thestockofinformationitself(i.e. thestockofideasor
knowledgeintheeconomist’sterms).
Consider the observation that occupational diversity scales logarithmically
withurbanpopulationsize(Figure4,fromIPUMSdata;seealso [9]).
Evenaroughevaluationoftherelationshipbetweenoccupationaldiversityand
16
)DSU(
emocni
atipac
rePFigure 3: Number of unique words (minus articles, prepositions) used by census
respondents in US cities to describe occupation; each dot is a US city; 1 percent
sample,datasource: IPUMS.
urban population over time suggests interesting variation, however. Occupational
diversity in US cities was distinctly lower in the 1940s (in the aftermath of the
Second Industrial Revolution) than at present, and lower still in the 1850s (in the
midstoftheFirstIndustrialRevolution). Inpreindustrialtimes,specializationwas
evenmoreconstrained. Itisnotsimplythaturbanpopulationsweresmallerinthe
past. Forinstance,ifancientRomeexistedintoday’surbannetwork,withitspop-
ulation of 1M, we would predict it to have ca. 400 unique occupations, whereas
in fact it has fewer than half of that (based on a count of occupational designa-
tions in inscriptions and texts from the Roman Empire, which we are working
to categorize according to our ontology; see also [34, 44]). To some extent, these
differencesaresensitivetothedifficultyofmaintainingoccupationalclassification
atconsistentresolutionacrosstimeandspace. Butnotentirely. AncientRomedid
not have chemical engineers, software developers, flight attendants, web design-
ers,etc.,andevenatinfiniteresolution,realshiftshaveoccurredbecausethestock
of information has grown. We hypothesize (as in Figure 5) that the relationship
between occupational specialization and population size has changed as a func-
tion of social evolution - that the computational-metabolic capacities of human
societieshavegrownduetoincreasesinthestockofinformation.
In the future, we intend to build a dataset of occupational diversity in deep
time in order to better understand the relationship between social evolution and
the total stock of information. We plan to exploit past and present census data
17Unique Occupations and Urban Population
500
450
400
350
300
250
200
150
100
0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
Millions
Population
Figure4: Urbanpopulations(millions)anduniqueoccupations,UScities,present
(datasource: IPUMS).
and to deploy text mining methods on large textual datasets (Wikipedia, Google
Books,HathiTrust)toanalyzethehistoryofoccupationalspecialization.
Ourhopeistobeabletoexploitthisdatasettoask:
1) What factors account for increases in occupational diversity? Is it possible
to distinguish the role played by market institutions, coordination costs, and the
stockofinformation?
2)Towhatextentistherecross-culturalstructureinthechangingcomposition
of occupational specialties over time? Could Gutman scaling be used to identify
necessary or probable sequences of occupations in the evolution of complexity
(in the manner of [67])? In other words, are societies universally likely to exhibit
certainoccupationsincertaintemporalsequencesorotherconfigurations?
3) Are there ways to exploit big textual datasets to understand the algorith-
mic complexity of specific occupations as well as the changing complexity of an
18
)SMUPI(
snoitapuccODiversity and Population over Time
# Occupations
Present US
19th century US
Roman Empire
Early agrarian system
Population
Social Evolution /
Computational Complexity
Time
Figure5: Schematicrepresentationofsocialevolutionandscalingofoccupational
diversity(hypothesized).
occupationovertime?
4) Is it possible to associate occupations with metafunctional categories such
as production (e.g. metallurgist), consumption (e.g. entertainer), and information
exchange(e.g. journalist),andtoidentifystructuresofchangeovertime?
5)Isitpossibletounderstandempiricallyhowspecificoccupationsinteractin
networksakintothewaythatcomputerscommunicate(seefollowingsections)?
6) Can changing occupational structures cast light on the macroevolutionary
dynamics of human societies, revealing the relative and changing importance of
processes such as convergent selection, conserved traits, horizontal transmission,
contingency,theevolutionofevolvability,etc. (asin[26])?
7) Using time series or cross-sectional analysis is it possible to understand
the “bang per bit” (in the sense of [46]) of various occupations or algorithms
19or combinations thereof? In the long run, what kinds of increases in the stock of
informationhaveyieldedthegreatestchangesinmetabolismorcomplexity? Does
thechangingpaceofchangehelpilluminatethedeepstructureofsocialevolution?
We believe occupational specialization is a suitable first proxy because crude
historical data are conceivably attainable for deep time and because occupations
plausibly reflect algorithms. However, we hope a computational approach to so-
cial evolution could inspire complementary efforts. It would be valuable to un-
derstand qualitatively and quantitatively how information storage and processing
technologieshavechangedovertime;howdeepchangesinthestructureofscience
andengineeringalterthe“bangperbit”ofdiscovery;andhowsocietiesimplicitly
usealgorithmstosolveproblemsandhowinstitutionsshapesocialcomputation.
4 A computational model of societies
Recall that our ultimate goal is to understand how a change (positive or negative)
intheabilityofasocietytoextractfreeenergyfromitsenvironment(“harvestfree
energy”) affects its abilities to run computations, which in turn affects how much
free energy it can harvest, which in turn affects its abilities to run computations,
andsoon. (SeetheBayesnetillustratedinFig.6.)
Thehopeisthatwecanmodelboththehumansocietyandtheenvironmentas
computers, in the full CS theory sense of the term, that are iteratively interacting
witheachother. Thatmightallowuscouchtheanalysisintermsoftherelationship
between the attributes of two computational machines. It might also allow us to
build upon the extremely rich body of theorems in CS theory. In the sequel, we
will refer to each of those two computers as an “agent”, where as needed, we
clarifywhetherwearediscussingjusttheSocietyagentortheEnvironmentagent.
Inthesectionsfollowingthisoneweintroduceabare-bonesmodelthatwefeel
can serve as a seed for discussing more fully featured models. The hope is that
this model might be simple enough to allow some formal, mathematical analysis,
whileatthesametimehaveitbeeasytoenrichthemodelbyaddinginsightsfrom
datasetsandfromdomainexpertise.
To lay the groundwork for that model of the computational process of inter-
actingagents, inthissectionwefirst introduceourmodelof ofthecomputational
processthathappenswithineachagentindividualy.
The key feature of this computational process that we focus on is that each
agent comprises a set of multiple interacting subsystems (“subagents”) that col-
lectivelyperformthecomputationwithinasingleiteration. Inparticular,ahuman
Societyagentcomprises(themembersof)multipleinteractingoccupations,which
collectively perform the computation the Society does to transform observations
ofthestateoftheEnvironmentintoactionsbackonthatenvironment.
20Figure6: Bayesnetmodelofasingleiterationofhumansocialcomputerinteract-
ing with an environment computer. Green arrows refer to actions actually taken
bytheSocietyAgent,asdescribedinformallyinthecaptions.
The next subsection briefly describes some of the scenarios considered in CS
theory that were direct inspirations for our model for two agents that interact
through an iterative process. In the following subsection we introduce our for-
mal model of the dynamics of an agent within any single such iteration. Then in
the section after this one we describe the the way that two agents jointly interact,
inthefullygeneralcase. Wealsodescribethephysicalmeaningofthevariablesin
this framework, paying special attention to how the framework captures features
of the computation process of an agent. In the following section we describe sev-
eralwaystotailorourframeworkconcerningtwointeractingagentstothespecial
caseofoneagentrepresentingSocietyandonetheEnvironment.
4.1 Inspirations for our model of agent computation
The central feature of the model we introduce is that each agent (both the Soci-
ety agent and the Environment agent) comprises a set of multiple machines. As
described below, in this paper we view each machine in the Society agent as a
separate occupation and / or technology. (However, )we believe the model ex-
tends far more generally, e.g., to usefully capture interactions among individuals,
or among corporations, or among nations, rather than only among occupations
and technologies.) We then have the “society computes” part of the interaction
between the agents shown in Fig. 6 consist of some fixed number of “timesteps”,
inwhichallthemachinesintheSocietyagentcancommunicatewithoneanother
while also performing computations in each timestep based on what they cur-
rently know. In our model, that iterated sequence of interwoven communication
andcomputationishowtheagentasawholecomputes. Accordingly,wecallsuch
an agent an instance of a “multiple communicating machines” (MCMs) model of
computation.
21There were several bodies of CS theory that were inspirations of the MCMs
model. PerhapstheprimaryoneisworkinCStheoryoncommunicationcomplex-
ity[50,72,4,6,27]. Instandardcommunicationcomplexity,therearekmachines
that only send single bits to one another at each timestep, and they must all end
upcalculatingthedesiredfunction, f(x ,...,x )[72]. Thereareseveralwaysthat
1 k
the field of communication complexity has been extended to deal with more than
twointeractingmachinesthough. One,called“simultaneousmessages”(SM),as-
sumes that (like in epistemic logic) each machine i can see x , the joint input of
−i
all the other machines in the society (e.g., all the other bits being output by the
environment). They cannot see their own input [6]. Instead, the work on SM has
every machine send a message to a referee, who sees none of the inputs directly,
and that referee makes the evaluation of f. In our case, that sort of makes sense
asamodelofahierarchy. Inaddition,therehasmorerecentlybeenworkthatisa
“number-in-hand”variantofthisoriginal“number-on-forehead”model. Thisnew
work is called “private simultaneous messages” (PSM), and has every machine i
receiveonlyitsowninput x [7,27].
i
Communication complexity focuses on the minimal number of communica-
tion timesteps needed to jointly calculate a function. We’re actually interested in
something different; how well one can do (e.g., the probability of success) at cal-
culating the function if one has a fixed amount of allowed number of timesteps.
In addition, we are not interested in having every machine in the society agent
calculatetheexactsamefunction.
Another inspiration from CS theory is distributed computing. In particular,
circuitcomplexitytheory[3,81,43]iscloselyrelatedtoourproblem. Perhapsthe
easiest way to understand what this body of work is about is to consider Boolean
functions. A “Boolean function” f over n bits maps any possible sequence of n
“input” bits to a single “output” bit. A “Boolean circuit” is a way to implement
suchaBooleanfunction.
To do this, a Boolean circuit arranges “gates” chosen from some fixed set of
a few types of logical gate, like the logical gates AND, OR and NOT, and feeds
those into one another, in an acyclic fashion, to implement the Boolean function.
Concretely,a“Booleancircuit”isasetofsuchgatesthatarefedintooneanother,
iteratively, through successive layers. The first layer is the sequence of n bits that
are the inputs to f, and the output bit is given by the output value of the (single)
gateinthelastlayerofthecircuit.
There are many measures of the circuit complexity of any given function f.
Examples include the minimal number of gates of any circuit that can implement
that function for all possible input bit strings, and the minimal number of layers
ofanycircuitthatimplementsthatfunctionforallpossibleinputbitstrings.
Otherworkincircuitcomplexitytheoryconsiderscircuitswheretheindividual
gatesperformfarmore(orless!) richinformationprocessingthansimpleBoolean
22primitiveslikeAND,ORandNOT.TheMCMsetupcanbeseenassuchacircuit,
wheretheindividualgatesarefinitestateautomata,whereeachgateateachlayer
has a specially identified parent gate in the previous layer, and sets its initial state
to be the ending state of its parent gate before processing all the inputs it receives
fromtheothergatesinthatpreviouslayer.
MCMs can also be viewed as a special type of a multi-agent system [74]. In
addition, the MCMs model can be viewed as a special case of a collective [100,
92,93,101],whereratherthanan(exact)potentialgame[57,13],wehaveateam
game[54],andthepreciseformofthecommunicationamongthemembersofthe
collectivemustobeymultipleconstraints.
Conversely, cellular automata (CA [99]) can be viewed as a special case of
MCMs. This is done by identifying each cell in a CA as a separate machine in an
associatedMCM.Ingeneral,anMCMhasafarrichergraphofinter-cellulardirect
communication, and a larger state space of each cell, than any CA. In fact, so
impoverishedisthecomputationalabilityofcellinaCA,thatinformationstorage
and processing is typically identified only with inter-cellular dynamics, not with
behavior occurring inside any individual cells [53]. This is in stark contrast with
thecaseofMCMs(andhumansocieties).
AmoreimportantinspirationbehindtheMCMsmodelwastheideaofformal-
izingthecomputationdonebyahumansocietyduringeachiterationasacompu-
tationbyaTuringmachine(TM[81,3,52]. Eachiterationwouldstartwithanew
input provided to that TM by the environment, and that TM would then evolve in
theusualwaythroughasuccessionoftimesteps. Afteritcompletesthenextitera-
tionwouldbegin. ParticularlycompellingistoconsideraTMwithmultiplework
tapes,whereeachtapemodelsadifferentoccupationortechnologyinasociety.
One difficulty with this approach is that TMs halt. That means that there is
no way for a society modeled with a TM to have memory from one iteration to
the next. A natural way around this shortcoming is to suppose that the input to
a society TM at the beginning of each iteration includes its own state at the end
of the previous iteration, in addition to getting information about the state of the
environment. However, unless that “state at the end of the previous iteration” is
extended to include the ending states of the work tape, there would be loss of
memoryofthoseendingstatesfromoneiterationtothenext. Soforexampleeach
occupation would forget what it had previously been thinking. This problem can
be circumvented if we instead model society as a monotone prefix TM (MTM),
i.e.,aTMthatneverhalts,iteratingforever,wherewestipulatethateachiteration
lastsforsomefixednumberτoftimestepsbeforethenextiterationbegins—and
with it arrives the next input from the environment. (Note that imposing such a
value τ is just like the upper bound on the number of allowed timesteps in the
definitionsoftheusualcomputationalcomplexityclasses,e.g.,PorNP.)
However,evenoncewereplaceTMswithMTMsthatrunforexactlyτtimesteps
23in each iteration, there are still two other substantial restrictions that we need to
address if we want to use our formalism to model the computation by a human
society. Thefirstisthattherearerestrictionsinhowmuchtheheadsoneachwork
tapecanmovealongthattapeinasingletimestepinanMTM,whereasthereisno
analogous restriction on how much the state of an occupation or technology can
change in a single timestep. The second restriction is there are no direct ways in
anMTMmodeltoallowdifferentworktapestotalkdirectlywithoneanother.
The model of the society agent that we investigate in this paper is a fully
formal version of an MTM that runs for exactly τ timesteps in each iteration,
with the two restrictions mentioned just above removed. We call this model a
“multiple communicating machines” (MCM) model, using the term “machine”
rather than “work tape”, since the machines do not have restrictions on how they
cancommunicatewithoneanother.
This MCM model will also serve as our model of the computation done by
the environment. The motivation for using the same model for both systems is
that it might allow us to directly compare the computational characteristics of the
society agent and the environment agent. We might then be able to analyze how
theirrelativecomputationalpowersaffectstheabilityofthesocietyagenttogrow
throughtimebyinteractingwiththeenvironmentagent.
4.2 Formal definition of Multiple Communicating Machines
model
In this subsection we first formally define MCMs, and then provide a few ex-
amples, illustrating the role the definitions will play in our investigation of the
interaction between human societies and the environment. After that we make a
few preliminary comments, before going on in Section 5 to introduce our model
oftwointeractingMCMs.
In general, it might be worthwhile to investigate formal models where some
of the following details are simplified (or even removed), and / or some of the
following details are elaborated in more detail. It all has to do with balancing
mathematical / computational tractability of our investigation vs. its empirical
accuracy.
1. There are N machines (or “sub-agents”) in an MCM, indexed by values
v ∈ V. The state space of machine v is X , with elements x . The joint state
v v
ofallthemachinesiswrittenas x ∈ X.
We will abuse terminology and refer to “cardinality of X ”, or write “|X |”,
v v
even though we mean different things depending on the precise type of
space X . For example, if X is finite, then |X | means the number of el-
v v v
ements of X , while if it is a Euclidean space Rn it means the dimension n,
v
24and if in fact the Cantor cardinality of X is at least ℵ , then |X | means the
v 2 v
Cantorcardinalityofthatset.
2. There is a directed graph G with a set of N nodes, V, each of which is
identified with one of the machines. An edge from node v to node v′ is
writtenas(v,v′). Theparentsofnodevarewrittenaspa(v),andthechildren
are written as ch(v). G is called the message graph for reasons that will
becomeclear.
3. There is a set of possible external inputs, E, with elements e, which for
simplicityisthesameforallmachinesv.
4. There is a set of possible (machine) messages, M, with elements m, a set
whichforsimplicityisthesameforallmachinesv.
5. Asshorthand,foreachmachinev,avectorofmessagesm indexedbyma-
v′
chines v′ ∈ pa(v) is written as inv ∈ IN . (Intuitively, during each timestep,
v
machine v will receive a message vector inv from all the machines who are
theparentsofvinthemessagegraph.)
6. Thereisamachine-indexedupdatefunction
f : X ×E×IN → X × M (1)
v v v v v
Theupdatefunction f hasseveralarguments,whichweconsiderinturn.
v
Thefirstargumentoftheupdatefunctionisjustthemachine’sownstate.
Thesecondargumentwillbeidentifiedwithanexternalinpute,whichcon-
cerns the other agent (the one not containing the machine v), and which
machine v sees during each timestep in an iteration. Note that this external
input to v is an extra input to v, in addition to the messages from some of
the other machines in the agent containing machine v. As described below,
within any given iteration of the two-agent Bayes net, the external input to
agentvwillnotchangefromonetimesteptothenext.
Thelastargumentisthevectorofallthemessagesthatvreceivesfromother
machinesinv’sagent. Ingeneral,thesewillchangefromonetimestepinan
iterationtothenext.
Thefirstoutputoftheupdatefunctionofmachinevisastateofmachinev.
The second output of the update function of machine v is a message that
machinevsendstosomeothermachines(asspecifiedinthemessagegraph).
Forsimplicityweassumethateach f isatotal(computable)function,guar-
v
anteed to finish between one timestep and the next, for any triple of argu-
mentstothatfunction.
257. To perform its computation, the MCM runs for a total of τ timesteps. In
each timestept, all machine in the MCM runs theirassociated update func-
tions simultaneously. The state of each such machine v represents whether
ithasbeenactivated(andpotentially,howactiveitis,dependingonourpre-
cise choice of X ). Machine v uses the associated component of the output
v
of its update function to set its state in the next timestep, t + 1. The other
componentoftheoutputofv’supdatefunctionisasinglemessage,m . This
v
message forms the associated input argument in the next timestep to every
machinev′ ∈ ch(v).
Note that for simplicity, we suppose that the messages that each machine v
sends to all the machines in ch(v) each time it runs its update function (i.e., in
each timestep) are identical, not varying from one receiving machine to the next.
Ontheotherhand,thissingleidenticalmessagethatvsendscanchangefromone
timesteptothenext.
4.3 Examples of MCMs
A concrete, physical example of a naturally occurring system that we can model
asanMCMisageneticregulatorynetwork. Inthisexample,eachmachineinthe
MCMmodelofthesystemisidentifiedwithoneofthegenesinthenetwork. The
messages in the MCM would be identified with transcription factors the genes
send to one another. So for example, if transcription factors are transmitted via
diffusion, then the directed edges in the message graph would be defined by pairs
of genes (v ,v ) where v responds to the transcription factor released by v . The
1 2 2 1
externalinputecouldthenbesomevectorofcountsofcertainbiomoleculesfrom
outsideofthecell.
Another example of a system in the natural world that can be modeled with
an MCM is a hunter-gatherer band. In this example, each machine in the MCM
model of the system is identified with an individual person in the band. The
messages in the MCM would be identified with things that the individuals say to
one another (or in some other way signal to one another). The external input e
could then be information that the members of the band collectively gather about
theirenvironment.
A related example — central to this paper — is a (complex) human society.
There are many different versions of this example, depending on what society-
based informational systems we identify with the separate machines. The exam-
ple of such a process that we focus on in this paper is a human occupation. There
aremanyotherprocessesthatweincludeinourmodelaswellthough. Forexam-
ple, we could identify various technologies with some of the machines — in this
26scenario,the“messages”backandforthbetweenindividualoccupationsandtech-
nologieswouldmodeltheusesofthattechnologybymembersofthatoccupation.
Another important process is information storage systems, e.g., libraries. So for
example we could use messages exchanged between individual occupations and
librariesasmodelsofmembersofthoseoccupationsstoringand/orretrievingin-
formationfromthoselibraries. Otherobviousexamplesofindividualmachinesin
a model of a human society include specific bureaucracies, specific corporations,
etc.
We can also model an environment that a human society interacts with as an
MCM. The machines in that MCM could be systems like the weather, plagues,
plants that might be receptive to domestication as food crops, etc. (As tongue-in-
cheek, crude intuition, it may make sense to identify each machine in the envi-
ronmentMCMwithaphenomenoninthenaturalworldthatpolytheisticreligions
ascribed a deity to.) The external input of the Society MCM would be the obser-
vationitmakesofthestateoftheEnvironmentMCM.
Inthisexampleofasocietyandenvironment,wemightalsoinvoketheChurch-
Turing thesis [69, 68] and require that f be Turing-computable for all v. Also on
v
physical grounds, no matter what the computational power of f , it makes sense
v
to require that the time to run it is very small on the timescale of the MCM’s
timesteps,foranyinput f mightreceive.
v
Yet another physical example is a spin glass (or more generally, Potts model,
or some such) undergoing Glauber dynamics. In this example we identify each
machine in the MCM with a separate spin, with the message graph reflecting the
coupling terms in the Hamiltonian of the overall MCM. The external input could
thenbeamagneticfield.
Movingontothedigitalworld,notethatMCMscanbeviewedasinstancesof
parallelcomputers,whichareubiquitousinmodern-daydigitalcomputers. Tosee
this we simply identify each machine in the MCM with a different processor in a
parallelcomputer,withthemessagesamongthosemachinesidentifiedwithinter-
processor communications. (We could augment this with details about shared
memory among the processors, rules for how access conflicts are managed, etc.)
In the same vein, MCMs likely have connections with circuit complexity theory,
whichiscloselyrelatedtothetheoryofparallelcomputation[3,81].
As another more abstract example of an MCM, suppose that we allow τ to be
infinite, and have e be an arbitrarily long sequence of bits. Suppose as well that
every machine v has an N-valued counter n in it (i.e., n is a component of the
v v
vector x ),andthatn increasesby1ineverytimestepforeverymachine. Finally,
v v
assume that for all machinesv, the associated update function f can only depend
v
onbitnumbern ine. Inthiscase,eachmachineintheMCMisaMealymachine.
v
SothefullMCMisasetof N simultaneouslycommunicatingMealymachines.
Finally,it’sworthpointingoutthatallofthemotivatingexamplesgiveninSec-
27tion 4.1 (which do not occur in the real world) can also be formulated as MCMs.
To do this though the machines in the MCM must have countably infinite state
spaces (uncountably infinite, in the case of a CA) and in the case of communica-
tion complexity, the machines would typically be allowed super-Turing computa-
tionalpower.
Taken together, these examples demonstrate that while there is a fair amount
of mathematical structure in the definition of an MCM, it can still model a very
wide range of real world distributed computational systems. In addition, none of
that mathematical structure is superfluous, in that all of it plays an important role
in all of the examples; removing any of the structure would make the resultant
definition of an MCM too impoverished to capture important features in these
example.
5 Interacting MCMs
In actual physical systems, the exact same mathematical structure describes three
processes which are often informally viewed as distinct. The “observation” of
agent B by agent A is an instance of the state of agent B at time t affecting the
stateofagent Aatsomelatertimet′. (Formally,changesto B resultinchangesin
t
the conditional distribution P(A |B).) Similarly, an “action” by agent B on agent
t′ t
A is an instance of the state of agent B at time t affecting the state of agent A at
somelatertimet′. Soitisan“observation”byagent Aoftheearlierstateofagent
B. We can illustrate this with the example of a human Society MCM interacting
with an Environment MCM. In this case, the external input of the Environment
MCM would in part reflect the action that the Society MCM takes on the En-
vironment MCM. (Such actions can range from types of niche construction like
constructingdwellingsintheenvironment,tosowingseedsintheenvironmentfor
futureharvest.)
In this section we present a general framework of an “iteration” of two in-
teracting MCMs. At the beginning of such an iteration each MCM observes the
other one (or equivalently, each acts on the other one). They then each carry out
an independent computation, by repeating their respective update functions (as
described in Section 4). This gives us a basic, pared-down model of interacting
MCMs, with an observation process that also models control and action of one
MCMbyanother.
The following section, Section 6, presents a model built on this basic frame-
workofinteractingMCMs,tailoredtothespecialcaseofoneagentrepresentinga
complex human Society and one representing the Environment. This model adds
extrastructurethatformalizeshowthejointstateofthosetwoMCMsattheendof
aniterationcandeterminethefreeenergyharvestbytheSocietyfromresourcesin
28the Environment, with the resultant modification of the parameters of the Society
MCM.
See Section 7.3 for some other ways to extend this basic model of interacting
MCMs.
5.1 The joint interaction between MCMs
EachofourtwoMCMsisdefinedbyanassociatedcollection,
(cid:110) (cid:111)
N,G,τ,{M },E,{f } (2)
v v
When we need to consider the two agents simultaneously, we will index these
featuresaccordingly,e.g.,writingτA forthevalueofτforagent A.
Looselyspeaking,anentirerunofτtimestepsofeachMCM(oneMCMmod-
eling the society and one modeling the environment) is interpreted as the com-
putation by that MCM occurring in each iteration of the Bayes net depicted in
Fig. 6. Those computations of the two agents are done in parallel. So for exam-
ple, if τA = τB = 1, then the two agents perform a joint computation, interacting
with one another continually, i.e., interacting with one another just as frequently
astheindividualmachinesineachagentinteractwithoneanother.
The external input to each machine v in an agent is interpreted as the result of
the observation of the other agent that the machine v makes at the beginning of
suchaniteration. Thisiswhytheexternalinputdoesnotchangefromonetimestep
to the next in the formal definition of an MCM in Section 4.2. As an example,
this external input to some machine v in the Society agent is the attributes of the
environment observed by the members of the machine v at the beginning of an
iteration. Note that because of this feature of the interactions, if the values τi of
both agents i are greater than 1, then the agents are performing their respective
computationsfasterthantheirinteractionswiththeotheragent.
WenowpresentthedetailsofourmodeloftheinteractionoftwoMCMs:
1. An iteration of two interacting agents (MCMs), A and B consists of a pre-
fixedsetofτA timestepsforagent AandτB timestepsforagent B. Weadopt
the convention that time in each iteration starts at 0, in that the time after
the first timestep of that iteration is 1, the time after that second timestep is
2,etc.
The Bayes net in Fig. 6 is a stylized depiction of an iteration, omitting the
computation of the environment agent, and omitting details of the compu-
tationbythesocietyagent.
There are a countably infinite number of such iterations succeeding one
another,formingasequence. Weadopttheconventionthatthejointstateof
29themachinesinthetwoagentsafterthelasttimestepofiterationt−1isthe
sameastheirjointstatebeforethefirsttimestepiniterationt.
2. In the first timestep of iteration t, agent A receives its external input from
the final (timestep τB) joint state of the machines in agent B at the end of
iterationt−1,accordingtosomeconditionalprobabilitydistribution,
P(eA(t)|xB(t−1)) (3)
This is the observation channel [18] of the state of agent B by agent A.
ThisobservationtakesplaceinthefirstlegofFig.6. (SeealsoFig.7.)
Note that the external input to (all of the machines within) agent A will be
the same value for all the timesteps in a given iteration t. This contrasts
withthemessages,whichmaychangeateachtimestepwithinthatiteration.
This difference reflects the fact that messages occur as part of the single
computation that an agent A does in response to the observations made by
the machines v in agent A concerning the other agent, and these observa-
tions by the machines in A are identified with the external inputs to those
machines.
As an example, consider the case of a Society agent A and Environment
agent B. In this situation, P(eA(t)|xB(t − 1)) models the observation that
themembersoftheoccupationsintheSocietyagentaremakingthroughout
iteration t of the state that the Environment had at the end of the previous
iteration, t − 1. (Note that notationally, in this conditional distribution the
arguments of the x’s specifies the iteration, not the timestep within the it-
eration.) In the case of a environment, agent B, P(eB(t)|xA(t − 1)) models
the effect throughout iteration t on the Environment of the joint action that
themembersoftheSocietyagenttookontheEnvironmentattheendofthe
precedingiteration,t−1.
3. After this first timestep, all machines in A repeat their respective update
functionsforthetotalofτ−1remainingtimesteps,atwhichpointiteration
t hasended.
Mutatis mutandi for the external input to agent B from the final state of
agent Aattheendofthepreviousiteration,andforitsensuingdynamics.
4. There is also a starting distribution over the joint state of all the machines
inbothagents,whichgetspropagatedintheusualwaybythedeterministic
update functions of the two agents. For simplicity we have not written it
explicitly.
30Figure 7: Expanded view of the Bayes net model in Fig. 6 representing an it-
eration of a human social computer interacting with an environment computer.
Green arrows refer to actions actually taken by the Society Agent, and purple ar-
rows refer to those actually taken by the environment as described informally in
the captions. The messaging back and forth by the machines in each agent are
informallyrepresentedbythesmalldirectedgraphsinthemiddleleg.
5. To simplify the exposition in Section 6 below, we will implicitly assume
that the observation channel of each of the two agents is a symmetric noisy
channel. Soeachofthosechannelsisparameterizedbyasinglerealnumber,
settingthenoiselevel. WewritethosetwonoiselevelsasσA andσB,giving
thenoiseintheobservationchannelofagent Aandofagent B,respectively.
We will refer to the set of quantities concerning agent A that are specified in
Eq. (2), together with the noise level σA, as the computation parameters of that
agent. AsdescribedbelowinSection6,allbutoneofthecomputationparameters
of the environment agent do not change from one iteration to the next. However,
asalsodescribedinSection6,thecomputationparametersofthesocietyagentdo
changebetweeniterations,asspecifiedbythe“evolutionfunction”ofthatagent.
5.2 Physical significance of an MCM’s computation parame-
ters
The computation parameters of a pair of interacting MCMs determines the max-
imal computational power of each of them. In particular, note that everything
else being equal, the greater NA is, the greater the computational power of agent
A, (just like increasing the number of processing units in a parallel computer in-
creases the power of that computer). Note also that the bigger the state spaces
31of the machines in an MCM is, the greater the memory space of each of those
machines,andsothegreaterthecomputationalpoweroftheMCM.
Similarly,thegreater|MA|is,themoreinformationthemachinesintheMCM
can send one another in every timestep. Accordingly, increasing |MA| increases
thecomputationalpowerofthatMCM.
Along the same lines, the maximal fan-out of the message graph of the ma-
chines in the society agent will affect how much computation it can do in each
iteration. As an example, several of the “complexity characteristics” recorded
in the Seshat data set of the evolution of ancient societies [94] were identified
in[80]ascapturingthe“computationalpower”ofthosesocieties. Thesecomplex-
itycharacteristicsincludedthesophisticationofthewritingsystemofthesociety,
the sophistication of its monetary system, and the sophistication of its transporta-
tion network. The direct analogs of these in the interacting MCMs model is the
parameters|MA|andthefan-outofthemessagegraphofagent A.
In addition, the smaller σA is, the more accurately agent A can ascertain the
startingstateofagent Batthebeginningofaniteration. Similarly,thesmallerσB
is, the more accurately the agent A can set a control action that it takes on agent
B.
In this regard, note that the action that agent A takes on agent B at the be-
ginning of iteration t is based on the computation that agent A completed in the
previous iteration, t − 1. That computation in turn reflects the observation that
agent Amadeofthestateofagent Batthebeginningofiterationt−1. Soloosely
speaking, that agent A’s computation is how it produces its answer to the follow-
ing question: “If you observe {blah} about the state of agent B at a certain time,
what is the action you should take to optimally affect the state that agent B will
have by the time you finish answering this question?” (The precise meaning of
“optimal” in the context of a society-environment pair of co-evolving agents is
discussedbelow.)
Inrealhumansocieties,thepopulationsizeisanextremelyimportantvariable.
Indeed,thepoorlychosenterm“scalarstress”whichis(mostly)synonymouswith
population size is ubiquitous in numerical data analysis in archaeology. Indeed,
variables involving population size are rife in the 50 or so data fields recorded in
theSeshatdataset[94,80]. Populationsizedoesnotoccurexplicitlyasavariable
inthedefinitionofanMCM.However,itdoesariseimplicitly,inseveralvariables
thatareinthatdefinition.
As an example, everything else being equal, if the population of “laborers”
in a human society who are acting directly on the environment increases, then
the aggregate actions of those laborers on the environment is more precisely cho-
sen, with less variability. That can be interpreted to mean that raising the overall
populationofthelaborersinasocietyresultsinshrinkingσE.
Similarly, if the number of members of a specific occupation in a human so-
32ciety increases, and if those members are at least somewhat distinguishable from
one another, then that means that the joint state of the members of that occupa-
tion increases. In terms of the MCM formalism, that means a growth in the state
space X for the machine v that represents that occupation. Along the same lines,
v
supposethenumberofmembersofaspecificoccupationincreases,andtheyneed
notallsendorreceivemessagestotheexactsamesetofothermachines. Interms
of the MCM model, this would mean that increasing the population of that occu-
pation causes a rise in the fan-out (out-degree) and fan-in (in-degree) of the node
inthemessagegraphthatrepresentsthatoccupation.
As a final comment, note that in the bare-bones version of the MCM frame-
work presented above, the external input e of each machine in an agent does not
changefromonetimesteptothenextduringaniterationoftheagent. Thisreflects
a “separation of timescales” between the processes of computation within each
agentandtheprocessesofeachagentobservingtheotheragent.
6 Integrating free energy harvest into the interact-
ing MCMs framework
Sections4and5presentahigh-levelframeworkfordescribinginteractingagents,
with some discussion of the possible physical meaning of the variables arising in
that interaction. In many ways this is a minimal framework, providing no more
thanawaytocapturethefeaturesdiscussedinSection4.1. Asdescribedattheend
ofSection2.2,oneofourgoalsinformulatingthisframeworkwasthatitnothave
toomuchstructuretobeamenabletomathematicalanalysis,andconsequentlybe
“coarse-grained”whenconsideredasamodelofanactualphysicalsystem.
However, oneof our primarygoals is touse thisminimal framework toinves-
tigate the MET of the Anthropocene (and more generally of human societies in
the latter part of the Holocene). To do that we need to introduce extra mathemat-
ical structure, specifying how the parameters and functions defining the Society
agent evolve in time, in response to the society’s interactions with the Environ-
mentagent. AsdiscussedattheendofSection2.2,thisextrastructureresultsina
“moderate-grained” model of the interactions between complex human societies
andtheirenvironment.
In this section we present one suchs moderate-gained model. The underly-
ing idea is that it takes energy to maintain high levels of each of the computation
parameters of the Society agent, i.e., there is an energy-cost function associated
with each computation parameter. In addition, at the beginning of each iteration
the Society MCM will “harvest” a certain amount of energy from the Environ-
ment MCM. The total amount of energy that it harvests is given by how well the
33Society can control the Environment MCM, acting on the Environment in a way
that causes it to have a desired state in the future. In turn, the maximal ability
of the Society agent to exert that control is determined by the best computation it
can do, and so by the values of the computation parameters of the Society MCM.
In sum, how much computation the Society can perform and how well it can use
the results of its computation to control the Environment determines how much
energytheSocietycanharvestfromtheEnvironment. Thatenergyharvestinturn
determines how much computation the Society MCM can perform, and how well
itcancanusetheresultsofitscomputationtocontroltheEnvironment.
For simplicity and clarity, from now now on we no longer talk generically
about two co-evolving agents A,B. Instead we consider the specific pair of a
Society and Environment co-evolving agent, which are the focus of our study.
Wewilldistinguishthecomputationparametersandfunctionsofthosetwoagents
withthelabelsS and E,respectively.
Onehigh-levelpointtokeepinmindisthattheMCMsmodelisamodel. The
precise mapping of the variables in the model and their dynamics to associated
phenomena in the real world is not specified, and may in fact vary from one use
of the model to another. In particular, the “energy harvest” process at the end /
beginning of an iteration takes one timestep in the model. However, in the real
world, it may take an extremely long time, e.g., if a semi-static thermodynamic
processisusedtomaximizeefficiency. Allsuchdetailsareelidedbelow.
6.1 Evolving the parameters of the MCM computation
In this subsection we specify one way that the parameters of the computations by
thetwoagentscanevolvefromoneiterationtothenext.
1. The joint state of the Environment and Society at the beginning and end
of an iteration determines the value of the gross free energy harvest rate
(GFER)ofthatiteration,viaaharvestfunctionfortheSocietyagent,ψ.
Togroundthinking,notethatinmanywaysahumansocietyneedstoacton
the environment in a way that causes the environment to have a predicted
stateinthefuture. IntermsofinteractingMCMs,thismeansthatbyappro-
priateactionontheEnvironmentMCMatthebeginningofaniteration,the
Society MCM is able to cause that Environment MCM to have a value at
the end of the iteration that matches a prediction for that ending state that
is made by the Society MCM, at the beginning of the iteration. This can
be formalized simply as the mutual information between those two states,
I(XE ;XS).
τE 0
There are many other choices for the GFER though. Some of them are ac-
tively grounded in stochastic thermodynamics, and in fact are specifically
34designed to model the case of a physical system acting on its environment
soastoextractasmuchfreeenergyfromthatenvironmentaspossible. Pre-
liminaryanalysisofahighlysimplifiedsuchsystem,inwhichtheagenthas
only a single machine and a single timestep, has proven surprisingly fruit-
ful[36]. Extendingthispreliminaryanalysisisanactivetopicofresearch.
2. Suppose we are give a value of the GFER at the end of an iteration. We
needtoallocatethatGFERamongthecomputationparametersdefiningthe
Societyagent,tosetthevaluesofthosecomputationparametersinthenext
iteration.
Intuitively, this allocation reflects two features of our framework. First, as
mentioned, many of the computation parameters of the Society agent have
anassociatedthermodynamiccost,whichscaleswiththevalueofthatcom-
putation parameter. Second, for simplicity we do not allow the Society
agent to somehow store unused free energy from one iteration to the next.
Accordingly, the GFER must be completely “spent” in each iteration by
paying the thermodynamic costs given by the precise values of the compu-
tationparametersofthesocietyagent. Together,thesetwofeaturesuniquely
specify the values of all the computation parameters at the start of the next
iteration.
We next present a discussion of the computation parameters of the Society
agentwhosevalueshaveassociatedthermodynamiccosts. Thenwepresent
asimpleformalizationofhowtoallocatetheGFERamongthosecomputa-
tionparameters. Crucially,thecostofeachofthesecomputationparameters
isaninvertiblefunctionofthevalueofthatcomputationparameter. Asare-
sult,thefractionoftheGFERallocatedtoanygivencomputationparameter
willsetthevalueofthatcomputationparameterforthenextiteration.
3. ThecomputationparametersoftheSocietyagentthatcausethermodynamic
costsineachiterationareasfollows:
(a) There is a thermodynamic cost function that monotonically increases
with increasing τS, since the larger τS is, the more total computation
the Society agent does per iteration. Overloading notation, write that
functionasC .
τS
(b) There is a thermodynamic cost function that monotonically increases
with increasing |MS|, since the larger |MS| is, the more costly it is for
a machine in the Society agent to send a message which requires it to
chooseamongthe|MS|possiblevalue. (E.g.,inahumansociety,|MS|
could be the number of possible postal letters or other forms of com-
35munication that one machine can send to another in each timestep.)
Overloadingnotation,writethatfunctionasC .
|MS|
(c) There is a thermodynamic cost that monotonically increases with in-
creasing NS, the number of machines in the society MCM, i.e., in-
creasingthenumberofoccupationsandtechnologies. (Thiscostarises
fromtheneedtoperformmaintenanceonthemembersoftheoccupa-
tion, i.e., due to the costs of maintaining homeostasis.) Overloading
notation,writethatfunctionasC .
NS
(d) There is a thermodynamic cost function that monotonically increases
with increasing the number of possible states of each machine in the
society agent, |XS|. (That’s because like the number of possible mes-
sages, increasing this computation parameter increasing the number
of states each machine must choose among from one timestep to the
next.) Overloadingnotation,writethatfunctionasC .
|XS|
(e) There is a thermodynamic cost function that monotonically increases
with increasing rS := 1/σS, i.e., with decreasing the noise in the ob-
servation channel through which the society MCM observes the envi-
ronmentMCM.Overloadingnotation,writethatfunctionasC .
rS
(f) There is a thermodynamic cost function that monotonically increases
withincreasingrE := 1/σE thenoiseintheobservationchannelthrough
which the environment MCM observes the society MCM. That’s be-
cause as discussed below, for MCM A to observe MCM Bis formally
identical to having MCM B control MCM A, and so decreasing this
level of noise is formally identical to decreasing the amount of noise
with which the Society agent acts on on the Environment agent at the
beginning of an iteration. (This is the only computation parameter of
theEnvironmentagentthatwillchangefromoneiterationtothenext.)
Overloadingnotation,writethatfunctionasC .
rE
(g) There is a thermodynamic cost function that monotonically increases
withincreasingmaximalfan-out(i.e.,out-degree)ofthemessagegraph
of the society agent, D(GS). (That’s because this feature of the mes-
sagegraphisthemaximalnumberofrecipientsofamessagebyama-
chine in the society agent during a timestep.) Overloading notation,
writethatfunctionasC .
D(GS)
In some circumstances we can set these cost functions based on real-world
data or domain expertise. Those that can’t be set that way can be set in any
mathematically reasonable way. For example, we can simply take them to
be the identity function (i.e., take C (z) = z for all z for such computation
i
parameters i), Another alternative would be to set C to equal some simple
i
36concave function, if with think there are economies of scale association
√
withthatcomputationparameter,e.g.,takeC (z) = zforsuchcomputation
i
parametersi. YetanotherpossibilitywouldbetosetC tobealogitfunction,
i
if we think there is a maximal value of the thermodynamic cost for some
computationparameters.
4. The (computation parameter) evolution function ϕ(GFER) specifies the
values of the computation parameters in the next iteration, based on the
GFER at the end of the current iteration. An example of such evolution
function,chosenforsimplicity,isthefollowing:
First, define an allocation distribution ρ over the possible joint values of
the computation parameters. So ρ specifies a fraction for each computation
parameter, where the sum of the fractions equals 1. As shorthand define
R(i) to be the product of the GFER at the end of iteration t and ρ(i), the
t
fractionofthatGFERthatisallocatedtoparameteri. Then
ϕ (GFER) = C−1(R(i))] (4)
ρ t i t
This reduces the specification of how the computation parameters evolve
from one iteration to the next to the specification of how the allocation dis-
tributionissetforeachiteration. HowtosetthatdistributionfortheSociety
agentisdiscussedinthenextsubsection.
We will not consider such an allocation distribution for the Environment
agent however. That is because as discussed below, we will take all of the
Environment agent’s computation parameters to be unchanging from one
iterationtothenext. (TheonlypossibleexceptionisσE,whoseevolutionis
actuallysetbytheevolutionfunctionoftheSocietyagent.)
6.2 Evolving the functions of the MCM computation
The preceding subsection only specified how to set the computation parameters,
given a harvest function and an allocation distribution. That still leaves open
the question of how to set that allocation distribution. It also leaves open the
issue of how to set the associated functions of the two agents which involve the
computation parameters. Only once we have specified these details will we have
fullyspecifiedtheco-evolvingdynamicsofthetwoMCMs.
1. To begin, label the iterations as {0,1,2,...}. For the evolution function de-
fined above, the values of the computation parameters in any iteration t+1
where t ≥ 1 are uniquely fixed by the value of the GFER at the end of
37iteration t.1 In turn, the GFER at the end of iteration t is set by the joint
distributionoverthestatesofthesocietyagentandtheenvironmentagentat
that time. Finally, that joint distribution is itself ultimately set by the com-
binationofthevaluesoftwoquantitiesatthebeginningofthefirstiteration.
The first of these two quantities is the joint distribution of the states of the
machines in the two agents at the beginning of that iteration. The second is
the functions which (together with the Society agent’s initial computation
parameters)specifythecomputationwithineachiteration. Thosedynamics
functionsfortheSocietyagentare
{fS},GS,ρ (5)
v
Similarly,thedynamicsfunctionsoftheEnvironmentagentare
{fE},GE (6)
v
2. WecantakethedynamicsfunctionsoftheEnvironmenttobeinvariantfrom
one iteration to the next, along with the computation parameters of the En-
vironment. If we do this, then loosely speaking, Society can act on the En-
vironment by changing the values of some of the Environment’s variables,
which in turn affects the dynamics of the environment, but Society cannot
directlychangethatdynamicprocessoftheenvironmentitself.
3. Specifyingthose(time-invariant)computationparametersanddynamicsfunc-
tions of the Environment agent is a perfect place to insert domain knowl-
edge. However, in general we will be uncertain of at least some of those
parameters and functions. We can set those parameters and functions ran-
domly. Or alternatively, as described below, we can set them adversarially.
It all depends on what precise questions concerning the co-evolution of the
SocietyandEnvironmentagentswereinterestedin.
4. However, the situation with the dynamics functions and allocation distribu-
tion of the Society agent is more complicated. Indeed, simply by allowing
the values of the computation parameters of the Society agent to change
from one iteration to the next means that the forms of the dynamics func-
tions of that agent will be different in different iterations. In particular,
changing the computation parameters in general changes the very spaces
1Note that this still requires us to set the values of those computation parameters at the be-
ginning of the first iteration. Similarly, we need to set the joint distribution over the states of
the Society and Environment MCMs at the beginning of the first iteration. Such details are not
discussedinthispaper.
38that the dynamics functions of the Society agent are defined over. (For ex-
ample, if the number of machines grows, both the state spaces of the new
machinesandthemessagegraphconnectingthemneedstochange.)
5. Like many of the other details of our model, this is a perfect place to intro-
ducedomainknowledge. Inparticular,seethediscussionbelowofGuttman
scaling for how domain knowledge might lead us to restrict the allowed se-
quences of what kinds of new technology machines can exist in the society
as we go from one iteration to the next. But we could also specify some or
allofthesedetailsbasedonpurelymathematicalapproaches.
6. One such purely mathematical approach is to simply generate the dynam-
ics functions and allocation distribution of the Society agent in an iteration
randomly. We could then investigate how the co-evolution of the Society
and Environment agents depends on initial values of the computation pa-
rameters of the two agents, at the beginning of the first iteration, or how
it depends on the parameters of the random distributions we are using to
generate the dynamics functions. We could also investigate how the co-
evolution depends on the allocation distribution and thermodynamic cost
functions of the society agent, if we wish to consider alternative forms of
thosefunctions.
7. Another set of approaches instead involves a nested pair of loops of opti-
mizations, with an inner loop inside an outer loop. These approaches start
by setting the dynamics functions and allocation distribution of the Soci-
ety agent in the inner loop, based on a given dynamics of the Environment
agent. Specifically, in the inner loop we (approximately) solve for the dy-
namics functions and allocation distribution of the society agent so that the
(expected future discounted) GFER of the Society agent is maximized, for
thatgivendynamicsoftheenvironmentagent.
Note that this optimization in the inner loop is a constrained optimization.
Some of the constraints are the dynamics functions and allocation distribu-
tion of the Environment agent of course. But in addition, the optimization
isconstrainedbythegivenvaluesofthecomputationparametersofthetwo
agents in the current iteration. Furthermore, as described below in Sec.
7.2.6, we might want to impose (possibly severe) constraints on the possi-
bleupdatefunctionsofcertain“resourcestore”machines,andontheupdate
functionsofanyothermachinesthatsendmessagesto(orreceivemessages
from)suchresourcestoremachines.
Also,weneedtobecarefulinthisoptimizationtorespecttheprecisespaces
that we’re optimizing over. In particular, the update functions will be func-
39tionsfromafinitesettoitself,sotheoptimizationofthosefunctionsmustbe
over some parametric form of functions from a finite set to itself. Domain
knowledge which leads us to specify the physical quantity a given machine
is supposed to represent could help here. For example, suppose we know
thattheelementsofX forsomemachinevhavenumericmeaning,allowing
v
ustoidentifythemwiththesmallestcountingnumbers,{0,1,2,...,|X |−1}.
v
This set is just a ring, if we take addition and multiplication to be modulo
|X |−1 (in the formal, algebraic sense of the word). Accordingly we might
v
want to restrict the optimization of f to considering only the set of linear
v
functions over that ring. As another possibility, if X is purely categorical,
v
thenwemayneedtoparameterize f bythesetofallfunctionsfrom X into
v v
itself.
A variant of this inner loop optimization is to have some of the Society
agent’s dynamics functions and allocation distribution chosen randomly,
while the others are optimized. For example, we could have the message
graph chosen randomly, e.g.,, by sampling a Renyi process, based on the
optimizedvalueofthecomputationparameter D(GS).
Intheouterloopofthisnestedpairofloopsweneedtospecifythedynamics
functionsandallocationdistributionoftheEnvironmentagent. Indeed,until
we specify how this outer loop is performed, we have not fully specified
how to do the inner loop optimization, since that inner loops needs to be
giventhedynamicsfunctionsandallocationdistributionoftheenvironment
agent.
Therearealsoseveralwayswecoulddothisouterloop. Thefirstistofixthe
update functions and message graph of the environment by randomly sam-
plingoverthesetofpossiblefunctions{fE}andgraphsGE ofthemachines
v
in the environment. (Presumably this would require us to specify a set of
possible forms of those functions and that graph, e.g., requiring the first to
be linear if the states of the machines are all rings requiring the second to
beaRenyigraphforsomeappropriateedgeprobabilityparameter.)
Asecondapproachistodoafullminimaxcalculation. Inthisapproach,the
update functions, allocation distribution and message graph of the Society
agent are optimized in an inner loop based on a given Environment agent,
as described above — and then the update functions and message graph of
the environment agent is adversarially set, to make the resultant (expected
futurediscounted)GFERoftheSocietyagentbeassmallaspossible.
Note though that if we adopt this second approach of analyzing the worst-
case behavior of the environment in the outer loop, then at least part of our
calculation is trivial: just choose the environment agent to ignore its input
40from the society agent entirely. So we have to quantify a minimal value
for that dependence somehow. E.g., as the conditional mutual information
between the environment’s output at iteration t + 1 and its input from the
societyagentinthatiteration(i.e.,theoutputofthesocietyagentattheend
of iteration t), conditioned on the earlier state of the environment’s output,
at the end of iteration t. (Or perhaps in terms of conditional entropy rather
thanconditionalmutualinformation.)
8. Itisimportanttore-emphasizethatthereisnorightorwrongchoiceamong
the various approaches described above for how to evolve the computation
parameters and dynamics functions and allocation distribution from one it-
eration to the next. It all depends on what precise question concerning the
co-evolutionoftheSocietyandEnvironmentagentsweareinterestedin.
7 Features of our co-evolving MCMs model and ways
to enrich this model
There are numerous salient features of the co-evolving MCMs model which are
worth describing. There are also many ways that we may want to extend this
model. We present both those features of the model presented above, along with
someofthewaystoextendit.
7.1 Features of the interacting MCMs model
There are several features of the interacting MCMs model that are worth empha-
sizing.
1. If τS is large while τE is small, then the Society does a lot of computation
between two successive times when it acts on the Environment — and the
Environment does not do much computation between those times. So in
this situation, the Society agent is computing what to do quickly on the
timescaleofthedynamicsoftheEnvironment.
2. Thefactthatourmodelallowsthetechnologiestochangefromoneiteration
to the next might provide a way of incorporating Guttman scaling [28, 65,
66] into our analysis, i.e., of incorporating the idea that some sets of new
technologies can only be added in a particular sequence, with each step in
that sequence enabled by an increase in the NFER at the beginning of an
iteration. One way to integrate this feature into the model is to ensure that
the dynamic functions evolution operator only adds machines with certain
capabilitiesinsuchaGuttmansequence.
413. One of our primary goals in formulating the interacting MCMs model is to
useittoinvestigatetheexplosiveescapefromMalthusiantrapsthathashap-
pened in human society in the last half century, starting in the West. (Some
authors refer specifically to the gap that opened up between the West and
China as “the Great divergence” [70], sometimes placing its origin around
the time of the collapse of Rome and Han China [77].) In terms of our
interacting MCMs model, that escape corresponds to a super-linear rate of
growthofGFER.
Accordingly, to investigate that escape we need the pair of the evolution
function ϕ and harvest function ψ to have the property that — for a certain
veryrestrictedsetoftheirinputvalues(i.e.,averyrestrictedsetofjointval-
ues of the GFER and the computation parameters of the society agent) —
the effect of the output of ϕ on the joint dynamics of the Society and Envi-
ronment agents causes yet higher GFER in the next iteration. In particular,
itwouldbeveryinterestingifintheverynextiteration,theGFERincreases
faster than population size, so that the GFER per capita rises, before the
population increases enough in the subsequent iterations without any more
riseintheGFERsothattheGFERpercapitafallsbacktoitsoriginalvalue.
ThiswouldbeaformalizationofescapingaMalthusiantrap.
4. Ideally,wewanttheretoevenbesituations,i.e.,jointstatesofthetwoagents
and associated GFER, such that once the pairs of agents hits one of those
joint states, ϕ together with ψ causes a “run-away” dynamics, where the
GFER starts increasing exponentially faster than the population size from
oneiterationtothenextforasequenceofmultipleiterations.
Phrased differently, we want our model, and in particular this pair of func-
tions,(ϕ,ψ),toendogenouslycaptureaphenomenonwherebyonceathresh-
old is reached, one has a “punctuated equilibrium”, of a sort, i.e., a discon-
tinuous leap to a new level of computational power. In our case, to model
the current major evolutionary transition, we want these leaps to cascade,
i.e., we want each one quickly lead to a next one, etc., in a quickening
avalancheofsuchleaps.
5. Note that this property may already be built into our model. As the Soci-
ety agent adds new machines from one iteration to the next, the associated
messagegraphmayundergophasetransitions,fromhavingonlysmall,dis-
connectedcomponentstohavinggiantcomponents,andeventuallytobeing
fully connected. This would correspond to a “jump” in the computational
power of the Society MCM. Similarly, as τS increases and / or the num-
berofmachinesintheSocietyMCMincreasesand/oritsmessagegraph’s
fan-outgrows,thecomputationalpoweroftheSocietyMCMincreases.
42For a fixed Environment MCM, such increase in the computational power
of the Society MCM might go through a “phase transition”, suddenly al-
lowing it to predict the future state of the Environment MCM far more ac-
curately than before. Alternatively, reductions in σE might cause a jump
in how well the Society MCM can control the future state of the Environ-
ment MCM, thereby simplifying the computational difficulty of predicting
thefuturestateoftheenvironment.
In all of these cases, the jump in the ability of the Society might lead to
a jump in the value of the GFER that the Society agent acquires at the
end of the iteration. (For example, one would expect such a jump in the
case of the mutual information harvest function, described in Section 6.1.)
These jumps might then “feed on themselves”, resulting in an accelerating
sequence of jumps in the value of the GFER, and therefore in the energy
usagepercapitaofthesociety.
6. Note that it is pretty much incontrovertible that societies don’t really con-
sider the costs associated with the future, only the benefits. Moreover, they
typicallyonlylookaveryshortdistanceintothefuture. Soratherthanthan
trytoincreasesomethingliketheexpectedfuture-discountedGFER(which
depends on future costs), they try to increase the immediate (next iteration)
GFER.Forusthismightbeanadvantage,sinceitpresumablysubstantially
simplifiestheapproachtosettingthecomputationparametersanddynamics
functionsandallocationdistributiontobeoptimal.
7. More generally, independent of what human societies actual do or don’t
try to optimize, there might be some rich mathematical analysis even if we
restrict attention to a single iteration of the co-evolving MCMs, without
considering the evolution function of the society agent or the nature of the
environmentagent’sdynamicsacrossiterationboundaries.
In particular, if the environment were dynamically simple — that is, if it
weresimplewhenviewedasanMCM—thenintuitively,onewouldexpect
that there would be no benefit to human society of increasing its compu-
tational power over multiple iterations. It would be interesting to either
establishthatthisisthecase,orshowthatitisnot.
7.2 Extending the MCM model
The definitions in Section 4.2 only provides the most basic type of MCM. Many
of the features of this basic type of MCM are chosen for pedagogical simplicity,
and to open the possibility of mathematical analysis (e.g., of scaling behavior).
43This definition can be enriched in many ways, to define a more complete (and
thereforemorecomplicated)typeofMCM.
1. In the basic type of MCM, the messages that v sends to all the machines
in ch(v) each time it runs its update function (i.e., in each timestep) are
identical, not varying from one receiving machine to the next. In the full
model,thatrestrictionisrelaxed,allowingeachmachinevtosendadifferent
messagetoeachofitschildmachinesinthemessagegraph.
2. Similarly, the message spaces of the machines in an MCM are identical in
thebasictypeofMCM,whereastheyareallowedtodifferfromoneanother
inthemorecompletedefinitionofanMCM.
3. In the basic type of MCM. the messages that any machine v sends to all
the machines in ch(v) each time it runs its update function (i.e., in each
timestep) are identical. This means that we do not allow a machine to “tai-
lor”itsmessagestotherecipient. AnaturalwaytoenrichthatsimpleMCM
model would be to allow such tailoring, i.e., allow v to send different mes-
sagestothemachinesinch(v)everytimeitruns f .
v
4. Intherealworldtherewillnotbeanupdate(deterministic)function, f ,but
v
ratheranupdateconditionaldistribution. Againforpedagogicalsimplicity,
the simple MCM model does not have this flexibility, i.e., it presumes that
allsuchdistributionsaredeltafunctions. Anobviouswaytoenrichthebasic
MCM model so that it is more realistic is to allow the f to be conditional
v
distributions.
5. Another way to enrich the basic MCM model is to have a special machine
that serves as a ledger. This would allow us to model social institutions
like the library for Ashurbanipal, or the clearing house of receipts in many
ancient Levant societies — or the internet for modern society. Going fur-
ther afield to consider different METs, if we model a single eukaryotic cell
as an MCM (with the machines being organelles), the ledger could be the
(epi)genome.
In whatever context, a ledger machine’s state space would be a tape (as in
conventional TM theory), which may either be infinite, or finite (as in a
genome)orfiniteandgrowingwiththenumberofiterations,asinalibrary.
Inaddition,whatcouldmaketheledgerparticularlyusefulinourmodelofa
societyagentisthatwecouldchooseamessagegraphsuchthat(almost)all
non-ledger machines would be able to send messages to and receive mes-
sages from the ledger machine. The effect on this ledger machine of the
messages it receives from any other machine in a timestep is equivalent to
44that other machine writing to a specific location on the ledger machine’s
tape, and / or sending requests to read the contents of a specific location in
the ledger machine. The state of the ledger machine would change appro-
priately in response to write messages. The messages sent by this ledger
machine would then be different for each of the other machines, given by
theledger’sresponse tothereadrequestjustmade bythoseothermachines
(ifany).
6. Similarly to a ledger, we could also have various machines that represent
storesofmaterialresourcesofvarioussorts. Wecouldthenhaveamessage
to or from the machine enforce conservation of the associated good. For
example, suppose a laborer machine v mines a single unit of some material
resourcefromtheenvironmentatthebeginningofaniteration. IntheMCM
framework,thatmeansthatatthebeginningoftheiteration,onecomponent
j of the observation vector, e(j) of the society MCM has the value 1, spec-
ifying that single unit of that resource that was mined. In the first timestep,
machinevincreasessomeassociatedcomponentioftheirstatevector, x (i)
v
by 1. For them to then send that unit of the resource to a storage machine
v′ would mean that in the associated timestep they send a message with the
value 1 to v′ and decrease x (i) by 1 at the same time. Then in the next
v
timestep, the value of x increases by 1. If at some subsequent timestep
v′
some other machine w needs to use that resource, a message can be sent
from v′ to w accompanied by a drop of 1 in the value of x , and then the
v′
associated component of x increases by 1 when they receive that message
w
inthenexttimestep.
More generally, production functions (in the standard economics sense)
could be modeled as resource machines that send messages directly one
another. The update function of a resource machine, setting the new value
of its state based on the messages it just received and its previous state,
would just be the associated production function we want to model with
thatmachine.
7. Yet another way to enrich the model is to restrict the possible form of the
message graph of an agent so that some nodes have far greater maximal
fan-outthanothers. Withthatextension, introducinganewcommunication
technology in a society agent would simply amount to introducing a new
machine whose fan-out is far greater than that of the other machines in the
agent.
457.3 Extending the model of interacting MCMs
The type of interaction between MCMs defined in Section 5 is an very pared-
down, basic one. It can be enriched in many ways, to get a more complete (and
thereforecomplicated)model.
1. One natural way to enrich the basic co-evolving MCMs model sketched
above would be to have the noise in the two observation channels not be
uniform and symmetric. For example, this would provide a way for the
Society agent to pay especially close attention to some of the variables in
theenvironment.
2. Moregenerally,eachmachinevinanagentcouldgetadifferentexternalin-
putfromthetimestep0stateofthetheotheragent,producedwithadifferent
observational distribution over values of e conditioned on the joint state of
v
the machines in the other agent. That set of machine-indexed observational
channelswouldprovideaobservationgraphfortheagent.
Asanexample,providingtheSocietyagentwithaobservationgraphwould
provide a way for some of the occupations in the Society agent to pay par-
ticularly close attention to the values of some subset of the variables in the
Environmentagent,e.g.,duetogeographicalproximity. Itmayevenbethat
some other occupations in the Society agent do not pay direct attention to
anyofthevariablesintheEnvironment.
3. Similarly,recallthattheobservationchannelsoftheEnvironmentagentare
the same as the action channels of the Society agent. Accordingly, restrict-
ing which of the nodes in the Society agent are roots in the Environment
agent’sobservationgraphwouldallowsomeoftheoccupationsintheSoci-
etyagenttobemorecloselyinvolvedinactingdirectlyontheEnvironment
comparedtotheotheroccupations. Thiswouldbeawaytocapturethefact
themembersofdifferentoccupationsobserve(andaffect)differentvariables
intheenvironment(duetophysicallocationofthemembersoftheoccupa-
tion,ifnothingelse).
4. Physicallocationcanbequiteimportantforhowrealhumansocietiesevolve
from one timestep to the next, not just for how they can act on the environ-
ment at the end of an iteration. This raises the issue of how to represent
the spatial locations of the machines in an agent. One natural way to do
it would be by having the message graph of the Society MCM be a planar
graph, with only nodes that (represent machines that we want to model as)
physically close to one another directly connected to one another by that
messagegraph.
465. Another important point to note is that in the basic model of the interac-
tion of the Society and Environment agents in Section 5, there is a “harvest
function”thatspecifieshowtheSocietyagentextractsfreeenergyfromthe
Environment, leading to new values of the parameters of the Society agent.
However,thereisnocorrespondingfunctionthatspecifieshowtheEnviron-
mentagent’sstatechangeswhenfreeenergyisextractedfromit.
A natural extension of the basic model would capture this by providing
special “resource storage” machine in the Environment agent, whose value
specifiestheamountoftheresourceswhoseharvestingprovidesfreeenergy
to the Society agent. There would then be a new step, just before the be-
ginning of any iteration but after the end of the previous one. In that step
the value of the resource storage machine in the Environment is reduced
bytheGFERgeneratedbytheharvestfunctionoftheSocietyagent(which
in turn is based on the ending joint state of the two MCMs in the previous
iteration).
6. Similarly, in a more elaborate model of the interaction of the Society and
Environment agents, there might be resources which are transferred from
the Environment agent to the Society agent but do not directly change the
computation parameters or dynamics functions of the Society agent. These
resources could be things like minerals, petrochemicals, building materi-
als, timber, etc. To model a transfer of these resources, we would simply
have machines in each agent that represent the total storage of the associ-
atedresourceinthatagent. Atthebeginningofaniteration,therecouldbea
transferofsuchresourcesbetween(thestoragemachinesofthoseresources
in)thetwoagents. Formally,thiscouldbeimplementedwithoutaddingany
moremathematicalstructuretothemodelofinteractingMCMsabove,sim-
ply by carefully incorporating “corresponding” dependencies in the obser-
vation graphs of the two MCMs, ensuring that the values in the associated
machinesintheMCMschangesunderthosetwoobservationgraphsinsuch
awaythatanincreaseinoneresultsinadecreaseintheother.
8 Discussion
The goal of this paper has been to identify the major gap that exists in the study
ofhumansocialevolution. Namely,duetoaseriesofcontingenciesinintellectual
history,thestudyofsocialevolutionhasbeendisconnectedfromadvancesincom-
putational complexity. It seems self-evident that there are advantages to bringing
these two bodies of thought into conversation. It is much harder, of course, to
bringthisreunificationabout.
47Here we have proposed a combined theoretical / empirical strategy to get at
the issue. We think that our proxy, occupational specialization, has the potential
to make concrete and visible the flow of information within a society and across
evolutionary time. We have also proposed a formal, mathematical model of how
asocietycomputesandhowitscomputationalpowerchangesovertime. Wehave
not,obviously,startedthemergerofourdataandourmodel. Thatcomesnext,af-
terthecandidfeedbackofouraugustassembly,forwhichweexpressouradvance
gratitude.
There is at least one major body of work involving information theory to
model the evolution of a species extracting resources from its physical environ-
ment. This body of work involves “Kelly gambling” and “bet-hedging”, and is
discussed in Appendix B. It would be straightforward to incorporate that body of
workintoourframework,butwedonotconsiderithere,forreasonsofspace. (See
also [33] for a formal model that could maybe be usefully applied to investigate
theMETs.)
In contrast, we could not find any way that Ashby’s semi-formal “requisite
variety” idea could enrich our framework. In fact, Baez and Aaronson (in sepa-
rate blog posts) argue strongly that Ashby’s idea is either tautological or wrong,
dependingonhowonecarefullydefinesit.
Acknowledgements
DHWandKHwouldliketothanktheSantaFeInstituteforsupport.
A Appendix A: Mathematical features of the evolu-
tion of the Society agent across iterations
In this appendix we briefly some of the challenges and strengths we foresee in
tryingtopursuethecalculationsdescribedinSection6.
1. Notethatinstandard“approximationcomplexitytheory”studiedinCS,we
are provided a desired family of functions {g : Σ∗ → Σ∗} indexed by the
i
lengthiofan“input”. (Asusual,Σisafixedalphabetbeingusedtoencode
boththeinputandoutputofgasstrings.) Typicallytheassociatedoutputis
viewed as encoding a scalar number. We are concerned with the number of
timestepsittakesacomputer(typicallyaTM)toproduceanoutputthatlies
within some “approximation ratio” α of g(x) for an input x (usually in the
worst-case sense). The central concern, as in (almost) all of computational
complexity theory, is how that number of required timesteps scales with
48the size of the input x. (See also previous literature on “the hardness of
approximation”—see[3],andalsotheworkontime-boundedKolmogorov
complexityinvolvingapproximateinferencediscussedin[91].)
Incontrast,wewillbeconcernedwithadifferentscalingbehaviorfromthat
considered in conventional approximation complexity theory: For a fixed
maximal number of timesteps, τ, how does α scale with the size of the
input?
2. Since the Society agent only ever has limited information concerning the
state of the variables in the Environment agent, then as far as the Soci-
ety agent is concerned, the Environment agent is a hidden Markov model
(HMM).
If we restrict the conditional distribution P(eB(t)|xA(t − 1)) appropriately,
v
then even if each variable v ∈ VB in the Environment receives messages
directly from the same set of machines in the Society, there are some such
machines (occupation specifically) in the Society whose choices have no
direct impactontheEnvironment. (Forexample,thechoicesofakinghave
no direct impact; their only effect on the Environment is indirect, through
the actions of the other occupations that the king commands.) In this case,
there is the same hidden nature in how the Society agent appears to the
Environment agent as vice-versa. So in this case, we actually have two
interactingHMMs.
3. If in fact our two agents are two interacting HMMs, it is non-trivial (for-
mally impossible in fact?) for the Society agent to exactly emulate the En-
vironment agent, even if it had access to the first input to the Environment
agent,atthebeginningoftheveryfirstiteration. Intuitively,sincetheSoci-
etyagentisconcernedwithexpecteddiscountedfuturefreeenergygain(or
some such), this means that the Society agent is making stochastic predic-
tionsforthefuturestatesoftheEnvironmentagent,andinparticularofhow
the future outputs of that Environment agent would differ depending on the
currentoutputsofthesocietyagent.
4. Nowit’scommontoconsiderMDPs(Markovdecisionprocesses)wherean
agentiscontinuallyinteractingwithanenvironmentthatisevolvingaccord-
ing to a (1st order) Markov chain. This has had some limited success. But
of course that success depends on the assumption that there are no hidden
variablesintheenvironment,i.e.,thatΠAB = VB.
Regardless,peopleoftensort-ofmotivatetheuseofpredictivecodinginthe
contextofMDPs,e.g.,intheoreticalneuroscience,ininformation-theoretic
terms,asawaytominimizeexpectedcodewordlength. Inthemoreabstract
49scenarios this leads people to consider the use of things like (the sizes of)
jpegcompressionsorLempelZivtoquantifytherequiredcomplexityofthe
predictive coding. Assuming that in our model the society MCM would in
factneedtopredictthedependenceofthefutureoutputsoftheenvironment
MCM on the outputs of that society, the need for predictive coding would
alsoarise,endogenously,inourmodel.
5. On the other hand, suppose that we assign an optimization function to the
dynamics of the environment (e.g., if follows a physics-like minimum ac-
tion principle). Also assume the joint behavior of the two agents is a Nash
equilibrium of their respective optimization functions. Then so long as the
set of iterations is infinite, there are scenarios where even if there are no
hidden variables, the joint behavior does not just have high complexity —
it is uncomputable in fact. (See [19, 20] and references therein.) TBD if
therewouldbesimilarphenomenainourscenario.
B Appendix B: A possible major issue left out of our
analysis
Sinceweareconsideringasequenceof(very)manyiterations,andsinceasociety
willdieoutifitspopulationgetstoosmall,wehaveaninfinite“costofruin”pos-
sibility we need to worry about. In addition, the harvest function might not only
depend additively on the joint state of the variables in the two agents. Instead,
the harvest function might depend multiplicatively on some of the relationship
between the two sets of variables. For example, it might be that the relationship
between a variable in the society agent and an associated variable in the environ-
mentagentismultipliedbysomefunctiondependingonthejointstateoftheother
variablesintheMCM’sinordertodeterminetheGFERofaniteration.
So it might make sense to try to incorporate the framework of Kelly gam-
bling [18], for example into the harvest function. Indeed, the Kelly gambling
(“bet-hedging”)frameworkhasbeenfoundtobequiteimportantinunderstanding
biological evolution [23]. More precisely, some have argued that that framework
should be extended to account for important features of real biology [73, 104].
The same might also be true if we want to incorporate that framework in the
co-evolving MCMs framework. Indeed, incorporating some variant of the Kelly
gambling framework might also simplify our analysis, and perhaps tighten the
relationshipbetweenitandconventionalinformationtheory.
Recallthedefinitionoftheharvestfunction,whichmapsthestatesoftheenvi-
ronmentandoftheagentattheendofaniterationtothefreeenergyharvestbythe
society in that iteration. Suppose we also consider just one specific environment
50behavior, in which it stochastically reacts to the combination of the action of the
societyanditscurrentstate(i.e.,afixedBayesnetfortheenvironment,ratherthan
a distribution over such Bayes nets, which is the case discussed above). Suppose
wesimilarlyafixedsocietybehavior.
Presumably we want to consider expected future discounted free energy har-
vestforsuchafixedharvestfunction,societybehavior,andenvironmentbehavior.
But in many circumstances the harvest function will depend multiplicatively on
the choice of the society, which can complicate things. An example is given by
Kelly gambling [18], i.e., the mathematics of the optimal strategy for long-term
horse-betting,orstock-betting,orgenotypehedging,oranyotherscenarioinvolv-
ingmultiplicativepayoffstothebetter.
Concretely, suppose that there is an IID real-valued winnings variable in the
environmentagent,whichhaskpossiblestates,W,withelementswrittenasw. For
now,makethesimplifyingassumptionthatthevalueofwinanygiveniterationis
conditionallyindependentofallinformationthatthesocietyagenthasconcerning
the environment at the start of that iteration. Write the associated distribution as
p(w).
Assume as well that the society must allocate some resources over a set of k
states, i.e., one of its variables, {b : i ∈ W}, is a vector over k values, which for
i
simplicityareindexedwiththekvaluesofW. Next,supposethatthetotalamount
of resource that society has to allocate, B := (cid:80) b, is given by the state of the
i i
society agent at the start of the iteration. So the “decision” of the society agent
b
during that iteration is to set the fraction vector, { i : i ∈ W} Suppose as well that
B
theharvestfunctionforagivenvalueofwandbisproportionaltowb .
w
Then as in Kelly gambling, the behavior of the agent that is asymptotically
optimal is to set b ∝ p, independent of the precise set W of possible values of the
winnings, w. (Those values of w only enter in determining the “winnings rate” at
whichtheexpectedfreeenergyharvestincreasesfromoneiterationtothenext.)
As an example of such multiplicative payoff, we could take b to be the num-
v
ber of people in occupation v in the associated iteration, and have w be some
“winnings” computation parameter of the environment. The idea is that the free
energyharvestattheendofaniterationdependsmultiplicativelyonthenumberof
peopleintheoccupationcorrespondingtothevalueofthatwinningscomputation
parameter of the environment had in that iteration. See [23] and other papers in
thepopulationbiologyliteratureonthe“fitnessvalueofinformation”.
N.b., if the value of w is not conditionally independent of all information
i
thatthesocietyagenthasconcerningtheenvironmentatthestartofthatiteration,
then things are more complicated. Let y be the information the society agent has
that is relevant to the value of w at the beginning of an iteration. For simplicity,
i
suppose y is a noisy observation of w In this case, the optimal resource allocation
51changestob ∝ P(w|y),andtheassociatedwinningsrateincreasesbythemutual
w
informationbetweenwandy.
Of course, the harvest functions we are going to be interested in will not have
exactly multiplicative payoffs. Nor are we interested in asymptotically optimal
behavior;thenumberofiterationsintothefutureweareinterestedinwillpresum-
ablybesomefinitenumber,andsoifit’snonethelesslarge,wemustusedeviation
theory [90] to analyze optimal behavior. These kinds of complications mean we
mayneedtoextendKellygamblingsomehow.
References
[1] Christoph Adami, The use of information theory in evolutionary biology,
Annals of the New York Academy of Sciences 1256 (2012), no. 1, 49–65
(en).
[2] Hashim M. Al-Hashimi, Turing, von Neumann, and the computational ar-
chitectureofbiologicalmachines,ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyof
Sciences120(2023),no.25,e2220022120(en).
[3] Sanjeev Arora and Boaz Barak, Computational complexity: a modern ap-
proach,CambridgeUniversityPress,2009.
[4] Jan Arpe, Andreas Jakoby, and Maciej Lis´kiewicz, One-way communica-
tion complexity of symmetric boolean functions, Fundamentals of Compu-
tationTheory,Springer,2003,pp.158–170.
[5] Jose´ Ignacio Arroyo, Beatriz D´ıez, Christopher P Kempes, Geoffrey B
West, and Pablo A Marquet, A general theory for temperature dependence
in biology, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 119 (2022),
no.30,e2119872119.
[6] La´szlo´ Babai, Anna Ga´l, Peter G Kimmel, and Satyanarayana V Lokam,
Communication complexity of simultaneous messages, SIAM Journal on
Computing33(2003),no.1,137–166.
[7] Marshall Ball and Tim Randolph, A note on the complexity of private si-
multaneous messages with many parties, 3rd Conference on Information-
Theoretic Cryptography (ITC 2022), Schloss Dagstuhl-Leibniz-Zentrum
fu¨rInformatik,2022.
[8] G. S. Becker and K. M. Murphy, The Division of Labor, Coordination
Costs, and Knowledge, The Quarterly Journal of Economics 107 (1992),
no.4,1137–1160(en).
52[9] Lu´ıs M. A. Bettencourt, Horacio Samaniego, and Hyejin Youn, Profes-
sional diversity and the productivity of cities, Scientific Reports 4 (2014),
no.1,5393(en).
[10] Lu´ıs MA Bettencourt, The origins of scaling in cities, science 340 (2013),
no.6139,1438–1441.
[11] Luis MA Bettencourt, Urban growth and the emergent statistics of cities,
Scienceadvances6(2020),no.34,eaat8812.
[12] Robert Boyd, A different kind of animal: how culture transformed our
species, University Center for Human Values series, University Press,
Princeton,2018(eng),HOLLISnumber: 990152078900203941.
[13] Ozan Candogan, Ishai Menache, Asuman Ozdaglar, and Pablo A Par-
rilo, Flows and decompositions of games: Harmonic and potential games,
MathematicsofOperationsResearch36(2011),no.3,474–503.
[14] Robert L. Carneiro, Evolutionism In Cultural Anthropology: A Critical
History,Routledge,February2018(en).
[15] Garry Chick, Cultural Complexity: The Concept and Its Measurement,
Cross-CulturalResearch31(1997),no.4,275–307(en).
[16] David Christian, Maps of time: an introduction to big history, California
world history library, University of California Press, Berkeley, 2004 (eng),
HOLLISnumber: 990128022730203941.
[17] , ”Complexity, energy and information in Big History and human
history”, 21st-Century narratives of world history (R. Charles Weller, ed.),
PalgraveMacmillan,Cham,Switzerland,December2017,pp.111–142.
[18] T. Cover and J. Thomas, Elements of information theory, Wiley-
Interscience,NewYork,1991.
[19] Jakub Dargaj and Jakob Grue Simonsen, A complete characterization of
infinitely repeated two-player games having computable strategies with no
computable best response under limit-of-means payoff, Proceedings of the
21stACMConferenceonEconomicsandComputation,2020,pp.69–70.
[20] ,Discountedrepeatedgameshavingcomputablestrategieswithno
computable best response under subgame-perfect equilibria, ACM Trans-
actionsonEconomicsandComputation10(2022),no.1,1–39.
53[21] Richard Dawkins, The blind watchmaker: why the evidence of evolution
revealsauniversewithoutdesign,Norton,NewYork,1996(eng),HOLLIS
number: 990079495730203941.
[22] TrevorDenton,CulturalComplexityRevisited,Cross-CulturalResearch38
(2004),no.1,3–26(en).
[23] Matina C Donaldson-Matasci, Carl T Bergstrom, and Michael Lachmann,
Thefitnessvalueofinformation,Oikos119(2010),no.2,219–230.
[24] RichardA.Easterlin,Growthtriumphant: thetwenty-firstcenturyinhistor-
ical perspective, 1st pbk. ed. ed., Economics, cognition, and society, Uni-
versity of Michigan Press, Ann Arbor, Mich., 1998 (eng), HOLLIS num-
ber: 99155800247303941.
[25] Brian J Enquist, James H Brown, and Geoffrey B West, Allometric scaling
of plant energetics and population density, Nature 395 (1998), no. 6698,
163–165.
[26] Magnus Enquist, Stefano Ghirlanda, and Kimmo Eriksson, Modelling the
evolutionanddiversityofcumulativeculture,PhilosophicalTransactionsof
the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences 366 (2011), no. 1563, 412–423
(en).
[27] OrrFischer,RotemOshman,andUriZwick,Publicvs.privaterandomness
in simultaneous multi-party communication complexity, Structural Infor-
mation and Communication Complexity: 23rd International Colloquium,
SIROCCO 2016, Helsinki, Finland, July 19-21, 2016, Revised Selected
Papers23,Springer,2016,pp.60–74.
[28] Rochelle Forrester, Guttman scale analysis and its use to explain cultural
evolution and social change, How Change Happens: A Theory of Philos-
ophyofHistory,SocialChangeandCulturalEvolution,(2009),BestPubli-
cationsLimited(2009).
[29] Oded Galor, Unified growth theory, University Press, Princeton, 2011
(eng),HOLLISnumber: 990127805250203941.
[30] Peter Gedeon, Social change or social evolution? Arguments for and
against social progress in the sociological theory of evolution, Corvinus
JournalofSociologyandSocialPolicy9(2018),no.1,3–33(en).
[31] Clifford Geertz, The interpretation of cultures: selected essays, Harper
torchbooks;TB5043,BasicBooks,NewYork,1973(eng),HOLLISnum-
ber: 990006803790203941.
54[32] Nigel Goldenfeld and Carl Woese, Life is Physics: Evolution as a Col-
lective Phenomenon Far From Equilibrium, Annual Review of Condensed
MatterPhysics2(2011),no.1,375–399(en).
[33] Nicholas Guttenberg and Nigel Goldenfeld, Cascade of complexity in
evolvingpredator-preydynamics,Physicalreviewletters100(2008),no.5,
058102.
[34] J. W. Hanson, S. G. Ortman, and J. Lobo, Urbanism and the division of
labour in the Roman Empire, Journal of The Royal Society Interface 14
(2017),no.136,20170367(en).
[35] Kyle Harper, Culture, nature, and history: the case of ancient sexuality,
Comparative studies in society and history 55 (2013), no. 4, 986–1016,
Publisher: CambridgeUniversityPress.
[36] HarrisonHartle,DavidWolpert,AndrewStier,ChristopherPKempes,and
GonzaloManzano,Workextractionwithfeedbackcontrolusinglimitedre-
sources,arXivpreprintarXiv:2407.05507(2024).
[37] Ricardo Hausmann, Ce´sar A. Hidalgo, and Sebastian Bustos, The atlas of
economic complexity: mapping paths to prosperity, The MIT Press, Cam-
bridge,MassachusettsLondon,England,2013(en).
[38] Joseph Henrich, Demography and cultural evolution: how adaptive cul-
tural processes can produce maladaptive losses—the Tasmanian case,
American antiquity 69 (2004), no. 2, 197–214, Publisher: Cambridge Uni-
versityPress.
[39] Martin Hilbert and Priscila Lo´pez, The World’s Technological Capacity
to Store, Communicate, and Compute Information, Science 332 (2011),
no.6025,60–65(en).
[40] EvaJablonkaandMarionJLamb,Theevolutionofinformationinthemajor
transitions,Journaloftheoreticalbiology239(2006),no.2,236–246.
[41] CharlesIJones,Sourcesofuseconomicgrowthinaworldofideas,Amer-
icaneconomicreview92(2002),no.1,220–239.
[42] Ju¨rgen Jost, Biological information, Theory in Biosciences 139 (2020),
no.4,361–370(en).
[43] Stasys Jukna et al., Boolean function complexity: advances and frontiers,
vol.27,Springer,2012.
55[44] Vojteˇch Kasˇe, Petra Heˇrma´nkova´, and Ade´la Sobotkova´, Division of labor,
specialization and diversity in the ancient Roman cities: A quantitative
approachtoLatinepigraphy,PLOSONE17(2022),no.6,e0269869(en).
[45] Christopher P. Kempes, Lawrence Wang, Jan P. Amend, John Doyle, and
ToriHoehler,Evolutionarytradeoffsincellularcompositionacrossdiverse
bacteria, The ISME Journal 10 (2016), no. 9, 2145–2157 (en), Number: 9
Publisher: NaturePublishingGroup.
[46] Artemy Kolchinsky and David H. Wolpert, Semantic information, au-
tonomous agency and non-equilibrium statistical physics, Interface Focus
8(2018),no.6,20180041(en).
[47] JaredT.Koyama,Mark;Rubin,Howtheworldbecamerich: thehistorical
origins of economic growth, Polity Press, Cambridge, UK ; Medford, MA,
USA,2022(eng),HOLLISnumber: 99156425988903941.
[48] David C. Krakauer, Darwinian demons, evolutionary complexity, and in-
formation maximization, Chaos: An Interdisciplinary Journal of Nonlinear
Science21(2011),no.3,037110(en).
[49] Adam Kuper, The invention of primitive society: transformations of an
illusion, Routledge, London ; New York, 1988 (eng), HOLLIS number:
990015776470203941.
[50] Eyal Kushilevitz, Communication complexity, Advances in Computers 44
(1997),331–360.
[51] MarcoH.D.vanLeeuwen,HISCO:Historicalinternationalstandardclas-
sificationofoccupations,LeuvenUniversityPress,Leuven,Belgium,2002
(eng),HOLLISnumber: 990091315710203941.
[52] M. Li and Vitanyi P., An introduction to kolmogorov complexity and its
applications,Springer,2008.
[53] Joseph T Lizier, Mikhail Prokopenko, and Albert Y Zomaya, A framework
for the local information dynamics of distributed computation in complex
systems,Guidedself-organization: inception,Springer,2014,pp.115–158.
[54] J. Marschak and R. Radner, Economic theory of teams, Yale University
Press,NewHaven,CO,1972.
[55] Melanie Mitchell, Complexity: A guided tour, Oxford university press,
2009.
56[56] Joel Mokyr, The Lever of Riches:Technological Creativity and Economic
Progress,OxfordUniversityPress,NewYork;Oxford,1990(eng).
[57] D. Monderer and L. S. Shapley, Potential games, Games and Economic
Behavior 14(1996),124–143.
[58] CristopherMooreandStephanMertens,Thenatureofcomputation,Oxford
UniversityPress,2011.
[59] Lewis Henry Morgan, Ancient society; or, Researches in the lines
of human progress from savagery, through barbarism to civilization,,
H. Holt and Company, New York, 1877 (eng), HOLLIS number:
990014359600203941.
[60] Ian Morris, Why the West rules– for now: the patterns of history, and
what they reveal about the future, 1st ed. ed., Business book summary,
Farrar, Straus and Giroux, New York, 2010 (eng), HOLLIS number:
990126126250203941.
[61] , The measure of civilization: how social development decides the
fate of nations, University Press, Princeton, 2013 (eng), HOLLIS number:
990134667850203941.
[62] , Evolutionary history, Evolutionary Psychology 20 (2022), no. 1,
147470492110682(en).
[63] George P. Murdock and Caterina Provost, Measurement of cultural com-
plexity,Ethnology12(1973),no.4,379–392,Publisher: JSTOR.
[64] Douglass C. North, Institutions, institutional change and economic perfor-
mance, Political economy of institutions and decisions, Cambridge Uni-
versity Press, Cambridge ; New York, 1990 (eng), HOLLIS number:
990019893890203941.
[65] P Peregrine, Toward a theory of recurrent social formations, The Emer-
genceofPremodernStates: NewPerspectivesontheDevelopmentofCom-
plexSocieties2(2018).
[66] Peter N Peregrine, Carol R Ember, and Melvin Ember, Universal patterns
in cultural evolution: An empirical analysis using guttman scaling, Amer-
icanAnthropologist 106(2004),no.1,145–149.
[67] PeterN.Peregrine,CarolR.Ember,andMelvinEmberReviewedwork(s):,
Universal Patterns in Cultural Evolution: An Empirical Analysis Using
57GuttmanScaling,AmericanAnthropologist,NewSeries106(2004),no.1,
145–149(en).
[68] Gualtiero Piccinini, The physical church–turing thesis: Modest or bold?,
TheBritishJournalforthePhilosophyofScience(2011).
[69] Gualtiero Piccinini and Corey Maley, Computation in physical systems,
StanfordEncyclopediaofPhilosophy(2021).
[70] Kenneth Pomeranz, The great divergence: China, europe, and the making
ofthemodernworldeconomy,PrincetonUniversityPress,2000.
[71] Barry B. Powell, Writing: theory and history of the technology of civi-
lization, Wiley-Blackwell, Chichester, U.K. ; Malden, MA, 2009 (eng),
HOLLISnumber: 990119415010203941.
[72] Anup Rao and Amir Yehudayoff, Communication complexity: and appli-
cations,CambridgeUniversityPress,2020.
[73] Olivier Rivoire and Stanislas Leibler, The value of information for popu-
lations in varying environments, Journal of Statistical Physics 142 (2011),
1124–1166.
[74] Iza Romanowska, Colin D Wren, and Stefani A Crabtree, Agent-based
modeling for archaeology: simulating the complexity of societies, SFI
Press,2021.
[75] Paul M. Romer, Endogenous Technological Change, Journal of Political
Economy98(1990),no.5,Part2,S71–S102,Publisher: TheUniversityof
ChicagoPress.
[76] Stephen K. Sanderson, Social transformations: a general theory of his-
torical development, expanded ed. ed., Rowman & Littlefield Publishers,
Lanham,Md.,1999(eng),HOLLISnumber: 990081368260203941.
[77] Walter Scheidel, Escape from rome: the failure of empire and the road to
prosperity,PrincetonUniversityPress,2019.
[78] E.Schrodinger,Whatislife?,CambridgeUniversityPress,1944.
[79] Elman Rogers Service, Cultural evolutionism: theory in practice,
Holt, Rinehart and Winston, New York, 1971 (eng), HOLLIS number:
990016507760203941.
58[80] Jaeweon Shin, Michael Holton Price, David H Wolpert, Hajime Shimao,
Brendan Tracey, and Timothy A Kohler, Scale and information-processing
thresholdsinholocenesocialevolution,Naturecommunications11(2020),
no.1,2394.
[81] Michael Sipser, Introduction to the theory of computation, ACM Sigact
News27(1996),no.1,27–29.
[82] Dan Smail, In the grip of sacred history, The American Historical Review
110(2005),no.5,1337–1361,Publisher: TheUniversityofChicagoPress.
[83] PaulE.SmaldinoandPeterJ.Richerson,HumanCumulativeCulturalEvo-
lutionasaFormofDistributedComputation,HandbookofHumanCompu-
tation (Pietro Michelucci, ed.), Springer New York, New York, NY, 2013,
pp.979–992(en).
[84] Adam Smith, An inquiry into the nature and causes of the wealth of na-
tions, Eighteenth century collections online, Printed for W. Strahan, Lon-
don,1776(eng),OCLC:741127004.
[85] John Maynard Smith, The major transitions in evolution, Perseus Books,
1999.
[86] Sam Smith, Damion Dooley, and Yongqun He, Foundational Development
ofanOccupationOntology(en).
[87] Fred Spier, Big History and the Future of Humanity, John Wiley & Sons,
May2015(en),Google-Books-ID:g5SDBgAAQBAJ.
[88] Eo¨rs Szathma´ry, Toward major evolutionary transitions theory 2.0, Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences 112 (2015), no. 33, 10104–
10111(en).
[89] Eo¨rs Szathma´ry and John Maynard Smith, The major evolutionary transi-
tions,Nature374(1995),no.6519,227–232,Publisher: NaturePublishing
GroupUKLondon.
[90] Hugo Touchette, The large deviation approach to statistical mechanics,
PhysicsReports478(2009),no.1-3,1–69.
[91] Boris A Trakhtenbrot, A survey of russian approaches to perebor (brute-
force searches) algorithms, Annals of the History of Computing 6 (1984),
no.4,384–400.
59[92] K. Tumer and D. H. Wolpert, Collective intelligence and Braess’ paradox,
Proceedings of the Seventeenth National Conference on Artificial Intelli-
gence(Austin,TX),2000,pp.104–109.
[93] , Overview of collective intelligence, The Design and Analysis of
Collectives (D. H. Wolpert and K. Tumer, eds.), Springer-Verlag, New
York,2002.
[94] Peter Turchin, Thomas E. Currie, Harvey Whitehouse, Pieter Franc¸ois,
Kevin Feeney, Daniel Mullins, Daniel Hoyer, Christina Collins, Stephanie
Grohmann, Patrick Savage, Gavin Mendel-Gleason, Edward Turner,
AgatheDupeyron,EnricoCioni,JennyReddish,JillLevine,GreineJordan,
Eva Brandl, Alice Williams, Rudolf Cesaretti, Marta Krueger, Alessandro
Ceccarelli,JoeFigliulo-Rosswurm,Po-JuTuan,PeterPeregrine,Arkadiusz
Marciniak, Johannes Preiser-Kapeller, Nikolay Kradin, Andrey Korotayev,
Alessio Palmisano, David Baker, Julye Bidmead, Peter Bol, David Chris-
tian, Connie Cook, Alan Covey, Gary Feinman, A´rni Dan´ıel Ju´l´ıusson,
Axel Kristinsson, John Miksic, Ruth Mostern, Cameron Petrie, Peter
Rudiak-Gould, Barend Ter Haar, Vesna Wallace, Victor Mair, Liye Xie,
John Baines, Elizabeth Bridges, Joseph Manning, Bruce Lockhart, Amy
Bogaard, and Charles Spencer, Quantitative historical analysis uncovers a
single dimension of complexity that structures global variation in human
socialorganization,ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences115
(2018),no.2(en).
[95] Edward Burnett Tylor, Anthropology: an introduction to the study of
man and civilization, Harvard College Library history of science project,
no. 00004, D. Appleton, New York, 1881 (eng), HOLLIS number:
990061023400203941.
[96] Geoffrey B West, James H Brown, and Brian J Enquist, A general model
for the origin of allometric scaling laws in biology, Science 276 (1997),
no.5309,122–126.
[97] , A general model for ontogenetic growth, Nature 413 (2001),
no.6856,628–631.
[98] LeslieA.White,Theevolutionofculture;thedevelopmentofcivilizationto
the fall of Rome, McGraw-Hill, New York, 1959 (eng), HOLLIS number:
990015092700203941.
[99] Stephen Wolfram, Cellular automata as models of complexity, Nature 311
(1984),no.5985,419–424.
60[100] D.H.WolpertandJ.Lawson,Designingagentcollectivesforsystemswith
markovian dynamics, Proceedings of the First International Joint Confer-
ence on Autonomous Agents and Multi-Agent Systems (Bologna, Italy),
July2002.
[101] D. H. Wolpert, J. Sill, and K. Tumer, Reinforcement learning in dis-
tributeddomains: Beyondteamgames,ProceedingsoftheSeventeenthIn-
ternationalJointConferenceonArtificialIntelligence(Seattle,WA),2001,
pp.819–824.
[102] David Wolpert, Jan Korbel, Christopher Lynn, Farita Tasnim, Joshua
Grochow, Gu¨lce Kardes¸, James Aimone, Vijay Balasubramanian, Eric
De Giuli, David Doty, et al., Is stochastic thermodynamics the key
to understanding the energy costs of computation?, arXiv preprint
arXiv:2311.17166(2023).
[103] David H Wolpert, The stochastic thermodynamics of computation, Journal
ofPhysicsA:MathematicalandTheoretical52(2019),no.19,193001,See
arXiv:1905.05669forupdatedversion.
[104] BingKanXueandStanislasLeibler,Bethedgingagainstdemographicfluc-
tuations,PhysicalReviewLetters119(2017),no.10,108103.
[105] Vicky Chuqiao Yang, Christopher P. Kempes, Hyejin Youn, Sidney Red-
ner,andGeoffreyB.West,ScalingandtheUniversalityofFunctionDiver-
sity Across Human Organizations, August 2022, arXiv:2208.06487 [nlin,
physics:physics,q-bio].
61