INN-PAR: Invertible Neural Network for PPG to
ABP Reconstruction
Soumitra Kundu Gargi Panda Saumik Bhattacharya
Rekhi Centre of Excellence for the Science of Happiness Department of EE Department of E&ECE
IIT Kharagpur, India IIT Kharagpur, India IIT Kharagpur, India
soumitra2012.kbc@gmail.com pandagargi@gmail.com saumik@ece.iitkgp.ac.in
Aurobinda Routray Rajlakshmi Guha
Department of EE Rekhi Centre of Excellence for the Science of Happiness
IIT Kharagpur, India IIT Kharagpur, India
aroutray@ee.iitkgp.ac.in rajg@cet.iitkgp.ac.in
Abstract—Non-invasive and continuous blood pressure (BP) offer a safer, more convenient alternative. However, these
monitoring is essential for the early prevention of many car- cuff-based devices are often bulky and impractical for
diovasculardiseases.Estimatingarterialbloodpressure(ABP)
continuous monitoring due to the need for repeated cuff
fromphotoplethysmography(PPG)hasemergedasapromising
inflations and deflations.
solution.However,existingdeeplearningapproachesforPPG-
to-ABP reconstruction (PAR) encounter certain information To address these limitations, photoplethysmography
loss, impacting the precision of the reconstructed signal. To (PPG) has emerged as a promising technique for measuring
overcome this limitation, we introduce an invertible neural
BP in a continuous and non-invasive manner. Wearable
network for PPG to ABP reconstruction (INN-PAR), which
devices like smartwatches, fitness bands, and smart rings
employs a series of invertible blocks to jointly learn the
mapping between PPG and its gradient with the ABP signal have significantly simplified the collection of PPG signals.
and its gradient. INN-PAR efficiently captures both forward Aditionally, recent advancements in deep learning have
and inverse mappings simultaneously, thereby preventing in- enabled the continuous extraction of arterial blood pressure
formationloss.Byintegratingsignalgradientsintothelearning
(ABP) waveforms from PPG signals. BP is estimated by
process, INN-PAR enhances the network’s ability to capture
analyzingtheseABPwaveformstodetermineSBPandDBP
essentialhigh-frequencydetails,leadingtomoreaccuratesignal
reconstruction.Moreover,weproposeamulti-scaleconvolution by identifying the peak and crest in each cardiac cycle [1].
module (MSCM) within the invertible block, enabling the
Several studies have explored the reconstruction of ABP
model to learn features across multiple scales effectively. We
waveforms from PPG signals using deep learning tech-
have experimented on two benchmark datasets, which show
that INN-PAR significantly outperforms the state-of-the-art niques, such as convolutional neural networks (CNNs) [2]–
methodsinbothwaveformreconstructionandBPmeasurement [4], variational autoencoders (VAEs) [5], and CycleGANs
accuracy. [6]. The U-Net architecture [7], with its contracting and
expansive paths connected by skip connections, has been
Index Terms—PPG, ABP, waveform reconstruction, invert-
widely adopted for ABP estimation from PPG signals [2],
ible neural network.
[3]. U-Net effectively translates one signal to another by
I. INTRODUCTION combining contextual information and high-resolution fea-
turestoreconstructABPwaveforms.Hilletal.[4]proposed
Continuous monitoring of blood pressure (BP) is es-
another method utilizing a modified V-Net architecture for
sential for the early detection and management of several
predicting ABP waveforms. Generally, these PPG-to-ABP
cardiovascular diseases. In BP measurement, systolic blood
reconstruction (PAR) methods [2]–[4] involve two steps:
pressure (SBP), the higher of the two values, signifies the
feature extraction and signal reconstruction. Despite their
peak pressure in the arteries during the heart’s contraction,
effectiveness, these methods often experience significant in-
whilediastolicbloodpressure(DBP)indicatestheminimum
formation loss during the feature extraction stage due to the
pressure during the heart’s resting phase between beats.
non-injectivemappinglearnedbythenetwork.Additionally,
Both SBP and DBP values are expressed in millimeters of
these methods do not account for the signal gradient, which
mercury (mmHg). Continuous monitoring aids in adjusting
contains critical structural information.
medications and lifestyle modifications for improved BP
management. To address the challenge of information loss in deep
Traditional methods of measuring BP can be divided into neuralnetworks,invertibleneuralnetworks(INN)havebeen
invasive and non-invasive techniques. Invasive techniques, proposed [8], [9]. INNs retain all information from the
which involve arterial cannulation, pose serious risks, while input signal by learning reversible bijective transformations,
non-invasive methods like cuff-based sphygmomanometers ensuringacompleteandaccuratemappingbetweentheinput
4202
peS
31
]GL.sc[
1v12090.9042:viXraFig. 1: INN-PAR architecture and Invertible Block (IB) structure.
signal x and output signal y. Through a series of invertible
and bijective functions {f }N , x and y can be related as,
k k=0
y =f ◦f ◦f ◦···◦f (x)
0 1 2 N
(1)
x=f−1◦f−1◦f−1◦···◦f−1(y)
0 1 2 N
Though INNs have primarily been used for generative Fig. 2: Multi-Scale Convolution Module (MSCM).
tasks in image [8], [10], [11] and signal processing [12]–
[14], several studies have also applied INNs to image re-
construction tasks [15]–[18]. In a similar manner, INN may
II. PROPOSEDMETHOD
be advantageous for signal-to-signal reconstruction tasks, A. Overall architecture of INN-PAR
as they simultaneously learn both the forward and inverse Our proposed model INN-PAR aims to reconstruct an
mappings, which helps prevent information loss. Addition- ABPsignalY ∈RL×1fromaPPGsignalX ∈RL×1,where
ally, incorporating the signal gradient into the learning L is the signal length. The ABP signal Y is related to the
process,whichfocusesontherateofchangeratherthanjust PPGsignalX throughanon-linearmapping:f :Y =f(X).
the signal values, enhances the ability to capture essential Hence, ABP to PPG signal reconstruction can be performed
high-frequency details [19], [20], thereby ensuring a more by the inverse mapping f−1 : X = f−1(Y). Our proposed
accurate reconstruction of the signal’s shape. method INN-PAR, utilizing an INN structure, simultane-
In this paper, we propose a novel INN built using a ously learns these two mappings.
stack of invertible blocks for the PAR task. While learning Following[8],wedesignINN-PARtohavemulti-channel
the mapping between PPG and ABP, INN-PAR simultane- input and output pairs. This allows the model to preserve
ously learns the mapping between their gradients, which all necessary information across the forward and inverse
improves the reconstruction capability of essential high- mappings. For the single-channel PPG and ABP signal pair,
frequency details. Additionally, we introduce a multi-scale we incorporate their gradients as additional channels. Fig.
convolution module (MSCM) within the invertible blocks 1 illustrates the architecture of INN-PAR. While learning
to capture multi-scale features effectively. During training the mapping between X and Y, we also learn the mapping
the network, we constrain both the estimated ABP and its between their gradients ∇X and ∇Y, where ∇ denotes
gradienttomatchthegroundtruthsignalsclosely.Extensive thegradientoperation.Sincethegradientoperationcaptures
experimentswereconductedacrosstwobenchmarkdatasets, essentialstructuralinformationandhigh-frequencydetailsof
demonstratingthatINN-PARoutperformsthestate-of-the-art thesignal,learninggradientmappingshelpsINN-PARmore
(SOTA)methodsinbothPPG-to-ABPwaveformreconstruc- accuratelyreconstructthehigh-frequencydetailsoftheABP
tion as well as SBP and DBP measurement accuracy. signal. Let G denote the INN-PAR, and we can write,
The rest of this paper is organized in the following
forward pass, G :(X,∇X)−→(Y,∇Y)
manner. The architecture of INN-PAR, the structure of (2)
reverse pass, G−1 :(Y,∇Y)−→(X,∇X)
the invertible block (IB), and the loss function details are
described in Section II. Experiments on two benchmark The invertibility of G is achieved by its invertible struc-
datasets show the effectiveness of our proposed method, ture, containing a stack of invertible blocks (IBs). Each IB
which is demonstrated in Section III. Finally, we conclude consists of an invertible 1×1 convolution followed by an
the paper in Section IV. affine coupling layer (ACL), described below.Fig. 3: Visual comparison with SOTA methods. The first row shows a signal from the Sensors dataset [2], and the second
row shows a signal from the BCG dataset [21]. Signals are best viewed in 200% zoom.
B. Affine Coupling Layer (ACL) D. Invertible 1×1 Convolution
ACL, the core component of IB, can operate in both Following Glow [11], we use an invertible 1 × 1 con-
forward and reverse modes. In the forward mode, ACL volution as the learnable permutation function to reverse
transformsaninputpair(X 1,X 2)toanoutputpair(Y 1,Y 2) the order of the channels before each ACL. The weights of
using the following equations [15]: thisconvolutionareinitializedtobeorthonormal.Thislayer
helps in mixing information across the channel dimension.
Y =X +H (X )
1 1 1 2
(3) E. Loss Function
Y =X ⊙exp(H (Y ))+H (Y )
2 2 2 1 3 1
During the training of INN-PAR, we constrain the recon-
where ⊙ denotes elementwise multiplication. H (·),
1 structed ABP signal Y and its gradient ∇Y to match the
H (·), and H (·) are learnable modules, that need not be
2 3 groundtruth(GT)ABPsignalY anditsgradient∇Y using
invertible [15]. In the reverse mode of ACL, (Y ,Y ) is g g
1 2 the L loss function. The overall loss function is,
perfectly mapped back to (X ,X ) as, 1
1 2
L=||Y −Y || +α||∇Y −∇Y || (5)
g 1 g 1
X =(Y −H (Y ))⊘exp(H (Y ))
2 2 3 1 2 1
(4) whereαisatuningparameter.Inourexperiments,weset
X =Y −H (X )
1 1 1 2 the value of α to 1.
where ⊘ denotes elementwise division. For H (·), H (·),
1 2
andH (·),weusemulti-scaleconvolutionmodule(MSCM) III. EXPERIMENTS
3
described below. A. Experimental Setup
C. Multi-Scale Convolution Module (MSCM) For the experiments, we utilize two publicly available
Fig.2showsthestructureofMSCM,whichprocessesthe datasets: Sensors [2] and BCG [21]. We use the Sensors
signal at multiple scales. At each scale, convolution layers datasetfortrainingandtestingINN-PAR.Moreover,wealso
are employed to extract the features. After each convolution tested the performance of the BCG dataset to check the
operation, the ReLU activation function is used except for model’s generalization ability without any finetuning. We
the last convolution layer. follow [1] for data pre-processing and splitting the dataset
For downscaling and upscaling of signals in MSCM, we into training, validation, and test sets. We are not using any
donotusestridedconvolutionsanddeconvolutionoperations subject calibration and PPG scaling. Also, we do not allow
as they lead to loss of information. Instead, we design subject information leakage among the training, validation,
lossless squeeze and unsqueeze operations for the down- and test sets. The signals are segmented into 5s chunks
scalingandupscalingsteps.LikethePixelShuffleoperation without overlapping. For the Sensors dataset, we use 6658
[22], the squeeze operation reduces the signal length while signalchunksfortraining,2383forvalidation,and2061for
keepingthesignalsizethesamebyincreasingthenumberof testing. For the BCG dataset, we use 671 signal chunks for
channels. Thus, the spatial information is preserved across testing. We train INN-PAR by minimizing the loss function
the channel dimension. For the unsqueeze operation, we in Eqn. 5 using Adam optimizer (β = 0.9, β = 0.999)
1 2
use the inverse of the squeeze operation, where the signal for 500 epochs with a batch size of 128. The learning rate
length is increased while keeping the signal size the same is kept constant at 1×10−4. Using the Pytorch framework,
by reducing the number of channels. we have conducted all the experiments in the NVIDIA A40TABLE I: Performance comparison using two benchmark datasets with SOTA methods. FLOPs are measured for
reconstructing an ABP signal with a length of 625. The best values are highlighted. ↓ means a low value is desired.
SBP and DBP values are in mmHg unit.
Sensors[2] BCG[21]
Method Params(K) FLOPs(M)
Waveform SBP DBP Waveform SBP DBP
MAE↓ NRMSE↓ MAE↓ MAE↓ MAE↓ NRMSE↓ MAE↓ MAE↓
VNet1d[1] 530 17.19 0.062 0.654 16.45 8.57 0.079 0.872 13.56 9.87
UNet1d[1] 141 43.76 0.059 0.527 15.34 7.29 0.080 0.725 12.74 8.02
INN-PAR(Ours) 372 0.018 0.058 0.506 15.10 7.20 0.075 0.701 11.96 7.93
GPU.Meanabsoluteerror(MAE)andnormalizedrootmean twice in the input. AE2: In the affine coupling layer, we
squareerror(NRMSE)[23]metricsareusedtocomparethe extract the features at a single scale instead of multi-scale
waveform reconstruction accuracy. For the accuracy of SBP feature extraction. For this, we remove the downscaling and
and DBP measurement, we utilize the MAE metric. upscaling layers in INN-PAR and keep only the convolution
For the implementation of INN-PAR, the number of and ReLU activation layers. AE3: In the loss function in
invertibleblocksissetto4.InMSCM,weprocessthesignal Eqn. 4, we set the value of α to 0. AE4: Our proposed
at 3 scales. At scale 1, the number of convolution filters is method. For ablation experiments, we train on the Sensors
16; at scale 2, the number is 32; and at scale 3, the number dataset,andtestontheBCGdataset.TableIIshowstheper-
is64.Forallthe3scales,thekernelsizefortheconvolution formancefordifferentablationexperiments.Asshownfrom
layer is set to 5×1. the results of AE1, not using the gradient channel of PPG
and ABP in INN-PAR severely degrades the performance.
B. Performance Comparison
Also, the multi-scale feature extraction in MSCM is highly
Since the majority of PPG to ABP reconstruction algo- effective, as evident from the results of AE2. Moreover,
rithms do not have open-source code, we have only been constraining the gradient of the reconstructed ABP signal
able to compare INN-PAR with two SOTA reconstruction to that of the ground truth ABP signal is also effective, as
methods. The algorithms used for comparison are VNet1d demonstratedbytheresultsofAE3.Theseresultsjustifythe
[1]andUNet1d[1].Toensureafaircomparison,weutilized design of INN-PAR as well as the loss function.
the models trained on the same dataset provided by the
benchmark work [1]. Table I exhibits a quantitative com- TABLE II: Comparison results of different ablation experi-
parisonofINN-PARwiththeSOTAmethods.Inadditionto ments.Thebestvaluesarehighlighted.↓meansalowvalue
the MAE and NRMSE metrics, the model parameters and is desired. SBP and DBP values are in mmHg unit.
FLOPs were also listed. We calculate the FLOPs under the
settingofreconstructinganABPsignaloflength625.Alow Waveform SBP DBP
Experiment
value of model parameters, FLOPs, MAE, and NRMSE is
MAE↓ NRMSE↓ MAE↓ MAE↓
desired.INN-PARsurpassestheSOTAmethodsinwaveform
AE1 0.657 1.203 129.83 63.74
reconstructionandSBPandDBPmeasurementperformance.
ThoughUNet1dhaslowermodelparametersthanINN-PAR, AE2 0.078 0.724 13.20 8.47
our method has significantly lower FLOPs or computational AE3 0.077 0.731 12.02 8.01
complexity. AE4 0.075 0.701 11.96 7.93
Figure3showsthevisualcomparisonforasignalfromthe
Sensors and BCG datasets. VNet1d does not reconstruct the
IV. CONCLUSION
ABP signal well. UNet1d and INN-PAR show better signal
reconstruction capability. However, INN-PAR reconstructs This work introduces INN-PAR, an invertible network
the high-frequency details of the ABP signal with much designed for the PPG-to-ABP reconstruction (PAR) task.
better accuracy. All these quantitative and qualitative results Unlike other deep learning models, INN-PAR jointly learns
show the effectiveness of INN-PAR. the mapping between PPG and its gradient with those of
the ABP signal, simultaneously capturing both forward and
C. Ablation Study
inverse mappings, thus, preventing information loss. Also,
To evaluate the effectiveness of our proposed method, we we propose MSCM to capture features at multiple scales.
perform the following ablation experiments. AE1: Instead Our ablation experiments justify the design of INN-PAR.
of joint learning the mapping between the signal and its ExperimentalresultsdemonstratethatINN-PARoutperforms
gradient, we only learn the mapping between signals. Since the SOTA methods. Future research could investigate the
the INN framework needs multi-channel input to maintain application of INN-PAR to other physiological signal re-
the invertibility, we repeat the single-channel PPG signal construction tasks.REFERENCES Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
2019,pp.3617–3621.
[1] S. Gonza´lez, W.-T. Hsieh, and T. P.-C. Chen, “A benchmark for [13] M. Strauss and B. Edler, “A flow-based neural network for time
machine-learningbasednon-invasivebloodpressureestimationusing domain speech enhancement,” in IEEE International Conference on
photoplethysmogram,”ScientificData,vol.10,no.1,p.149,2023. Acoustics,SpeechandSignalProcessing(ICASSP),2021,pp.5754–
[2] N.Aguirre,E.Grall-Mae¨s,L.J.Cymberknop,andR.L.Armentano, 5758.
“Blood pressure morphology assessment from photoplethysmogram [14] J. Mosin´ski, P. Bilin´ski, T. Merritt, A. Ezzerg, and D. Korzekwa,
and demographic information using deep learning with attention “Ae-flow: Autoencoder normalizing flow,” in IEEE International
mechanism,”Sensors,vol.21,no.6,p.2167,2021. Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP),
[3] T. Athaya and S. Choi, “An estimation method of continuous non- 2023,pp.1–5.
invasive arterial blood pressure waveform using photoplethysmogra- [15] M.Xiao,S.Zheng,C.Liu,Z.Lin,andT.-Y.Liu,“Invertiblerescaling
phy: A U-Net architecture-based approach,” Sensors, vol. 21, no. 5, networkanditsextensions,”InternationalJournalofComputerVision,
p.1867,2021. vol.131,no.1,pp.134–159,2023.
[4] B. L. Hill, N. Rakocz, A´. Rudas, J. N. Chiang, S. Wang, I. Hofer, [16] X. Wei, H. Van Gorp, L. G. Carabarin, D. Freedman, Y. C. Eldar,
M.Cannesson,andE.Halperin,“Imputationofthecontinuousarterial and R. J. van Sloun, “Image denoising with deep unfolding and
linebloodpressurewaveformfromnon-invasivemeasurementsusing normalizing flows,” in IEEE International Conference on Acoustics,
deeplearning,”Scientificreports,vol.11,no.1,p.15755,2021. SpeechandSignalProcessing(ICASSP),2022,pp.1551–1555.
[5] K. Qin, W. Huang, and T. Zhang, “Deep generative model with [17] W. Yin, P. Lu, and X. Peng, “Colorflow: A conditional normalizing
domain adversarial training for predicting arterial blood pressure flow for image colorization,” in ICASSP 2024-2024 IEEE Inter-
waveformfromphotoplethysmogramsignal,”BiomedicalSignalPro- national Conference on Acoustics, Speech and Signal Processing
cessingandControl,vol.70,p.102972,2021. (ICASSP). IEEE,2024,pp.2735–2739.
[6] M. A. Mehrabadi, S. A. H. Aqajari, A. H. A. Zargari, N. Dutt, and [18] Y.Xing,Z.Qian,andQ.Chen,“Invertibleimagesignalprocessing,”
A.M.Rahmani,“Novelbloodpressurewaveformreconstructionfrom inProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFconferenceoncomputervisionand
photoplethysmography using cycle generative adversarial networks,” patternrecognition,2021,pp.6287–6296.
in202244thAnnualInternationalConferenceoftheIEEEEngineer- [19] C. Ma, Y. Rao, Y. Cheng, C. Chen, J. Lu, and J. Zhou, “Structure-
inginMedicine&BiologySociety(EMBC). IEEE,2022,pp.1906– preservingsuperresolutionwithgradientguidance,”inProceedingsof
1909. theIEEE/CVFconferenceoncomputervisionandpatternrecognition,
[7] O. Ronneberger, P. Fischer, and T. Brox, “U-net: Convolutional 2020,pp.7769–7778.
networks for biomedical image segmentation,” in Medical image [20] Z. Wang, Z. Yan, and J. Yang, “Sgnet: Structure guided network
computing and computer-assisted intervention–MICCAI. Springer, viagradient-frequencyawarenessfordepthmapsuper-resolution,”in
2015,pp.234–241. ProceedingsoftheAAAIConferenceonArtificialIntelligence,vol.38,
[8] L. Dinh, D. Krueger, and Y. Bengio, “Nice: Non-linear independent no.6,2024,pp.5823–5831.
components estimation,” in ICLR (Workshop), 2015. [Online]. [21] C.Carlson,V.-R.Turpin,A.Suliman,C.Ade,S.Warren,andD.E.
Available:http://arxiv.org/abs/1410.8516 Thompson, “Bed-based ballistocardiography: Dataset and ability to
[9] J.-H.Jacobsen,A.Smeulders,andE.Oyallon,“i-revnet:Deepinvert- trackcardiovascularparameters,”Sensors,vol.21,no.1,p.156,2020.
iblenetworks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1802.07088,2018. [22] W. Shi, J. Caballero, F. Husza´r, J. Totz, A. P. Aitken, R. Bishop,
[10] L. Dinh, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Bengio, “Density estimation D.Rueckert,andZ.Wang,“Real-timesingleimageandvideosuper-
using real NVP,” in International Conference on Learning resolutionusinganefficientsub-pixelconvolutionalneuralnetwork,”
Representations, 2017. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/ inProceedingsoftheIEEEconferenceoncomputervisionandpattern
forum?id=HkpbnH9lx recognition,2016,pp.1874–1883.
[11] D. P. Kingma and P. Dhariwal, “Glow: Generative flow with invert- [23] K.D.StephenandA.Kazemi,“Improvednormalizationoftime-lapse
ible 1x1 convolutions,” Advances in neural information processing seismicdatausingnormalizedrootmeansquarerepeatabilitydatato
systems,vol.31,2018. improve automatic production and seismic history matching in the
[12] R. Prenger, R. Valle, and B. Catanzaro, “Waveglow: A flow-based nelsonfield,”GeophysicalProspecting,vol.62,no.5,pp.1009–1027,
generative network for speech synthesis,” in IEEE International 2014.