A survey to measure cognitive biases
influencing mobility choices
Carole Adam
May 7, 2024
Abstract
In this paper, we describe a survey about the perceptions of 4 mobility modes (car, bus, bicycle,
walking)andthepreferencesofusersfor6modalchoicefactors. Thissurveyhasgathered650answersin
2023,thatarepublishedasopendata. Inthisstudy,weanalysetheseresultstohighlighttheinfluenceof
3cognitivebiasesonmobilitydecisions: halobias,choice-supportivebias,andreactance. Thesecognitive
biases are proposed as plausible explanations of the observed behaviour, where the population tends to
sticktoindividualcarsdespiteurbanpoliciesaimingatfavouringsoftmobility. Thismodelcanserveas
the basis for a simulator of mobility decisions in a virtual town, and the gathered data can be used to
initialise this population with realistic attributes. Work is ongoing to design a simulation-based serious
gamewheretheplayertakestheroleofanurbanmanagerfacedwithplanningchoicestomaketheircity
more sustainable.
Keywords: modalchoice;cognitivebiases;sustainablemobility;individualdecision-making
1 Introduction
Mobility is a central issue in the transition to a more sustainable lifestyle. The average daily distance
traveledbytheFrenchpopulationhasincreasedconsiderably,from5kmonaverageinthe1950sto45km
on average in 2011 [58], as has the number of personal cars (11,860 million cars in 1970 [7] compared to
38,3millionin2021[15,28]). ForexampleinToulouse,carsconcentrate74%ofthedistancestraveledby
the inhabitants and contribute up to 88% to GHG emissions [25]. The evolution of mobility is therefore
an essential question, both for the global climate crisis and for public health: negative impact of a
sedentary lifestyle [9], road accidents, air and sound pollution [44]. Indeed, 40000 deaths per year are
attributable to exposure to fine particles (PM2.5) and 7000 deaths per year attributable to exposure
to nitrogen dioxide (NO2), i.e. 7% and 1% of the total annual mortality [38]; the 2-month lockdown of
spring 2020 in France saved 2300 deaths by reducing exposure to particles, and 1200 more deaths by
reducing exposure to nitrogen dioxide [38].
Thisshowsthatpublicpoliciesandindividualbehaviourchanges(modalshifttowardscycling,more
extensive teleworking) can have an impact on public health. For instance during the COVID-19 pan-
demics many temporary cycling lanes were set up [48], although many have since been returned to cars
[6]. Aside from such emergencies, public policies take time to set up, and they are not always well
accepted. Indeed, despite feeling more and more concerned about climate change, citizens are often
reluctant to constraining public policies that could slow it down, as shown by recent strikes against
petrol taxes or new road tolls. As a result, mobility evolves very slowly, for instance in France a large
proportionofcommutingisstilldonebycar,evenforveryshortjourneys[14]. Manyexplanationsofthis
inertiawereproposed: constraineduseofthecar(e.g.totransportchildrenortools);lackofalternatives
(limited public transports); social inequities (car-dependency in rural areas, cycling facilities and public
transport concentrated in town centres, cost of electric or newer cars...); difficulty of changing habits
[12,33];individualism[21];orcognitivebiasesinfluenceonhumanreasoning[27,26,2]. Mobilitychoices
are therefore explained by a combination of the context (infrastructures and services provided where
the user lives and works), individual characteristics (age, gender, fitness, handicap), and psychological
and sociological factors (preferences, emotions, biases, social pressure). Urban policies can modify the
infrastructure (develop public transport or cycling lanes, for example), adapt their offer to various user
profiles (accessibility, gender, financial help), or communicate to try and modify individual preferences
1
4202
yaM
6
]YC.sc[
1v05230.5042:viXraand choices (for example campaigns in favour of active mobility for health reasons, advocating for sus-
tainablemodesforecologyreasons,promotingelectriccarsaslessexpensiveonthelongterm,promoting
road safety, or a mix of these arguments). But an essential aspect yet neglected in modality policies is
the consideration of cognitive biases influencing individual choices [26, 27].
In order to highlight some of the biases involved in mobility decisions, we conducted a survey about
people’s subjective perceptions of mobility. We asked people about their decision factors, i.e. what is
important to them when choosing a mobility mode (ecology, price, etc). We also asked them how they
perceive the different mobility modes available (e.g. how safe is it to cycle, how expensive is the car,
etc). Our survey collected 650 answers during March-July 2023. This paper presents a first analysis of
theresults,includingastudyofthecognitivebiasesthatcouldexplainapparentlyirrationalchoices. We
also show some lessons that can be learned for mobility policies.
Thepaperisstructuredasfollows. InSection2weanalysetheliteratureaboutmobilityinsociology,
psychology,andcomputermodeling. Section3describesoursurveymethodology,whileSection4presents
astatisticalanalysisoftheanswers. Section5thenfocusesontheidentificationofthreespecificcognitive
biasestoexplainthemobilitychoicesobserved. Finally,Section6discussesourresults,howtheycanbe
used to inform mobility policies, and their limitations, before Section 7 concludes the paper.
2 Background
2.1 Sociology of mobility
User profiles. The Mobil’Air study [16] presents 4 car user profiles: open to all modes; attached
to an individual mode, ensuring independence; constrained; and convinced, loving to drive, for all their
journeys. This study provides percentages of the population in each category, but does not consider
othermodesofmobility. Thestudyalsonotestheimportanceofconstraintsdependingonthereasonfor
travel (transporting children for example), and the strength of habits or routines.
Rocci [49] proposes 6 user profiles: passionate car drivers adhering to the car; passionate car drivers
in opposition to another mode; rational multimodal users, sticking to the car but sometimes using
public transport; multimodal users in opposition to the car but sometimes forced to take it; alternative
mode users passionate about their mode; and alternative mode users in opposition to their mode. This
classification is more detailed and considers other modes than the car, but does not provide population
distribution statistics. We find several similarities with the previous survey, such as constrained or on
the contrary passionate use of the car. In particular, Rocci shows that driving pleasure allows to accept
or forgot the associated constraints (delays, parking difficulty, cost...), while a mode considered as only
utilitarian will be switched for another one as soon as it does not fill its function anymore. This is
a strong differences between modes whose use can be passionate (car or bicycle) vs public transport.
Finally,Roccialsoshowstheinter-individualdifferencesinperceptionofmodes: forexample,convinced
car drivers tend to underestimate the price of the car, and overestimate that of public transport.
Anotherimportantpointinmobilityprofilesistheroleofgender[45]. Womenoftenfeelmoreexposed
in their use of public modes, and feel more concerned with safety.
Decision factors. Inadditiontoenvironmentalconstraints,themodaldecisionalsodependsoneach
person’s’mobilitycapital’[49](owningabicycle,havingadrivinglicense,beingfittocycleorwalk,living
closetoatrainorbusstop...). Beyondtheseconstraints,everyonewillevaluatedifferentaspects,suchas
price, safety, or travel time. The choice must also minimise the mental load (number of connections, for
instance). Public transport has an image associated with stress, risk of aggression and dependence [32],
unlike the car which conveys an image of autonomy and social success, reinforced by advertisements.
Inoursurveydescribedinthispaperweinvestigatetheprioritiesandperceptionsof6decisioncriteria,
asextractedinpreviouswork[4]: cost,time,practicality,safety,comfort,andecology. Otherdimensions
that could be considered in the future include the health impact, often promoted for ’active’ mobility
modes. [59] conducted a survey in Germany with 10782 people, and retained very similar dimensions:
mobilitymodeswereratedasbeingcheap, fast, environmentallyfriendly, comfortable, safeandreliable.
Theyhavenopracticalitydimension(whichrepresentsthecognitiveloadassociatedwiththemode)buta
reliabilitycriteria,representingtheprobabilitythatthetripfails. Theythenranaclusteringanalysison
thevaluesofthesedimensionsintheirsample,todeduce5distinctuserprofiles,suchascomfort-oriented
or price-sensitive.
2Habits. Mobility choices are not only a result of these rational dimensions. Habits are at the heart
of mobility decisions [12]: individuals tend to reproduce habitual decisions when they are in the same
context. Thisprocesscansavedecisiontime,butalsoleadtodecisionsthatarenotadaptedtochangesin
theenvironment,iftheyarenotreconsidered. Habitscanalsomodifyperceptions(time,cost,etc.): thus
auseraccustomedtotakingthecarcanoverestimatetraveltimebypublictransportandunder-estimate
travel time by car [49, 8].
Lifecyclechanges,duringwhichallhabitsaredisrupted(jobchange,moving,birth,etc.),arefavorable
moments for breaking old habits and creating new ones [50]. Work has thus experimented with the
distribution of free public transport tickets to newly arrived residents, to encourage them to abandon
the car [5]. The COVID-19 pandemic has also shown an unusual reset of habits and encouraged bicycle
travel, at least temporarily [6].
2.2 Cognitive biases
Definition. Cognitivebiasesareheuristicsusedbyourcognitivesystemtofacilitatedecision-making
in situations of uncertainty or danger [56]. They allow rapid reasoning during stressful or complex
situations despite the incompleteness or uncertainty of the information necessary for rational decision-
making. They arethususeful to make fasterdecisions despitethe lack of information, andare therefore
essentialtoourproperfunctioning. Butasanyheuristics,theycanleadtomistakes,seeminglyirrational
decisions, with sometimes serious consequences.
Forinstance[55]analyseaplanecrashasresultingfromthepilot’sself-deceptionbiasthatprevented
him from reacting to alerts from his copilot. [22] propose a logical model of biases allowing to propose
explanations of erroneous decisions leading to accidents. [39] show that it is necessary to recognize
and eliminate biases to avoid various accidents or collisions. [20] highlight the importance of educating
medicalpersonnelaboutbiasesthatcanaffecttheirdecisionsanddiagnoses. [35]listvariousbiasesthat
affect patient decisions about vaccination. Finally [37] show how biases can explain companies’ lack of
adaptation to climate change. This shows that cognitive biases must be taken into account when trying
to understand or influence human decisions.
Biases and mobility. Innocenti et al. [27] show that people tend to ’stick’ to the car, even if more
expensive than metro or bus, and explain this irrationality by the influence of cognitive biases. They
conclude that mobility policies need to try to modify the perception of the different modes of mobility.
Another study [26] looks at the reasons why drivers are generally reluctant to switch from their
personal car to new modes of mobility, even those proven to be more efficient. Although this study
focuses on carpooling or free-floating bikes and scooters, their findings are interesting. They find that
”seeminglyirrational”mobilitydecisions”thatworkagainstthenewmobility”areinfluencedbyvarious
emotions, social norms and cognitive biases, and are not taken into account by mobility operators. The
halo biaspushesmotoriststoamplifythebenefitsofdriving(autonomy...) andignoreitsdisadvantages
(delays in traffic jams...). The ambiguity bias pushes them to prefer known risks to unknown risks,
to maintain an illusion of control, and thus to avoid the uncontrollable risks posed by certain modes
(delaysorbreakdownsofpublictransport). Theanchoringbiasimpliesthatanegativefirstimpression
regardinganewmodeofmobilitywillberetained,preventingfuturereuse. Thestatusquobiasinduces
apreferencetokeepthingsastheyare,inordertosavecognitiveload,similarlytohabits[12]. Thestudy
also lists emotional and social factors which explain this attachment to the car: pride associated with
owning a car, aggressiveness towards users of other modes [18] and fear of becoming the target in the
event of a modal switch; or fear of crime, particularly among women.
Theyalsolistemotionalandsocialfactorsthatexplaincarstickiness,suchascarpridebias(owning
anicecarisvalued);fearoftheunknown(newmodesareconsideredmoredangerousbynon-usersthan
by users); negative social emotions towards outgroups or disruptors (users of other, in particular new,
modes), who can be the target of aggressive behaviour [18]; and symmetrical fear of being themselves
targeted by such aggressions from their current social group if they were to switching to new disrupting
modes; and fear of crimes, where women in particular are found to be more concerned with threats to
their safety in public spaces, such as using the public transports or sharing rides.
Other biases that could be involved include reactance [11], defined as the tendency to react to
persuasion attempts felt as coercive by asserting one’s free will and strengthening one’s non-compliant
position as a result. Such messages could thus have an effect contrary to that intended, by agonising
3receivers. Forinstance[52]showthatrestrictionsofmobilityduringthepandemicsledpeopletoahigher
desire of going out; while [34] show that the loss a freedom felt during lockdowns leads to preferences
for advertisements for tourism products. [2] proposed a computer model of the influence of this bias on
mobility choices.
Choice-supportivebias,oraposteriori rationalisationorpost-purchaserationalisation[36]consists
in rationalising a choice after it was made, by attributing positive features to the option selected, and
more negative features to the rejected options. It is similar to the halo bias discussed above. This
modifiedinterpretationaimsatreducingone’scognitivedissonanceandregret;forinstancesomeonewho
drivestoworkcaninsistontheautonomyprovidedbythecar,oronthedangersassociatedwithcycling.
3 Survey methodology
Objective. The goal of the survey is to understand the priorities and perceptions of people when
evaluating mobility options. We also want to evaluate how rational their decision is, i.e. to compare
theirdeclaredusualmobilitymodewithpredictionsmadebyarationaldecisionalgorithmbasedontheir
personal priorities and perceptions. When their choice is deemed irrational, we will try to reveal the
impact of various cognitive biases in this difference. We will also investigate gender differences in these
perceptions and choices.
Questions. Our questionnaire consists of three main parts. The first part concerns the responders’
profile and their mobility habits. In the second part, the participants are asked to provide their priority
ratings over the 6 decision criteria identified above (ecology, comfort, financial accessibility, practicality,
safety and speed), i.e. to state how important each criterion is in their daily mobility choice. The third
part concerns the participants’ perceptions of the value of the mobility modes considered (bicycle, car,
public transport and walking) over these criteria, i.e. to mark how well they think that each mode
satisfies each criterion. All ratings (priorities and values) are made on a Likert scale from 0 to 10. The
questionnaire was administered in French. Below is a translation of its main elements:
• Part 1: responder profile
1. What is your gender (Multiple choice: woman, man, other, do not wish to answer)
2. Which mobility mode do you use most for your daily trips? (Choice: bike, car, public transport,
walk)
3. What is the distance between your place of residence and your main place of activity, in km?
4. How many times per week do you realise the roundtrip between your residence and your place
of activity?
5. Are any mobility modes inaccessible to you (personal constraints, lack of infrastructures,
for instance no public transport available)? (Multiple choice: bicycle, car, public transport,
walking, none)
6. Give precisions if you wish. (free text)
• Part 2: importance of choice criteria: for each criteria, we ask you to evaluate how important
it is for you when choosing your daily mobility mode. Answers on a Likert scale from 0 to 10 for
the following 6 criteria:
– Ecology: this mode has a low carbon footprint
– Comfort: this mode is pleasant to use
– Financial accessibility: this mode is cheap
– Practicality: this mode is flexible, does not impose strong constraints
– Safety: this mode allows me to move without risks (accidents, injury, aggression)
– Speed: this mode allows me to reach my destination in low time
• Part 3: evaluation of responder’s perceptions of mobility means. For each of the 4 modes:
1. How would you rate the (ecology, comfort, financial accessibility, praticity, safety, speed)
of this mode as a daily commuting mode? 6 questions, answers on a Likert scale from 0 to 10.
2. Do you want to add anything on your perception of this mode? (free text answer)
Privacy. ThequestionswereverifiedbyaprivacyresearcherandtheuniversityDPO,toensurecom-
pliance with personal data regulations. No question allows to identify the responders, in particular we
do not collect names, emails, addresses of work or residence, or age. The only sensitive data collected is
the gender, which was needed for the purpose of our study.
4Targeting. Thesurveywasadministeredthroughanonlineform. Thisformwascirculatedonvarious
mailinglistsaddressedtoresearchers,universitystudents,orpersonalcontacts,inFrance. Oursampleis
thereforenotfullyrepresentativeoftheglobalpopulation,butbiasedtowardspeopleworkingorstudying
inuniversities. Althoughnoquestionallowsustoknowthegeographicaloriginofananswer,webelieve
thatthesampleisalsogeographicallybiased,withmoreanswersfromGrenoble,wheretheauthorworks.
Raw data. Theanonymousanswersobtainedfromthissurveyarepubliclyavailableasopendata,to
allow reproduction of this research [3]. To ensure protection of responders’ privacy, the free comments
are not published, because they often contain sensitive data (geographical origin, handicap, etc).
4 Survey results analysis
4.1 Statistical results
Mobility distribution The respondents did provide their usual mobility mode. Figure 1a shows
thedistributionofanswersoverthe4optionsinoursample. Comparatively,Figure1bshowsthemodal
distribution in the general French population, based on [46]. We can notice that our sample is not
representative. This is due to our targeting: first, geographically, the authors live in areas where the
bicycle is over-represented compared to the national average1; second, socially, our survey was mainly
answeredbystudentsanduniversitystaff,whoarenotrepresentativeoftheglobalpopulation. However,
we have obtained a large representation of each mobility mode, which will allow us to draw significant
quantitative conclusions.
(a) Our sample: (b) France 2023, data from [46]:
car 20.6%, bike 31.4%, bus 35.1%, walk 12.9% car 76%, bike 2%, bus 6%, walk 16%
Figure 1: Distribution of mobility: comparing our sample with the French population
Accessibility. Figure2belowshowssomestatisticsabouttheaccessibilityofmodes. Figure2asplits
theaccessibilityresultspermode,showingthecountofuserswhocannotaccesseachspecificmode;please
note that the sum is not equal to the total number of answers since some users report no inaccessible
mode, or on the contrary report several ones. Figure 2b details the percentage of users by number of
modesthatareinaccessibletothem. Allusershaveatleast1modeaccessible,butmanyanswersreport
at least one mode being inaccessible.
1INSEEstatisticsforGrenoble: https://www.insee.fr/fr/statistiques/2557426
5(a) Number of users without access to each mode (b) Number of inaccessible modes
Figure 2: Accessibility of modes
4.2 Mean values
Priorities. Table1reportstheaverageprioritiesofour6criteriainthepopulationofrespondents(n
= 650), and in the sub-populations of users of each mode. We can observe differences between users of
different modes, with some criteria being more salient or in the contrary more insignificant for users of
a given mode. For instance cyclists have a much higher priority for ecology, and drivers a much lower
one;walkerstendtoneglecttime,andfocusonprice,alongwithbususers. Thesedifferencesinpriority
profiles will be discussed later. These average values can be used to initialise a synthetic population for
an agent-based simulation, thus endowing agents with realistic priority profiles [17, 59]. Future work
would be needed to do a clustering analysis and deduce types of users; for the moment we only regroup
users of the same mode.
all (650) Bicycle (204) Car (134) Bus (228) Walking (84)
Ecology 7.08 8.3 5.65 6.76 7.27
Comfort 7.1 7.31 7.19 6.75 7.35
Finance 6.97 7.08 5.63 7.44 7.58
Practicality 8.27 8.54 8.57 7.81 8.42
Time 7.47 7.68 7.79 7.37 6.7
Safety 6.2 5.37 6.72 6.46 6.67
Table 1: Average priorities of criteria, over all answers, and over users of each mode
Evaluations. Beyond priority profiles, individuals also differ in their evaluations of how well a given
mobilitymodefitsagivencriterion. Table2reportstheaveragevaluesofBicycle,Car,BusandWalking
overthe6criteria. Thevaluesareaveragedovertheglobalpopulation,overthesub-populationofusers
of this mode, and over the sub-population of non-users of this mode (users of any one of the other 3
modes). This allows to notice a difference in evaluations between users and non-users, where users of
a given mode systematically evaluate it higher than the rest of the population on any criteria. This is
particularlyobviousforthecomfortandpracticality,forthecostofdriving,orforthespeedofanygiven
mode. These differences will be discussed in more details in the following.
6Bicycle All Users Non-u Car All Users Non-u
Ecology 9.21 9.56 9.05 Ecology 1.81 2.52 1.63
Comfort 6.03 7.39 5.4 Comfort 7.69 8.51 7.47
Finance 7.74 8.54 7.37 Finance 2.68 3.84 2.38
Practicality 6.63 8.23 5.9 Practicality 6.32 8.32 5.81
Time 6.6 7.98 5.96 Time 6.76 8.21 6.38
Safety 4.62 5.38 4.28 Safety 7.29 7.69 7.19
(a) Bicycle (n=204) (b) Car (n=134)
Bus All Users Non-u Walk All Users Non-u
Ecology 7.43 7.77 7.25 Ecology 9.81 9.74 9.83
Comfort 5.83 6.46 5.49 Comfort 6.7 8.12 6.49
Finance 6.87 7.25 6.66 Finance 9.75 9.79 9.74
Practicality 5.78 7.2 5.0 Practicality 5.99 8.01 5.69
Time 5.57 6.81 4.91 Time 2.98 4.96 2.69
Safety 7.46 7.37 7.5 Safety 6.77 7.12 6.72
(c) Bus (n=228) (d) Walk (n=84)
Table 2: Evaluations of 4 modes on 6 criteria
4.3 Analysing decisions
Mobility scores. Thescoresofthe4mobilitymodesarenotdirectlygivenbyresponders, but
computed as a weighed average of their own evaluations of modes on criteria, weighted by their
personal priorities for these criteria. Concretely, an individual i has personal priorities for each
criterion c, denoted prio (c) (how important this criterion is), as well as personal values of mode
i
m over each criterion c, denoted val(m,c) (how well they believe that mode m satisfies criterion
c); we use these to deduce the personal score of mode m for individual i with the following
formula:
(cid:88)
score (m)= val(m,c)∗prio (c)
i i
c∈crits
Table 3 summarises statistics about the scores obtained for the 4 mobility modes in our
sample. The table provides the average score over all answers, standard deviation, median score,
as well as the average scores over users of the mode vs non-users. By users, we mean people
who declared that mode as their usual commuting mode, while non-users are those who declared
another usual mode. We can see that the evaluations for some modes are very variable, with
standarddeviationsupto1.75pointsformarksgivenonascaleof10. Comparingmarksbetween
users and non-users also shows wide differences. In the following we investigate these differences
in more details.
Mode Mean mark Stdev Median Users Non-users
Bicycle 6.85 1.66 7.06 8.11 6.27
Car 5.41 1.75 5.47 6.93 5.01
Bus 6.43 1.47 6.62 7.21 6.01
Walk 6.90 1.52 7.07 8.00 6.73
Table 3: Marks given to the 4 modes of mobility
Constrained choice. In our survey, the responders provided their perception of availability
forthe4modes. Weusedtheseanswersandcheckedforeachresponderifthemodethatreceives
7the best score according to the formula above is considered to be unavailable to them. In the
casewhenthebestoption(wrt.theirpersonalprioritiesandevaluations)isnotavailable(wrt.to
theirownperceptions),weconsiderthatthisresponder’schoiceisconstrained. Itisimportantto
note that unavailability can be subjective: different users will have different distance thresholds
to consider that their work is too far to walk or cycle, for instance, or different thresholds
regarding how complicated a public transport trip can be before it is considered unfeasible. This
unavailabilitycanalsodifferbetweenusersinthesamecontext,forinstancepublictransportcan
be available in the area, but not adapted to some kinds of handicap.
Rational choice. Finally,wedefinetherationalmodalchoice,inlinewith[29],asthemobility
mode, among those available to the user, that moximises the score computed above. For each
user, we compared the mode receiving the best score (excluding unavailable modes) to the mode
that they declared as their usual commuting mode. If they match, the choice is deemed rational:
this responder did choose the available mode that receives the best score; if they differ, meaning
that the user does not use a mode that is available and receives a better score, then the choice
is deemed irrational. Individuals with different priorities will have different rational choices even
though they are in the same environment. It is important to notice that the choice is deemed
’rational’onthebasisofsubjectiveevaluationsthatcouldactuallybebiasedandhelprationalise
a choice that is not so rational. Below we show how these subjective perceptions result in
differences between genders and between habitual users of different modes. Later, Section 5 will
investigate if the mobility choices reported by the responders are rational in the sense of that
model, and if not, why.
4.4 Gender differences
Priorities. Figure 3 details the priority profiles for male vs female responders. The sum of
answers from men and women is not equal to 650 users, because a number of answers have
selected another gender, or preferred not to answer; however, there were not enough results for
these options to draw significant statistics, so we omitted them here. We can see that priorities
are very similar on most criteria, except for 2 significant differences: females give more priority
tocomfortandsafetythanmales. Thiscouldbepartiallyexplainedbythefactthatwomenmore
often transport their children [40].
All Men Women
Number 650 331 301
Ecology 7.08 7.05 7.08
Comfort 7.1 7.01 7.23
Finance 6.97 6.96 6.94
Practicality 8.27 8.24 8.3
Time 7.47 7.52 7.45
Safety 6.2 5.99 6.44
Table 4: Average priorities by gender
Figure 3: Gendered priority profiles
Evaluations. To further analyse these results, we show in Table 5 the comparison of male vs
female evaluations of the 4 modes on the 6 criteria. We can notice that the evaluation of ecology
is the most similar between genders. On the contrary, there are sensible differences on the
evaluations of Practicality, Safety, and Comfort. Figure 4 displays the evaluation differences for
these3criteria. Thedifferencesforsafetyandcomfortmatchtherespectivedifferencesinpriority
for these criteria. We can observe that women rate the safety and comfort of all modes lower,
8except for walking that they find more comfortable than men. The difference in practicality is
moresurprisingsincetheprioritywasthesame;itmightsuggestthatduetoadditionalconstraints
(children,familyshopping,etc),thecarisreallymoreconvenientforwomenthanbicycleorpublic
transport. Indeed, theyratethepracticalityofbicycleandbussignificantlylowerthanmen, and
the practicality of car significantly higher, while that of walking is similar.
Ecology Comfort Finance Practicality Time Safety
Bicycle (9.27, 9.15) (6.19, 5.81) (7.92, 7.5) (6.81, 6.38) (6.74, 6.43) (4.71, 4.52)
Car (1.85, 1.8) (7.89, 7.53) (2.56, 2.8) (6.24, 6.46) (6.8, 6.75) (7.5, 7.11)
Bus (7.48, 7.36) (5.92, 5.73) (7.12, 6.6) (5.82, 5.69) (5.57, 5.53) (7.78, 7.12)
Walk (9.82, 9.83) (6.52, 6.88) (9.79, 9.7) (5.97, 5.98) (2.69, 3.27) (7.1, 6.42)
Table 5: Gendered evaluations of modes on criteria
(a) Safety (b) Comfort (c) Practicality
Figure 4: Gendered differences in evaluation of mobility on 3 criteria
Constrained choices. Finally, we have compared the number of constrained choices. Con-
cretely,weconsiderthemobilitychoicetobeconstrained,iftherationallybestmode,aspredicted
bythemarkingalgorithmbasedondeclaredprioritiesandevaluations,islistedasunavailableby
the responder. For instance, based on a responder’s priorities and evaluations, we could deduce
that their preferred mode would be public transport, but they reported it as unavailable, maybe
because their residence address is not served by any bus line. Among the 650 answers, we have
found59whosechoicewasconstrainedthatway,ofwhichonly19men(5.74%ofmen’sanswers)
and 36 women (11.96% of women’s answers), suggesting that men have less constrained choices
than women. Figure 5 reports which modes are selected in this case, by men vs women.
Figure 5: Comparing constrained choices by man vs women
94.5 Differences per usual mode
In this paragraph we compare perceptions of mobility depending on the responders’ usual com-
muting mode.
(a) Priority profiles of users of the different modes (b) Evaluation profiles of the different modes
Figure 6: Symmetry in priorities and evaluations per usual mode
Priorities. Figure 6a shows the difference in average priorities on the 6 criteria, over the
populations of habitual users of the 4 different modes. Habitual users are those who declared
that mode as their usual commute mode in our questionnaire: over 650 answers, 204 use their
bicycle, 134 use their car, 228 use the bus, and 84 walk. The figure shows that some criteria
seem to be similarly important for all responders, especially practicality (slightly lower priority
forbususers),butalsocomfortandtime(slightlylowerforwalkers),andthereforelesspredictive
of the differences in choices. On the contrary, we can observe very variable priority profiles over
some other criteria. In particular, the priority for ecology ranges from very high over bicycle
users, to very low for car users, through average priorities for walkers and bus users. Similarly,
car drivers have a significantly lower priority for the price of their mode; walkers have a lower
priority for time; and cyclists have a significantly lower priority for safety. We can also notice
that the priorities for ecology are quite widespread over the range of values, it is the criterion
with the most differences in priorities. On the contrary for finance and safety, only one category
divergesfromtheglobalagreement. Makingaparallelwithevaluationsofmodesonthesecriteria
allow to suggest an explanation.
Evaluations. Figure 6b shows the median evaluations of the 4 modes on the 6 criteria, com-
puted over all answers. It shows strong similarities between the strengths and weaknesses of a
mode over the criteria, and the priority profiles of users of this mode. Said differently, users of
a mode will both have a higher priority for the criteria where this mode is globally evaluated
as very good and a lower priority for the criteria where this mode is evaluated as bad. We can
observe that bicycle is evaluated as highly ecological, and cyclists also declare a much higher
priority for ecology. Similarly, car is evaluated very poorly on the financial aspect (it is consid-
ered the most expensive, by very far), and car users concomitantly declare a much lower priority
for the financial criterion. Besides, this declared priority seems to be in contradiction with the
population’s concerns for the cost of life, as suggested by polls or by the massive strikes against
new tolls or increases in petrol prices. Cyclists use the mode that is considered the less safe
by responders, and concomitantly declare a much lower priority for their safety. Yet, safety is
10one of humans’ basic needs, and found to be a strong factor in modal choice [41]. On the other
hand, criteria where there is little differences in priority profiles also display low differences in
evaluations: allmodesareconsideredsimilarlycomfortableandpractical; thebusisevaluatedas
slightly less comfortable and practical, which coincides with a slightly slower priority of its users
for these 2 criteria. Finally, only walking is considered significantly slower, in symmetry with a
lower priority for time in walkers.
Users vs non-users. The figures above show how the general average priorities and median
evaluations of the modes on criteria, are symmetric. But even further, users of a mode not only
choose a mode whose median evaluation is better on the criteria that are important to them, or
whoseweakpointsarenotimportanttothem. Theyalsomakeadifferentevaluationoftheirmode
comparedtonon-users. Figure7illustratestheevaluationdifferencebetweenusersandnon-users
of each mode, computed as the average evaluation over all habitual users of this mode, minus
the average evaluation of non-users (users of the other 3 modes). A positive difference means an
over-evaluationbyusersoranunder-evaluationbynon-users,whileanegativedifferenceindicates
an under-evaluation by users compared to non-users.
Figure 7: Evaluation difference for each mode between users and non-users
We can observe that users of a mode generally over-evaluate it on all criteria compared to
non-users. Thereare2notableexceptions,wherewalkerstendtoveryslightlyunderestimatethe
ecology of walking compared to other users, and bus users slightly under-estimate the safety of
buses compared to non-users. There is no deviation in the evaluation of the price of walking,
sinceeverybodyconsidersthatitisfree. Twocriteriaareequallyover-estimatedbyusersofall4
modes (by over 2 points in average): practicality and time, suggesting that all answers evaluate
themodetheyuseasfasterandmorepracticalthanothers,orchoosethemodethattheythinkis
fasterandmorepractical. Itisinterestingtonotethatthese2criteriaarealso the onesreported
as being the most important to the participants when choosing a mode. It suggests that the
priority of a criterion is linked to its over-estimation by its users.
Other criteria show more differences, with cyclists over-estimating (or non-cyclists under-
estimating) more than others their level of comfort and safety ; and car drivers over-estimating
howcheaptheirmodeis,andhowecologicalitis. Thispartlycompensatesthelowerevaluationof
caronthese2criteria,alongwiththeirrelativelylowpriorityforthese2criteria. Saiddifferently,
participants who use the car preserve a good score for car by both over-estimating the value and
lowering the priority of weak criteria, where car is globally less good than other modes; cyclists
preserve a good score for bicycle by neglecting the priority of safety or over-estimating its value.
11Similar adaptations can be observed on the other modes, in line with our model of the halo bias
[2]. To conclude, priorities and evaluations of all modes differ depending on each individual’s
usual mobility mode; these differences are oriented in such a way that priority profiles of users
reflect the respective strengths and weaknesses of their usual mode. In the following we suggest
some explanations to this symmetry between priorities and evaluations.
4.6 Explaining mobility decisions
There are several ways to explain such evaluations and priorities differences between users of
different modes.
Context. First, not all responders to our questionnaire live in the same area, so different
evaluations can be explained by different contexts. Not all towns have the same quality of bus
network,equalinfrastructurestoenhancecyclingsafety,weatherconditions,orsimilarlegislation
inplaceaboutspeedlimits,whichresultsindifferentdistributionsofthepopulationovermobility
modes available. For example, towns such as Grenoble or Strasbourg have significantly more
cyclists than the national average, due to a long history of urban policies in favour of cycling.
However,somecriteriadonotdependontheregionalcontext,suchasecology(walkingorcycling
arealwaysmoreecologicalthandriving),orhavealimitedregionaldependency,suchasprice(car
insurance and petrol price are expensive in all areas) and time (walking is slower than the other
modes beyond very short distances). Therefore, differences on the evaluation of these criteria
cannot be explained by the context, which suggests that other explanations can be found.
Knowledge by usage. Second, people who do not use a mode are less likely to have an
accurate evaluation of its qualities, and more likely to over-evaluate its risks or drawbacks. Said
differently, someone needs to try a mobility mode before they can have an informed opinion
about it. For instance, people will tend to overestimate walking time, in particular when they
are less physically active [19]; such overestimation might deter them from walking [47]; some
towns are thus investigating the use of signs for pedestrians that indicate the walking time to
different monuments, in order to encourage walking [10]. Similarly, our results show that non
walkersunder-estimatethespeedcriteriaofwalking,orthatnoncyclistsfindthebicycletobeless
comfortable and more dangerous than cyclists do (in line with fear of the unknown as discussed
in [26]). In the other direction, bus users find the bus less safe than non users, suggesting that
they might be more aware of the potential risks since they have witnessed them directly. But
this does not explain why evaluations and priorities deviations are aligned.
Rational selection. Third, it seems obvious that people who have a better perception of a
mode are more likely to use it: people who find that cycling is very comfortable are more likely
touseabikethanpeoplewhothinkitisveryuncomfortable,allthemoreifcomfortisimportant
to them. It is therefore only natural that users have a globally better perception of their mode
than of the other modes. However, some differences are hard to justify this way when there
is some sort of objective evaluation (cycling or walking is objectively very ecological; driving is
objectively quite expensive), or when their amplitude is too wide.
Besides, this deviation is generally accompanied by a similar deviation from the average
priority: car drivers have a lower priority for ecology and finance, where their mode performs
poorly compared to others; cyclists report a significantly lower priority for safety, where bicycle
isevaluatedasmoredangerous;orwalkerreportalowerpriorityfortime,whileusingtheslowest
mode. Assumingobjectiveevaluationsofamodeoncriteria, itseemslogicalthateachmodewill
attract users whose priorities align with the evaluations, i.e. users who have a higher priority
for their qualities, and lower priorities for their weak points. For instance, walking or cycling
being the least expensive modes and most ecological are likely to attract users very concerned
12with price and/or ecology; inversely, walking is very slow so it is not likely to attract users
interested in shortening their trip time, while car being very expensive and less ecological will
rather attract users not concerned with price or ecology. However, some priorities reported do
no seem consistent: it is not likely that all drivers actually do not care about price, or that
all cyclists do not care about their safety, suggesting that they could modify these priorities a
posteriori to support their mobility choice.
Biases. Finally, some differences could also be explained by cognitive biases. The choice-
supportive biasorpost-purchaserationalisationiswell-knowninmarketing,andrepresentsthe
tendency to retroactively amplify the positive attributes of the selected option, or the negative
attributes of the ignored options. The goal is to minimise regrets after a choice. Applied to our
context, this bias would push people to give better marks to their mode and worse marks to
the others, in order to feel better about their choice, which is consistent with our observations.
The halo bias consists in selectively focusing on some aspects to preserve a first impression.
Concretely here, people could adjust their priorities to focus on strong aspects and neglect weak
aspects of their chosen mode, in order to preserve their satisfaction and avoid a costly modal
change. This is also consistent with our observations so far. In the sequel we explore how our
observations can support the existence of these cognitive biases in mobility decisions. Please
notehoweverthatthesecanonlybepresentedashypotheses,asotherexplanationscouldleadto
the same observations, as discussed above. Cognitive biases are proposed here as one potential
explanation, in order to support the necessity to take them into account when designing urban
policies to encourage soft mobility.
5 Cognitive biases in mobility decisions
5.1 Post-purchase rationalisation bias
(a) Bicycle (b) Car (c) Bus (d) Walk
Figure 8: Evaluation medians for all, users, non-users
Wisdom of the crowd. From the observations above, it is difficult to deduce the ’objective’
value of each mode on each criteria, or said differently it is hard to know if users over-evaluate
their mode, if non-users under-evaluate it, or if they are all right and the different evaluations
come from differences in their context. Wisdom of the crowd [24, 54] is the idea that when
evaluating a continuous value, the collective evaluations of many individuals could be considered
as a probability distribution, with the ’real’ value close to the median. Applied here, we could
try to ’crowdsource’ the objective evaluation of each mode on each criterion, in order to counter
thesubjectivedeviationsnoticedbetweenusersandnon-users. Figure8illustrateshowusersand
non-users evaluate each mode on all criteria, compared to the median evaluation. This figure
makes evaluation variations even more visible, in particular the differences between users and
13non-users in evaluating practicality and time of bus trips. Besides, we can observe both over-
evaluations from users, and under-evaluations from non-users, for most criteria. This tends to
confirm the influence of the post-purchase rationalisation bias, where people over-evaluate good
aspects of a choice and under-evaluate its bad aspects.
Rationality of decisions. We then decided to check if the mobility choices declared by the
responders to our survey were rational, in the sense of our multi-criteria decision algorithm
explained above (Section 4.3). Concretely, we considered a choice as rational if it receives the
best score among all the available modes for this individual. In a first method, we compared
the scores computed with the individual’s self evaluations of modes on each criteria. However,
as shown above, these evaluations could be biased so as to rationalise the decision a posteriori.
Thereforeinasecondmethod,wecomparedthemarksobtainedwiththeindividualprioritiesbut
thecrowdwisdom,i.e.withthemedianevaluationofmodesoncriteriaovertheentirepopulation
of responders, in order to cancel evaluation biases.
Figure 9: Percentage of rational choices, per mode, with self evaluations vs crowdsourced evaluations
Figure9reportsthepercentageofrationaldecisionswithbothmethods. First,wecanobserve
that most decisions are rational with self-evaluations: about 80% choices are rational for users
of bicycle, car, and walk. However, the choice to use the bus is only rational for half of its users.
Second,wecanobservethatsignificantlylessdecisionsarerationalwhenusingcrowdevaluations.
Indeed, this cancels the post-choice rationalisation and therefore reveals irrational choices that
were hidden (or justified) by this bias. Another explanation would be that the median mark is
under-estimatingtherealvalueofamode: indeed,accordingtothecrowd,nodecisiontotakethe
bus is ever rational. On the contrary, crowd evaluations make walking even more rational than
self evaluations. In conclusion, individual evaluations of modes on criteria make the individual
decisions more often rational than the crowd evaluations, which suggests that individuals could
adapt their evaluations to rationalise their choices.
Remark. It is interesting to notice that to evaluate the rationality of the responder’s choice,
we considered only the options that they declared as available to them. However, these available
options are also subjective and could be biased to rationalise the user’s choice. For instance,
someonecanconsiderthatpublictransportisnotavailablebecauseitis’toofar’,orover-evaluate
thewalkingtimetorejectthisoption,orfeelthatcyclingisnotavailableduetotheirfitnesslevel
which could change. Future work would be needed to investigate these other perception biases.
145.2 Halo bias
Our rational algorithm only accounts for about 80% of the mobility choices of our responders.
In order to capture more of the reported modal choices, we investigated another bias: the halo
bias, which consists in focusing on the good aspects of one’s choice, and neglecting drawbacks.
Concretely,weassumethatindividualstendtoadaptnotonlytheirevaluations(undertheeffect
of the choice-supportive bias), but also their priorities (under the effect of the halo bias), to
justify their usual modal choice.
Figure 10: Percentage of rational choices, per mode, with all criteria vs with halo on worse criteria
Figure10showsthepercentageofdecisionsthatareconsideredasrationalbasedonourmulti-
criteria algorithm, using all 6 criteria (blue bars, same as Figure 9 above). Besides, it also shows
the percentage of decisions that are rational if applying the same algorithm, but neglecting some
criteria, i.e. applying the halo bias. Concretely, for each response, we re-computed the average
mark with a selected set of criteria, ignoring those where the declared mode had the worst
evaluation (thus setting the priority to 0 for these criteria), in line with our model [2]. We can
observe that the rationality of the bus still remains quite low. Indeed, bus users tend to have a
more balanced evaluation, where the bus does not stand out on any criterion, and symmetrically
noprioritystandsouteither. Asaresult,nosinglecriterioncanbeignoredtoimprovetheglobal
mark much. But globally, the halo bias allows to capture more decisions than just the rational
multi-criteria decision algorithm. This supports our hypothesis that the halo bias can explain
some decisions that initially looked irrational. In future work, we could also investigate different
implementationsofthehalobias, suchasfocusingonlyonthebestratedcriteria, oronalimited
set of the most important criteria.
Mode Ecology Comfort Finance Practicality Time Safety
Bicycle 0 6 1 2 1 19
Car 15 0 9 0 0 0
Bus 3 8 9 5 4 2
Walking 0 0 1 0 12 3
Table 6: Number of decisions made rational by ignoring each criterion among users of each mode
Further, Table 6 shows which criteria are ignored per mode, with the count. Unsurprisingly,
differentcriteriastandoutforeachmode: cyclistscanputahaloonsafety;cardriverscouldignore
ecology and finance; bus users would lower their attention to comfort and price; and pedestrians
mostly need to lower their focus on time. Halo bias, as we model it, is complementary to the
post-purchase rationalisation bias: individuals tend to both over-evaluate their mode on some
weakcriteria, andcompletelyignoretheworst-ratedcriteriatojustifytheirmode. However, this
is still not sufficient to capture all decisions.
155.3 Reactance bias
Inordertovisualisepotentialreactancebiases,wefocusedonhowusersofspecificmodesevaluate
the other modes, instead of just taking the average over all non-users. The goal behind this is to
reveal particular ’dislikes’ between some modes, that could be due to official messages or policies
thatseemtofavouroneortheother,orseemtopushuserstochangemode. Inparticular,cyclists
are often perceived very negatively by car drivers [18], and vice-versa [43]. New mobility modes
such as e-scooters are also perceived negatively by pedestrians [30], but unfortunately these new
modes were not part of our survey.
Figure 11: Deviations in evaluation, by users of each specific mode
Figure 11 shows how users of each mode (represented by the colored bars) over- or under-
evaluateeachmode. Ontheleft,wecanseehowbicycleisevaluatedbytheusersofthe4modes.
With no surprise, cyclists do over-evaluate their own mode, while the users of the other modes
under-evaluateit. Butwhatisnewhereisthatwecanseethatthecardriversdounder-evaluate
bicyclefarmorethanwalkersorbususers. Yet, thereisnoobjectivereasonswhiledriverswould
preciselyhavesuchlowerperceptionsthanusersofpublictransportsorpedestrians. Alternatively,
wesuggestthatthisexpressessomesortofreactancebiaswheredriversfeelquestionedorblamed
by the public discourse that they should use their bicycle. By reactance, they under-rate it even
moreinreaction,toasserttheirfreedomofchoice. Thisisinlinewithstudiesshowingaggressive
relationshipsofcardriverstocyclists[18]perceivedasobstacles,ornotconsideredtobelegitimate
ontheroad[42]. Theothermodes(publictransportandwalking)arelessbothersometodrivers,
astheyarenotconflictingforthesamespace(drivinglanes),whichisreflectedbylowerdeviations
in their evaluation; they have also been around for longer than newer modes such as rental bikes
or e-scooters. Pedestrians also have potentially negative interactions with cyclists, yet they do
notunder-evaluatebikeasamobilitymodeasmuchasmotorists;indeedtheycannotfeelblamed
byofficialcommunicationcampaignssincetheyalreadyuseasoftmobilitymode. Symmetrically,
cyclists are those who under-evaluate car driving the most, although this is less impressive than
drivers’ under-estimation of cycling.
We can observe that car drivers tend to be the less objective judges: they over-estimate their
own mode and under-estimate the other modes far more than others. This could be explained
by a very different priority profile, where car users tend to neglect ecology and money, which
are quite important to the average responders in our sample. Inversely, pedestrians seem to be
more objective, slightly under-evaluating bicycle and car, and even over-estimating slightly the
bus; this is consistent with the fact that they are not blamed for their mobility choices, unlike
car drivers accused of contributing to global warming, and cyclists or users of emerging mobility
modes, accused of not respecting safety rules [31, 23].
16(a) Evaluation deviations for ecology of modes (b) Evaluation deviations for safety of modes
Figure 12: Mean evaluation deviation by usual mobility mode
Ecology. Since most official communication is about more ecological or sustainable mobility
choices, we further focused on the perceptions of the different modes on this specific criterion.
Figure 12a shows the mean deviations between the evaluation of ecology of each mode, by users
of each mode. For instance, the red line shows how car drivers evaluate the ecology of each
mode. We can notice that they over-evaluate the ecology of cars, while they under-evaluate that
of cycling or public transport, and slightly that of walking. Interestingly, walkers also under-
evaluate the ecology of cycling, which might reveal a reactance bias, since those 2 categories of
users are those that have the most conflicts with cyclists who share their mobility space. Apart
from this, users of bicycle, bus and walk have quite similar evaluations of ecology of all modes.
Safety. Wealsodecidedtofocusonsafety,anothertopicofofficialcommunicationstoencourage
safe sharing of the urban space. Figure 12b shows the results. We can observe a very different
evaluation of safety by car drivers with respect to all other users. They particularly under-
estimate the safety of bicycles and pedestrians. Cars and bus are considered the safest modes, in
line with road deaths statistics. Bus users are more concerned with the risks of aggression than
collision, and their evaluation of bus safety is significantly higher among men (mean 7.78) than
among women (mean 7.12), as discussed above (Section 4.4).
Cost. Some responders also reported that walking was expensive (5 people rated it at 0 for
financialaccessibility,19intotalrateditbelow7),andmanyreportedthatcyclingwasexpensive,
while the costs are very limited. This could also be interpreted as a reactance bias where people
markbicycleseverelyinreactiontoinsistentpromotioncampaigns. Futureworkwillbededicated
to further analyse answers, in particular the text comments, to study the influence of reactance.
6 Discussion
6.1 Limitations of the survey
Formulation. There are several limits in our survey. First, some questions were ambiguous
or understood differently by different responders. For instance, we did not exploit the daily
distance travelled or number of weekly trips due to too many abnormal answers, with values up
to 2000km home-work distance, or 40 trips per week. The inaccessibility of mobility modes can
alsobeunderstooddifferently,eitherasacompletelackofavailabilityvsanunsuitabilityforone’s
personal constraints: it is different to not be able to walk at all, vs considering that one’s work
17is too far to walk. Second, our attention to not collect personal or identifying data does limit
our knowledge of the particular context of each individual: age and town would have provided
usefulinformationtofurtheranalysetheanswers,andtoattributedecisionstocontextualfactors
whererelevant. Third,weonlystudiedfourmobilitymodes,whichreducesthereachofourstudy.
We do not account for emerging mobility modes such as e-scooters. Further, we did not specify
whether’bicycle’representedamuscularbikeoranelectric-assistedone. Similarly,the’car’mode
does gather all sorts of vehicles, electric or not, which have different attributes. This leads to
different evaluations by respondents depending on their interpretation of the questions.
Sample. Finally, our sample was biased, as discussed above. In other work, we have corrected
this bias to initialise a virtual population representative of the national French population, from
values obtained in the survey. But in the context of the present study, which is targeted at
identifying biases, we consider that the sample serves our purpose. Indeed, biases can affect any
user, independently of their mobility mode.
Decision factors. Our survey relies on 6 decision factors that were previously identified. In
theliterature,othersurveysusesimilarfactors. Forinstance[59]clusteredusersbasedonalmost
thesame6factors,withtheexceptionofthe’reliability’factorreplacingour’practicality’factor.
The decision dimensions retained in such models are all coarse-grained approximations of more
precise determinants that depend on each travel mode: congestion or availability of parking for
cardriving,reliabilityorconnectivityofpublictransport[57],oraltitudeprofilewhenwalkingor
cycling. We suggest that our idea of practicality, which could also be named ’fluidity’, captures
specificaspectsofthedifferentmodesthatimpacttheuser’scognitiveload: continuityofcycling
lanes (no thinking about itinerary), continuity and reliability of bus lines (no connections, no
risks of failure), continuity of car trips (no stop and go in traffic jams). Walking looks like the
’fluidest’mode,butweigheddownbyitsslowness. Besides,otherfactorsarenotconsideredinour
survey nor in the literature. In particular, the health impact is becoming more important after
the pandemics, encouraging to choose active mobility modes as a way to get physical exercise
[53]. Future work could survey the relative importance of these other criteria, but the current
survey was sufficient to reveal the influence of cognitive biases.
6.2 Cognitive biases as potential explanations
Another important point that we want to insist on is that the cognitive biases identified here
are presented only as hypotheses. We suggest them as plausible explanations of the observed
’car stickiness’, or inertia in mobility despite new policies and infrastructures aimed at favouring
soft mobility. It is impossible to prove for a given individual what really caused a decision, all
the more without details about their personal context, since we did not gather any personal
information. We can only conclude that biases that capture a large number of decisions are
plausible explanations for similar variations observed in many individuals, and should thus be
taken into account by deciders. This is in line with other works such as Fouillard et al. [22], who
proposealogicalmodeltodiagnosecognitivebiasesinerroneousdecisionmaking,appliedtoplane
accidents. Instead of asserting that one or the other bias is the only explanation to the accident,
their model allows to infer all possible biases that could explain the observed scenario. Our
study here fits this approach: we describe cognitive biases that explain the observed behaviours,
without asserting that they are necessary or sufficient explanations.
Besides, several different explanations can interacttogether, for instance a choice canstart as
constrained (such as using a bicycle before owning a driving license) before being rationalised a
posteriori to preserve some satisfaction (e.g. insisting on the ecological value of this choice). A
choicecanalsoberationalinitially(suchasdrivingtoworkwhenthedistanceistoolongandno
practical public transport is available), and later protected when the urban environment evolves
18(e.g. new bus lines), by adopting biases (e.g. over-estimating the risks of taking the bus, such
as strikes or delays), to avoid a costly modal switch (e.g. giving up to car and take the bus).
A choice can come from a routine (e.g. drive to work as a cultural reflex), but be reinforced by
modifications of priorities that justify it (e.g. insist on the importance of comfort or autonomy).
Finally, otherbiasesnotstudiedherecanalsoplayarole, inparticularinreactiontocommu-
nication campaigns. Confirmation bias, anchoring, or reactance can modify people’s beliefs and
preventthemfromacceptingofficialmessages,asseeninclimatechangedenial,orlackofrespect
of road safety rules. Advertisement campaigns play a role in giving a good image of the car,
symbolofautonomy,adventure,power,orsocialsuccess. Reboundeffectshouldnotbeneglected
either: measures that initially seem favourable can then turn around: building larger roads to
decrease traffic jams will eventually attract more cars; telecommuting will reduce the number of
trips, but also push people to live further away from their workplace and increase the distances
traveled; makingcarsmoreenergy-efficientwillreducethecostperkilometreandeventuallylead
to more trips. But our model as it is already provides useful insight about mobility decisions, as
explored in the next paragraph.
6.3 Applying our model
One point of interest with models of modal choice is the ability to deduce modal transfer to new
modalities, or to existing ones when their properties change. For instance, urban planners may
want to predict if building an urban cable transport will reduce the number of cars, i.e. if the
futurecabletransportuserswillbeformermotorists,orratherformerusersofpublictransportor
pedestrians. Similarly, whowouldtake publictransportif theyweremade free? Would morecar
driversswitchtocyclingofcyclinglanesweremademoresecure? Inoursurvey,wehavegathered
theperceptionsandprioritiesofusers, whichallowustocomputetherationalchoiceforthemin
their current context, but also if the context would change. Concretely, we can introduce a new
value for some mode on some criterion, simulating an urban planning policy, and recompute the
resulting rational choices of all users. Other work have studied similar scenarios based on such a
model: for instance [53] modify values in their model to predict the impact of policies change in
various scenarios, such as building more cycling lanes.
(a) Free public transport (b) Safe cycling lanes (c) 15-minute city
Figure 13: Predicting modal transfer with various policies
Figure13illustratesthepredictedmodaltransferswiththreedifferenturbanpolicies. Onthe
left, public transport is made free, which is represented in our model by an evaluation of 10 on
thefinance criterion. Wecan seethatthe busgainsnew users, mostlyatthe expense ofwalking.
Inthemiddle,therearesafecyclinglanes,whichismodelledasanevaluationof10forbicycleon
thesafetycriterion. Asaresult, therearemorecyclistsbutmostlyformerpedestrians, andsome
bus users, but very few former car drivers. Finally on the right, we have modelled the idea of a
15-minutecity,i.e.acitywhereeverythingisinwalkingdistancerange,bysettingtheevaluation
19of walking on the time criterion to 10. Again, many users switch mode, but mostly cyclists and
bus users. Again, car drivers mostly kept to their initial choice. These are only three examples,
but it shows that users will choose modes that are similar to their preference profile; if other
modes are improved on criteria that they are not interested in, this will not have much impact
on their decisions. Thus for instance, car drivers who have lower priorities than the average on
finance will not react to free public transport.
Of course this is only a simplification and the prediction cannot be considered fully valid, but
it illustrates the power of such a model once correctly calibrated on the real population. It also
shows that given their values (or priorities for the criteria), not all modal transfers are equally
likely. Saiddifferently,emergingmobilitymodesarelikelytogainusersattheexpenseofwalking
or bicycle, and sometimes bus, rather than among car drivers, whose values are too different.
Besides,thisdoesnoteventakehabitsorcognitivebiasesintoaccount,whichmightinducemore
inertiainthemodaltransferseventhoughtherationalchoicemighthaveevolved. Inotherwork,
weuseasimulatorbasedonthismodeltoillustratetheimpactofcognitivebiases, bylettingthe
user switch them on or off in the decision making of the virtual population. This way, the user
can observe the difference in impact of their urban policies depending on cognitive biases, and
realise that they can create an inertia in the adoption of new mobility modes [2, 1].
In future work, it would be interesting to compare such predictions with real observations
in cities that have enforced new policies, for instance free public transport in Dunkerque [13] or
more recently metropolitan train in Strasbourg [51], in order to validate the model. Further, we
wouldalsoliketoapplyclusteringalgorithmsinordertofindclassesofsimilaruserprofilesbased
ontheirdeclaredpreferences,whichwouldhelptailoringpoliciesorcommunicationtotheirneeds
andexpectations,makingthemmoreefficient. Finally,ongoingworkisdedicatedtothedesignof
a serious game based on this model, where the player will take on the role of a land-use planner
who can decide urban policies in order to make mobility more sustainable in a virtual city.
7 Conclusion
In this paper, we have described a survey about the perceptions of 4 mobility modes and the
preferences of users for 6 modal choice factors. This survey has gathered 650 answers in 2023,
that are published as open data [3]. In this study, we have used these results to highlight the
influence of a number of cognitive biases on mobility decisions: halo bias, choice-supportive bias,
and reactance. These cognitive biases are proposed as plausible explanations of the observed
behaviour, where the population tends to stick to individual cars despite urban policies aiming
at favouring soft mobility. We have discussed how this model and the gathered data can also
serve as the basis to simulate how a virtual population reacts to urban policies enacted by a
player. Other work has been dedicated to implementing agent-based models of mobility choice,
influenced by various biases [2], and informed by this data [17]. Work is still ongoing to design
a simulation-based serious game where the player takes the role of an urban manager faced with
planning choices to make their city more sustainable. Future work is also planned to further
analyse the data, in particular to deduce clusters of similar users, and to analyse the qualitative
answers to open-text questions. This survey provides useful insight into human reasoning in
response to urban policies, that can inform agent-based modellers or policy makers.
Acknowledgements
This work is part of the ANR project SwITCh funded by the French National Research Agency
under number ANR-19-CE22-0003.
20References
[1] Carole Adam. Interactive simulation of inertia created by mobility habits. In 54th Int. Simulation and
Gaming conf.,2023.
[2] CaroleAdam.Simulatingtheimpactofcognitivebiasesonthemobilitytransition.In54thISAGAConference
(Simulation and Gaming),2023.
[3] CaroleAdam. Answerstoasurveyaboutperceptionsofmobility,2024. https://doi.org/10.57745/ELLXJF.
[4] CaroleAdam,AliceJacquier,andFranckTaillandier. Simulation`abased’agentsdestrat´egiesurbainespour
unemobilit´eplusdurable. Academic Journal of Civil Engineering,40(1):33–36,2022.
[5] Sebastian Bamberg, Daniel R¨olle, and Christoph Weber. Does habitual car use not lead to more resistance
tochangeoftravelmode? Transportation,30:97–108,2003.
[6] LucaBarbarossa. Thepostpandemiccity: Challengesandopportunitiesforanon-motorizedurbanenviron-
ment,overviewofitaliancases. Sustainability,12(17),2020.
[7] AlainBarr´e. Quelquesdonn´eesstatistiquesetspatialessurlagen`esedur´eseauautoroutierfran¸cais. Annales
de g´eographie,106(593/594):229–240,1997.
[8] Tilmann Betsch, Susanne Haberstroh, Andreas Gl¨ockner, Thomas Haar, and Klaus Fiedler. The effects of
routinestrengthonadaptationandinformationsearchinrecurrentdecisionmaking. Organizationalbehavior
and human decision processes,84(1),2001.
[9] AviroopBiswas,PaulIOh,GuyEFaulkner,RaviRBajaj,MichaelASilver,MarcSMitchell,andDavidA
Alter. Sedentary time and its association with risk for disease incidence, mortality, and hospitalization in
adults: asystematicreviewandmeta-analysis. Annals of internal medicine,162(2):123–132,2015.
[10] AnnaBorowik,DamienTessier,MichelGuinot,andPatriceFlore.Evaluationoflong-termeffectofpedestrian
signagewithtimetravelindicationingrenoblecity(france).Movement&SportSciences-Science&Motricit´e,
106(4):7–17,2019.
[11] JackWBrehm. A theory of psychological reactance. Academicpress,1966.
[12] OlivierBrette,ThomasBuhler,NathalieLazaric,andKevinMar´echal. Reconsideringthenatureandeffects
ofhabitsinurbantransportationbehavior. Journal of Institutional Economics,10(3):399–426,2014.
[13] Henri Briche. Dunkerque, laboratoire de la gratuit´e des transports en commun. Retour sur les effets de la
gratuit´epartielle.Rapportfinal. Technicalreport,VIGS(VillesInnovantesetGestiondesSavoirs),2017.
[14] ChantalBrutelandJeannePages. Lavoiturerestemajoritairepourlesd´eplacementsdomicile-travail,mˆeme
pourdecourtesdistances. Ins´ee Premi`ere,835:19,2021.
[15] CCFA. L’industrieautomobilefran¸caise,analyseetstatistiques2019. Technicalreport,Comit´edesconstruc-
teursfran¸caisd’automobiles,2019.
[16] Aina Chalabaev et al. Les apports de la litt´erature et des analyses pr´ealables pour d´efinir une intervention
visantunreportmodaldurable. InMSFS,2018.
[17] Chloe Conrad and Carole Adam. Identifying and modelling cognitive biases in mobility choices.
arXiv:2402.09921,2024.
[18] AlexaDelbosc,FarhanaNaznin,NickHaslam,andNarelleHaworth.Dehumanizationofcyclistspredictsself-
reportedaggressivebehaviourtowardthem: Apilotstudy. TransportationresearchpartF:trafficpsychology
and behaviour,62:681–689,2019.
[19] BartDewulf, TijsNeutens, DelfienVanDyck, IlseDeBourdeaudhuij, andNicoVandeWeghe. Correspon-
dence between objective and perceived walking times to urban destinations: Influence of physical activity,
neighbourhood walkability, and socio-demographics. International journal of health geographics, 11:1–10,
2012.
[20] TiffanySDohertyandAaronECarroll. Believinginovercomingcognitivebiases. AMA Journal of Ethics,
22(9):773–778,2020.
[21] Nils Epprecht, Timo Von Wirth, Christian Stu¨nzi, and Yann Benedict Blumer. Anticipating transitions
beyondthecurrentmobilityregimes: Howacceptabilitymatters. Futures,60,2014.
[22] Valentin Fouillard, Nicolas Sabouret, Safouan Taha, and Fr´ed´eric Boulanger. Catching cognitive biases
in an erroneous decision making process. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC),pages3121–3127.IEEE,2021.
[23] Federico Fraboni, V Mar´ın Puchades, Marco De Angelis, Luca Pietrantoni, and Gabriele Prati. Red-light
runningbehaviorofcyclistsinitaly: Anobservationalstudy. Accident Analysis & Prevention,120:219–232,
2018.
[24] FrancisGalton. Voxpopuli(1907). Nature,75:450–451,1949.
21[25] Grande Agglom´eration Toulousaine. Exploitation enquˆete m´enages d´eplacements 2013 : Quel impact de la
mobilit´esurles´emissionsdegaza`effetdeserre?,2016.
[26] Jo¨elHazan,BenjaminFassenot,AmmarA.Malik,andJoannaMoody.Whatdrivesdrivers? howtoinfluence
mobilitybehaviors. Technicalreport,BostonConsultingGroup,HendersonInstitute,2020.
[27] Alessandro Innocenti, Patrizia Lattarulo, and Maria Grazia Pazienza. Car stickiness: Heuristics and biases
intravelchoice. Transport Policy,25:158–168,2013.
[28] INSEE. Donn´ees sur le parc automobile franc¸ais au 1er janvier 2021, 2021. Minist`ere de la Transition
Ecologique.
[29] AJacquierandCAdam. Choiceofmobility: anagent-basedapproach. InSAGEO,pages127–138,2021.
[30] OwainJames,JISwiderski,JohnHicks,DenisTeoman,andRalphBuehler. Pedestriansande-scooters: An
initiallookate-scooterparkingandperceptionsbyridersandnon-riders. Sustainability,11(20):5591,2019.
[31] Marilyn Johnson, Judith Charlton, Jennifer Oxley, and Stuart Newstead. Why do cyclists infringe at red
lights? an investigation of australian cyclists’ reasons for red light infringement. Accident Analysis & Pre-
vention,50:840–847,2013.
[32] VincentKaufmann,KamilaTabaka,Jean-MarieGuidez,andNicolasLouvet. Etsilesfran¸caisn’avaientplus
seulementunevoituredanslatˆete? Technicalreport,C.d’´etudessurlesr´eseaux,lestransports,l’urbanisme
etlesconstructionspubliques,France,2010.
[33] Pietro Lanzini and Sana Akbar Khan. Shedding light on the psychological and behavioral determinants of
travel mode choice: a meta-analysis. Transport. research part F: traffic psychology & behaviour, 48:13–27,
2017.
[34] XiaoyanLuo,JihaoHu,LisaCWan,andXiaoShannonYi. Restrictionreduction: Theeffectsofmobilityre-
strictiononconsumers’preferencesforadvertisementsoftourismproducts.TourismManagement,94:104638,
2023.
[35] PaulaMendesLuz,PauloNadanovsky,andJulieLeask.Howheuristicsandcognitivebiasesaffectvaccination
decisions. Cadernos de Sau´de Pu´blica,36,2020.
[36] Mara Mather, Eldar Shafir, and Marcia K Johnson. Misremembrance of options past: Source monitoring
andchoice. Psychological Science,11(2):132–138,2000.
[37] Daina Mazutis and Anna Eckardt. Sleepwalking into catastrophe: Cognitive biases and corporate climate
changeinertia. California Management Review,59(3):74–108,2017.
[38] S.etal.Medina. Impactdelapollutiondel’airambiantsurlamortalit´eenfrancem´etropolitaine. Technical
report,Sant´ePubliqueFrance,2021.
[39] Atsuo Murata, Tomoko Nakamura, and Waldemar Karwowski. Influence of cognitive biases in distorting
decisionmakingandleadingtocriticalunfavorableincidents. Safety,1(1):44–58,2015.
[40] Claudia Nobis and Barbara Lenz. Gender differences in travel patterns. Research on Women’s Issues in
Transportation,2(3):114–123,2005.
[41] RobertBNoland. Perceivedriskandmodalchoice: riskcompensationintransportationsystems. Accident
Analysis & Prevention,27(4):503–521,1995.
[42] JulianAOldmeadow,SamanthaPovey,AndrewPovey,andChristineCritchley.Driverangertowardscyclists
inaustralia: Investigatingtheroleoftheperceivedlegitimacyofcyclistsasroadusers.Transportationresearch
part F: traffic psychology and behaviour,63:240–251,2019.
[43] Evangelos Paschalidis, Socrates Basbas, Ioannis Politis, and Mixalis Prodromou. “put the blame on...
others!”: The battle of cyclists against pedestrians and car drivers at the urban environment. a cyclists’
perceptionstudy. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology and behaviour,41:243–260,2016.
[44] CinziaPastorelloandGiorgosMellios.Explainingroadtransportemissions: Anon-technicalguide.Technical
report,EuropeanEnvironmentAgency,2016.
[45] ClairePelgrims. Genderedcyclist-bicycleassemblagesinlausanne: equipmenttrajectoriesinahillycontext
betweenaffectiveinvestments,customisationpracticesandanemergingethicofcareandsecuring. InSwiss
Mobility Conference,2023.
[46] MathieuPerona.A` pied,`av´elo,enbusouenvoiture: lesd´eplacementsdomicile-travailenFrance.Technical
report,CEPREMAP,2023. NotesObservatoireduBien-Etre.
[47] Kelcie M Ralph, Michael J Smart, Robert B Noland, Sicheng Wang, and Lisa Cintron. Is it really too far?
overestimating walk time and distance reduces walking. Transportation research part F: traffic psychology
and behaviour,74:522–535,2020.
[48] Patrick R´erat, Lucas Haldimann, and Hannah Widmer. Cycling in the era of covid-19: the effects of the
pandemicandpop-upcyclelanesoncyclingpractices. Transportationresearchinterdisciplinaryperspectives,
15,2022.
22[49] Ana¨ısRocci. Del’automobilit´e`alamultimodalit´e? Analysesociologiquedesfreinsetleviersauchangement
de comportements vers une r´eduction de l’usage de la voiture. Le cas de la r´egion parisienne et perspective
internationale. PhDthesis,Sociologie.Universit´eRen´eDescartes-ParisV,2007.
[50] Alexander J Rothman, Peter M Gollwitzer, Adam M Grant, David T Neal, Paschal Sheeran, and Wendy
Wood. Haleandheartypolicies: Howpsychologicalsciencecancreateandmaintainhealthyhabits. Perspec-
tives on Psychological Science,10(6):701–5,2015.
[51] Marie-L´eaRousseauandLaurentGuih´ery.Lespremierspasdurerm´etropolitaintransfrontalierdestrasbourg:
enseignementsdesexp´eriencesallemandesetsuissespourunrenouveaudeservicesferroviairesm´etropolitains
enfrance. Allemagne d’aujourd’hui,pages139–153,2023.
[52] Hiroyuki Sakai, Mariko Shimizu, Takayoshi Yoshimura, and Eiji Hato. Psychological reactance to mobility
restrictionsduetothecovid-19pandemic: ajapanesepopulationstudy. Frontiers in Psychology,12:655022,
2021.
[53] MariangelaScorranoandRomeoDanielis. Activemobilityinanitaliancity: Modechoicedeterminantsand
attitudesbeforeandduringthecovid-19emergency.ResearchinTransportationEconomics,86:101031,2021.
[54] JamesSurowiecki. The Wisdom of Crowds/James Surowiecki. NY.: Anchor/Doubleday,2005.
[55] Robert L. Trivers and Huey P. Newton. The crash of flight 90: doomed by self-deception? Science Digest,
pages66–67,111,November1982.
[56] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: Biases in judg-
mentsrevealsomeheuristicsofthinkingunderuncertainty. science,185(4157):1124–1131,1974.
[57] YannisTyrinopoulosandConstantinosAntoniou.Factorsaffectingmodalchoiceinurbanmobility.European
Transport Research Review,5:27–39,2013.
[58] JeanViard. E´loge de la mobilit´e: essai sur le capital temps libre et la valeur travail. Edsdel’Aube,2011.
[59] Johannes Weyer, Fabian Adelt, and Marlon Philipp. Modeling sustainable mobility: Impact assessment
of policy measures. TATuP-Zeitschrift fu¨r Technikfolgenabsch¨atzung in Theorie und Praxis/Journal for
Technology Assessment in Theory and Practice,32(1):56–62,2023.
23