Behavioral analysis in immersive learning environments: A systematic
literature review and research agenda
Yu Liu1, Kang Yue2, and Yue Liu∗1
1Beijing Engineering Research Center of Mixed Reality and Advanced Display, School of
Optics and Photonics, Beijing Institute of Technology, Beijing 100081, China.
2Institute of Software, Chinese Academy of Sciences, Beijing 100045, China.
Abstract 1 Introduction
The rapid growth of immersive technologies in educa- Immersion refers to the experience when people be-
tional areas has increased research interest in analyz- come deeply absorbed by such attractive objects as
ing the specific behavioral patterns of learners in im- music, movies, works of art, landscapes, or even their
mersive learning environments. Considering the fact ownthoughts,andforgettheirsurroundingstemporar-
that research on the technical affordances of immer- ily (Yuen et al., 2013). While, in the educational con-
sive technologies and the pedagogical affordances of text, especially in the context of e-learning (Monahan
behavioral analysis remains fragmented, this study etal.,2008),mobilelearning(Sunetal.,2016),orubiq-
firstcontributesbydevelopingaconceptualframework uitous learning (Liu et al., 2009), the immersive learn-
thatamalgamateslearningrequirements,specification, ingexperiencehasamorespecificmeaning,i.e.,people
evaluation, and iteration into an integrated model to engage in the mediated or simulated learning environ-
identify learning benefits and potential hurdles of be- mentcreatedbyimmersivetechnologies,includingaug-
havioral analysis in immersive learning environments. mented reality (AR), virtual reality (VR), mixed real-
Then, a systematic review was conducted underpin- ity (MR), and involve the willing suspension of disbe-
ning the proposed conceptual framework to retrieve lief(Dedeetal.,2017). Immersivetechnologymakesit
valuable empirical evidence from the 40 eligible arti- possibletoconstructalearningenvironmentthatblurs
clesduringthelastdecade. Thereviewfindingssuggest the distinct boundary between the tangible and digi-
that(1)thereisanessentialneedtosufficientlyprepare tal or simulated world, and brings abundant possible
the salient pedagogical requirements to define the spe- advantagesintheeducationalareasthathavebeenex-
cific learning stage, envisage intended cognitive objec- tensively studied in numerous previous research, such
tives, and specify an appropriate set of learning activ- asenhancinglearningexperienceandemotions(Huang
ities, when developing comprehensive plans on behav- etal.,2016),promotionoflearningmotivationandcre-
ioral analysis in immersive learning environments. (2) ativity(Weietal.,2015),andexperiencingthepresence
Researchers could customize the unique immersive ex- through immersive virtual field trips (Han, 2021).
perimentalimplementationbyconsideringfactorsfrom
Disambiguation of fundamental terms of immersive
four dimensions: learner, pedagogy, context, and rep-
technology is needed to describe clear delineation and
resentation. (3) The behavioral patterns constructed
specific features among the three terms of VR, AR,
in immersive learning environments vary by consider-
and MR. Augmented reality refers to the technology
ing the influence of behavioral analysis techniques, re-
that enriches the sensorial perception of a person with
search themes, and immersive technical features. (4)
the superimposition of virtual content anchored in the
The use of behavioral analysis in immersive learn-
real world (Daponte et al., 2014; Sereno et al., 2020;
ing environments faces several challenges from techni-
Alkhabra et al., 2023). Azuma has identified three
cal, implementation, anddataprocessingperspectives.
characteristics of AR: the combination of real and vir-
Thisstudyalsoarticulatescriticalresearchagendathat
tual content, real-time interactivity, and 3D registra-
could drive future investigation on behavioral analysis
tion (Azuma, 1997). Several AR tracking approaches,
in immersive learning environments.
such as marker-based, sensor-based, and marker-less
Key words— Architectures for educational tech-
tracking methods, have been developed to achieve sta-
nology system; Augmented and virtual reality; Evalu-
ble and flexible tracking and registration performance
ation methodologies; Human-computer interface; Sys-
(Wang et al., 2016). VR refers to the technology that
tematic literature review
creates an interactive three-dimensional virtual world
that not only produces a faithful reproduction of “re-
∗Correspondingauthor: YueLiu,liuyue@bit.edu.cn. ality” but expands the bounds of reality to accom-
1
4202
yaM
6
]CH.sc[
1v24430.5042:viXraplish things that cannot come true in physical real- behavior patterns analysis in immersive learning envi-
ity (Kardong-Edgren et al., 2019; Slater and Sanchez- ronmentsarestillscarce,thereisanurgentneedtocon-
Vives, 2016). Based on the criteria proposed by Slater ductasystematicreviewtoscrutinizeusers’behavioral
and Wilbur (1997), the classification of VR can be de- patternswithimmersivetechnologyasawhole,looking
scribed into three general categories according to the toexploreadeeperunderstandingofhowlearnerslearn
levelofimmersion: non-immersiveVR,semi-immersive andhowteachersteachinimmersivelearningcontexts.
VR, and fully-immersive VR (Rose et al., 2018). Ac- Underpinningtheproposedconceptualframework,this
cording to Milgram and Kishino’s reality–virtuality review contributes to the literature by consolidating
continuum(MilgramandKishino,1994)andBenford’s factors of behavioral analysis in immersive contexts.
taxonomy (Benford et al., 1998), MR refers to the
technology that integrates virtual and real worlds as
2 Conceptual framework
a whole space that spans the local and remote as well
asthephysicalandsyntheticdimensions. ThoughMR
technology has been investigated pervasively, there is Numerous well-established educational frameworks
no one-size-fits-all definition of MR. In this review, to have been incorporated into immersive learning appli-
avoid confusion over the definition of MR, we identi- cations. This section highlights several representative
fied only the articles involving MR technology whose frameworks that form the fundamental basis for the
authorsexplicitlyreferredtotheterms“mixedreality” proposed framework.
or “MR”. Fowler (2015) proposed the design for learning
Although immersive technologies are not new tech- framework to extend and enhance the pedagogy of im-
nologies emerging in educational settings, the rapid mersive learning, which focused more on the pedagog-
development of immersive technology applications in ical requirements instead of solely emphasizing tech-
recentyears—intermsofinteractioncapabilities(Pe- nical affordances implicit in 3D virtual learning envi-
tersen et al., 2022) and behavioral transition (Miller ronments (VLEs). The design for learning framework
and Bugnariu, 2016) — have made immersive tech- is a practitioner-orientated model to provide guidance
nologies increasingly attractive to researchers, organi- to practitioners on designing appropriate 3D VLEs so
zations, and educators. With the high level of interac- as to meet the particular teaching and learning re-
tivity, a growing number of mature commercial plat- quirements. InFowler’sframework,thelearningobjec-
forms embedding immersive technologies have become tivesperformanalignmentbetweenlearningstagesand
available to domestic consumers, enabling researchers learningactivities,resultinginacompletemodelcover-
todevelopeffectivepedagogicalsystemsforinvestigat- ingthestrongerpedagogicalinputanddesignemphasis
ingtheinteractionbehaviorsinimmersivelearningen- forimmersivelearningenvironments. Thisalignmentis
vironments at much lower costs. Educational scholars an attempt to achieve the intended learning outcomes,
fromvariouseducationalcontexts,suchasarts(Chang as described by Biggs and Tang (2011), to acknowl-
etal.,2014), engineering(Chenetal.,2020), manufac- edgeandunderstandwhatcompetencestudentsarein-
turing and construction (Wu et al., 2020), and science tended to develop. Bloom’s taxonomy (Anderson and
(Cai et al., 2021; Chiang et al., 2014; Zhang et al., Krathwohl, 2001; Bloom et al., 1956) is chosen as the
2021), have made many endeavors to identify behav- theoretical model to describe the appropriate learning
ioralpatternsfrominteractionsamonglearners, teach- objectivesingenericlearningactivities. Howtodesign
ers,andlearningenvironmentsduringimmersivelearn- immersive learning systems with the learning objec-
ing processes. Fruitful behavioral analysis techniques tives of analyzing learners’ behaviors in 3D VLEs re-
integratingqualitativeandquantitativeanalysismeth- mainsachallenge. Therefore,Fowler’sdesignforlearn-
odshavebeenintroducedtotheinvestigationofbehav- ing framework has a promising potential to provide an
ioralprocessesanduncoveringofnewresearchavenues avenue for designing effective 3D VLEs with the par-
(Hou, 2012a, 2018; L¨ams¨a et al., 2021). The behav- ticularlearningrequirementofbehavioralanalysisand
ioral analysis techniques commonly used to construct provides the foundation for conducting the systematic
behavior patterns are summarized in Table 1. review in the context of this study.
As highlighted by Cheng and Tsai (2013), addi- Another mature conceptual framework used to sup-
tional study is necessary to acquire an in-depth un- porttheimmersivelearningsystemdesignanddevelop-
derstanding of students’ learning behavior sequences mentisthefour-dimensionalframework (4DF)(deFre-
by mixed method analysis, such as behavioral analysis itasetal.,2009,2010;deFreitasandNeumann,2009).
techniques, when involved in science education with The framework comprises the following four dimen-
immersive technologies. A conceptual framework is sions: learnerspecification,pedagogicperspective,rep-
proposedtosupportthedevelopmentandimplementa- resentation, and context. Each dimension of the 4DF
tion of learning behavior patterns construction in im- hasadependencyrelationshipwithothers. Meanwhile,
mersivecontextstoinformscholarsandresearchersin- the four dimensions would also jointly constitute a ro-
vestigating the potential pedagogical affordability in bust conceptual framework.
relevant educational research. Additionally, consider- However, one of the critiques of these models and
ing review studies that comprehensively explain user frameworks discussed above is that, more often than
2Table 1: Behavioral analysis techniques and the associated definition.
Behavioral analysis Definition References
techniques
Behavior frequency Behavior frequency analysis performs the statistical analysis on the log Hou(2012b),Liuetal.(2017)
analysis of the coded behaviors recorded in the interaction system to obtain the
behavior’sfrequencyanddistributioninformation.
Quantitative content QCAisaresearchmethoddefinedassystematically,objectively,andquan- Poldneretal.(2012),Riffetal.
analysis(QCA) titativelyassigningcommunicationcontenttocategoriesaccordingtospe- (2014)
cificcodingschemesandrules,andusingstatisticaltechniquestoanalyze
therelationshipsinvolvingthesecategories.
Lag sequential analysis LSAaresearchmethodthatismoreappropriateforanalyzingthedynamic Bakeman and Quera (2011),
(LSA) aspectsofinteractionbehaviorsaccordingtotimeandpresentsequential Draper and O’Connor (2019),
chronologyinformationoftheusers’activities. Hou(2009)
Social network analysis SNA is an effective quantitative analytical method for analyzing social Scott and Carrington (2011),
(SNA) structures between individuals in social life, which takes as the origin WuandNian(2021)
pointthepremisethatsociallifeisconstructedprimarilybynodes(e.g.,
individuals, groups, or committees), the relations between those nodes,
andthepatternsgeneratedbythoserelations.
Clusteranalysis Clusteranalysisclassifiesdatatoformmeaningfuldatagroupsbasedon Tanetal.(2019)
similarity (or homogeneity) in describing the data objects and the rela-
tionshipsamongdata.
not, only a limited number of generic concepts are 2.1 Requirement.
considered when designing and evaluating immersive
The requirement construct is derived from the design
learning activities. The high-level models like Fowler’s
for learning framework, which envisages the learning
designfor learning frameworkand4DFarenoteasyto
design process by satisfying a series of instructional
useforexploratoryorexplanatoryinvestigation(Mayer
requirements through acknowledging which learning
et al., 2014), for example, as straightforward theoret-
stagethelearnerisat,settingappropriatelearningob-
ical models to review the use and design of immer-
jectives the learner means to achieve, and conducting
sive learning. Poor or sensationalist implementation
a given set of learning activities (Fowler, 2015). The
of learning technologies not restricted to immersive
requirement construct is treated as the input of the
technologies, would seriously hinder the affordability
BAILF. However, the design for learning framework
ofapromisingtechnologythatisappliedintheeduca-
provides few indications of how to make design deci-
tional domain (Lai and Cheong, 2022). In response to
sions on applying the model at the specification stage.
this limitation, a conceptual framework is still needed
to provide comprehensive, concrete, and practical per-
2.2 Specification.
spectivesforconductingasystematicreviewofimmer-
sive learning with the intended learning outcomes of
In an attempt to overcome this limitation, the 4DF is
behavior analysis in this study. Given the benefits
integrated into the BAILF as the specification stage,
as well as the critiques of the discussed frameworks,
promising to encapsulate multiple conceptual theories
a behavioral analysis in immersive learning framework
andframeworksparallellytoincreasenotablestrengths
(BAILF)isproposedastheextendedmodelofFowler’s
for immersive learning system design and implementa-
designforlearningframeworkand4DFthatintegrates
tion (de Freitas and Routledge, 2013). The 4DF in
key concepts outlined in previous models to illustrate
the specification stage is rearranged in the following
the requirements, specification, evaluation, and itera-
order: learner, pedagogy, context, and representation.
tionofimmersivelearningwithbehavioranalysisasthe
Furthermore, during the design process of the immer-
primary intended learning outcomes, as Fig 1 depicts.
sivelearningenvironment,itiscrucialtocarefullycon-
sider two distinctive and unique attributes of 3D Vir-
tualLearningEnvironments(VLEs): ”representational
fidelity” and ”learner interaction,” as emphasized by
Dalgarno and Lee (2010), and the specific relation-
The BAILF proposed in this study not only has to
ships between these two distinct characteristics should
be contextualized with relevant literature identified in
be investigated through appropriate practitioner ap-
the following sections, but also needs to consider the
proaches (Fowler, 2015). Consequently, the immersive
higher and lower level construct into the framework.
learning system design mechanics, including three fac-
Thisframeworkisbuiltuponseveralpedagogicalmod-
tors: representational fidelity, learner interaction, and
els, such as activity theory (“four-dimensional frame-
practitioner approach, are constructed as the core of
work”), constructivism (“design for learning frame-
the specification stage.
work”), and game-based learning framework (“input-
process-outcome”, IPO framework) (Garris et al., - The 1st Dimension in the framework involves the
2002), and can be summarized into four key stages: learner specification. The learner-centered con-
requirement, specification, evaluation, and iteration. struct highlights the significance of learner inter-
3Figure 1: Behavioral analysis in immersive learning framework (BAILF)
action,oneofthetwouniquecharacteristicsof3-D critical factors for supporting the construction of
VLEs argued in Dalgarno and Lee’s model (Dal- the learning context.
garno and Lee, 2010).
- The2ndDimensionintheframeworkanalysesthe
pedagogic perspective when conducting learning 2.3 Evaluation.
activities, and includes a deliberation of instruc-
tional models to scaffold learners throughout the Inspired by the IPO framework, the model’s output
learningprocesses. Theselectionoflearningtheo- construct is vital for evaluating the achievement of
riesmayparticularlyaffectanalyzingtheintended learning objectives and intended learning outcomes
learning outcomes. Consequently, the systematic (Ak, 2012; Garris et al., 2002; Hsiao and Chen, 2016).
review of pedagogic perspectives, such as instruc- Tothisend, theevaluationconstructisintegratedinto
tional models and learning theories from related the BAILF, which comprises three factors: learning
literature, can make sense to find effective ways analysis methods and behavioral outcomes.
for knowledge construction and transformation in
3D VLEs.
- The 3rd Dimension in the framework outlines 2.4 Iteration.
the representation of the immersive learning sys-
tem, including the interactive representation of To make the learning system scalable and robust, the
the learning experience, immersion degree of 3D iteration stage as the refining process in framework
VLEs, and the representational fidelity, which is construction is important for preventing sensational-
the second unique characteristic of 3-D VLEs ar- ist or haphazard integration of immersive technology
gued in the Dalgarno and Lee’s model (Dalgarno into learning practices (de Freitas and Oliver, 2006).
and Lee, 2010). In the iteration stage, problems and limitations in the
system design and evaluation process are discovered,
- The 4th Dimension in the framework pays atten- and additions, subtractions, as well as substitutions of
tion to the context where the immersive learning learning system implementation should be carried out
happens. Hardware and software platforms are to fix the system defects.
43 Research method: systematic
(1) Paperswerepeer-reviewedprimarysourcearticles.
literature review
(2) Papers whose full text was accessible.
Aimingtoachieveresearchobjectivesofthesystematic (3) Research areas: education-related, immersive
literature review, this systematic review followed the technology-related papers.
preset protocol to provide essential both quantitative
(4) Papersdealtwithbehavioralpatternsanalysisand
and qualitative evidence (Arksey and O’Malley, 2005;
construction.
Khan et al., 2003; Wendler, 2012).
Exclusion criteria.
3.1 Information sources
(1) Papers were commentaries, literature reviews or
The papers were recovered from the online research book chapters.
databases related to education and technology, includ-
ing Scopus, Web of Science, IEEE Xplore Digital Li- (2) Papers whose full text was not accessible.
brary, and ERIC (Education Resources Information
(3) The focus of the study was not on the education-
Center). This systematic literature review also was
related, immersive technology-related context.
mindful of other online databases, such as Science Di-
rect,theACMdigitallibrary,JSTOR,Wiley,EBSCO,
(4) The analysis of the study did not involve the con-
and Taylor & Francis. Nonetheless, the majority of
tent about learners’ behavior analysis.
relevantarticlesretrievedfromthesedatasetswerean-
ticipated to be already included in the datasets se-
lected above, which has been confirmed using exem- 3.4 Literature quality assessment
plary cross-checks. To avoid omitting some relevant
papers that were not included in these databases, the Aiming to evaluate the quality of eligible papers, a se-
backward and forward snowballing method, which is a riesofqualitycriteriaderivedfromtheliteraturequal-
practical literature searching technique for identifying ity assessment method presented by Connolly et al.
additional relevant papers based on the references list (2012) was applied and revised in this study.
and the citations of the target papers (Wohlin, 2014), Specifically, each of the included papers was ana-
was applied in the literature identification procedure. lyzed and assigned a score ranging between 1 to 3
StArt(state-of-the-artthroughsystematicreview)tool across the five dimensions, where 1 indicates low qual-
(Fabbrietal.,2016)wasadoptedasinformationextrac- ity, 2 indicates medium quality, and 3 indicates high
tion software to assist in data organization and moni- quality in each dimension. Each paper was graded on
toringtodecreasethechancesoferrorswhenprocessing fivedimensions, withthesumofthescoresforeachdi-
duplicate papers. mensiondeterminingthefinalscore. Thepaperquality
assessmentprocedurewasconductedindependentlyby
tworaters,andthefinalscoreforeachpaperwasdeter-
3.2 Search criteria
mined by computing the mean value of the two raters’
Thesearchtermsorkeywordsincludeanyquerystrings scores, ranging from 5 to 15. As suggested by Johnson
that describe immersive technologies and additional et al. (2016), the articles could be classified into three
query strings that describe the construction of be- categories according to the scores: articles with less
havioral patterns by utilizing behavioral analysis tech- than 8 points were annotated as “weaker evidence”,
niques in an instructional context. The research terms articles with 8-12 points were annotated as “moder-
usedforliteratureidentificationaresummarizedinTa- ate evidence”, articles with more than 12 points were
ble 2. According to the characteristics of each online annotated as “stronger evidence”.
research database, the search strings were manually
combinedandmarginallymodifiedtomatchthesearch 3.5 Coding Procedure
capabilities provided by each database.
With the aim of conducting a systematic review map-
ping study on the theme of behavioral analysis in the
3.3 Inclusion and exclusion criteria
immersivelearningenvironment, itisessentialtoelab-
The paper selection procedure was guidedby the prin- orate every construct in the BAILF, which produces
ciples of the Preferred Reporting Items for System- problems that need to be addressed corresponding to
aticLiteratureReviewsandMeta-Analyses(PRISMA) the framework constructs. In order to obtain a deeper
(Moher et al., 2009) statement, as shown in Fig 2. To understanding of the generalization of BAILF, a con-
determine whether a study meets the eligibility crite- cept matrix adapted from Salipante et al. (1982) and
ria,inclusionandexclusioncriteriaaimedataddressing Webster and Watson (2002) was developed to make
research questions were proposed during the screening the transition from the author- to the concept-centric
stage. literature review, providing classification structure in
Inclusion criteria. helping clarify critical concepts of the review. Seven
5Table 2: Key search terms used for literature identification that was conducted in November 2022.
Immersive technology- AND Behavioral analysis-related concept AND Education-related
related concept concept
Immersivetechnologies*OR Behavior*analysisOR Education*OR
Virtualreality*ORVROR Behavioralpattern*OR Learn*OR
Augmentedreality*ORAROR Quantitativecontentanalysis*ORQCAOR Train*OR
Mixedreality*ORMROR Lagsequentialanalysis*ORLSAOR Teach*OR
Crossreality*OR Socialnetworkanalysis*ORSNAOR Student*
Extendedreality*ORXR Clusteranalysis
Figure 2: Literature identification process derived from the PRISMA framework. Using the
previously-defined key concept terms, this review yielded 676 results from databases. With the aid of the
StArt software, 53 duplicate papers were found and deleted. During the screening phase, a review of the titles,
abstracts, and keywords revealed 560 irrelevant articles, and 63 studies that met the inclusion criteria were
included for the following selection stage. During the eligibility phase, the entire text of the remaining articles
was scanned in detail to check the theoretical contribution in the area of learning implementation, behavior
analysis, virtual communities, and the extension of instruction theories. Thus, 24 studies with limited evidence
on analyzing learner behavior sequences or without immersive intervention were excluded. Additionally, an-
other five articles were classified as ineligible due to the lack of reliability in their contributions or inconsistent
analysis. Then, the backward and forward snowballing method was carried out on Google Scholar to find more
relevant literature, including another six papers in this review. In the end, 40 papers were ultimately classified
as eligible and included in the final review.
mainconceptmatrixfacetscorrelatedwiththerelevant design of behavioral patterns construction in im-
framework constructs were formulated, as summarized mersive learning environments?
in Table 3. Based on the classification scheme, seven
primary research questions were proposed in this re-
view: - RQ2. Whatarethelearnerspecificsbasedon4DF
forbehavioralanalysisinimmersivelearningenvi-
- RQ1. What are the learning requirements in the ronments?
6Table 3: Classification scheme.
Concept matrix Categories Description
facets
1.1Learningstages Conceptualization Learnerscomeintocontactwithconceptsthroughpresentationandvisualization
intheimmersivelearningenvironment.
Construction Learners construct new knowledge through interactivity with others or virtual
learningcontentintheimmersivelearningenvironment.
Dialogue Learnerstesttheiremergingunderstandingofnewknowledgethroughdiscussion
withothersoramorecomprehensiverangeofinteractivityinVLEs.
1.2Cognitivelearning Lower-level cognitive Rememberingisthecognitiveprocesswithlowcognitivecomplexity,including
outcomes/objectives category identifyingandrecallingrelevantinformationfromlong-termmemory.
Understanding is the cognitive process that helps learners construct meaning
frominstructionalactivitiesandhassubcategoriessuchasinterpreting,exempli-
fying,classifying,summarizing,inferring,andexplaining(RadmehrandDrake,
2019).
Higher-level cognitive Applyingistoimplementtheacquiredknowledgeintopractice.
category Analyzing is to break the learned knowledge into constituent parts and deter-
minetherelationshipofthepartswithoverallstructure.
Evaluatingistojudgethelearnedknowledgebasedonspecificcriteria.
Creatingistomakenewlearningproductsbymentallyreorganizingfragmented
elementsintonewknowledgepatternsorstructures.
1.3Learningactivities Listofmini-learningac- Learningactivitiesaretheactionslearnersdisplaytoreachtheintendedlearn-
tivities ing goals. Individual mini-learning activities (behaviors) can be grouped into
learningactivitiesat anextensiverangeof granularitythroughspecificbehav-
ioralpatterns.
2.1Learnertypes Specificlearnertypes The specific type of learners when participating in the immersive learning ac-
tivities.
2.2Applicationdomains STEM Science, Technology, Engineering, and Mathematics (STEM) describes various
academic disciplines related to these four terms, such as: biology, chemistry,
engineering,mathematics,physics,andmore.
Humanities Humanities describe academic disciplines that study aspects of human society
andculture,includingculture,history,language,andmore.
General Knowledge & General knowledge & skill describes the application domains where learners
Skills study basic knowledge and skills to cultivate the essential ability to deal with
dailyaffairs,suchascognitive&socialskills,art&design,andreading.
3.1Instructionaldesign InstructionalStrategies Theinstructionalstrategiesentailasetofinstructionalmodelstoleadlearners
methods to understand what information has been provided, how the learning process
functions,andhowtoacquirelearningacquisitioneffectively.
InstructionalTechniques Theinstructionaltechniquesaretherules,procedures,tools,andskillsusedto
implementtheinstructionalstrategiesintopractice.
3.2Codingschemes SpecificCodingschemes The coding scheme defines the specific behavior sequences that would be ana-
lyzedusingvariousbehavioralanalysistechniques.
4.1Hardwaredevices Specific Hardware de- Hardwaredevicesusedintheimmersivelearningactivities.
vices
4.2 Software develop- Specific software explic- Softwaretoolsusedtodevelopimmersivelearningsystems.
menttools itly
5.1 HCI methods in SpecificHCImethods TheinteractionmethodsbetweenlearnersandVLEs.
VLEs
5.2Behaviorrecording Specificbehaviorrecord- Theappliedmethodsusedtorecordlearners’behaviorsequences,suchasvideo-
andrecognition ingmethods taping, classroom observation, and automatic recording methods by software
methods tools.
Manual and automatic Themanualcodingmethodreferstothemethodofbehaviorrecognitionthatis
codingmethods conductedmanuallyandusuallyindependentlybytwoormorecoders.
Automaticcodingmethodsrefertobehaviorrecognitionthatisconductedusing
softwaretoolsautomatically.
6.1 Behavioral analysis SpecificBehavioralanal- Behavioralanalysismethodsareusedtoanalyzelearners’behaviorsequencesto
methods ysismethods constructbehavioralpatterns,suchasbehaviorfrequencyanalysis,QCA,LSA,
SNA,andclusteranalysis.
6.2 Behavioral patterns Constructed behavioral Behavioralpatternsareconstructedasthevitaloutcomeofbehavioralanalysis
outcomes patterns inimmersivelearningenvironments.
7.1learningiteration Iteration expectation Thelearningiterationrequirementswerefoundintheimplementationoflearning
anddifficulties activitiesofbehavioralanalysisinimmersivelearningenvironments.
- RQ3. What are the pedagogic considerations - RQ7. What are the challenges in analyzing learn-
based on 4DF for behavioral analysis in immer- ers’behaviorinimmersivelearningenvironments?
sive learning environments?
- RQ4. How to construct immersive context based 4 Results and analysis
on 4DF for behavioral analysis?
In this section, the evidence extracted from the re-
- RQ5. What are the representation dimension
tained literature based on the above work is analyzed
based on 4DF for behavioral analysis in immer-
and interpreted from the four stages of BAILF, pro-
sive learning environments?
viding detailed, structured, and concrete information
- RQ6. What behavioral patterns were constructed on the themes of this review. All included papers were
in immersive learning environments? codedaccordingtothemajorimmersivetechnologyin-
7volved, and the behavioral analysis-related literature tualization stage, researchers designed mini-activities
evidence was also summarized, as shown in Table 7. to provide a primary exposition of the concept to be
Accordingly, the answers to formulated research ques- formed, allowing learners to be immersed in the con-
tions were revealed and presented. cept representation using various immersive technolo-
gies. Though the primary exposition can only serve
to provide the superficial initial contact with the con-
4.1 RQ1. What are the learning re-
ceptual knowledge to be learned, the essential func-
quirements in the design of behav-
tion in the primary conceptualization stage is to ori-
ioral patterns construction in im- ent the learners and give learners clear learning maps
mersive learning environments? onto subject matter through appropriate learning ac-
tivities (Mayes and Fowler, 1999), such as construct-
Based on the conceptual frameworks from design for ing environments, observing models, receiving infor-
learning (Fowler, 2015) and the proposed BAILF, mation, and discovering facts. Based on the primary
three constructs are selected to uncover the learn- conceptualizationstageforrepresentingknowledge,re-
ing requirements in planning behavioral patterns con- searchers can design task-based mini-activities in the
struction: learning stages, cognitive learning objec- secondary construction stage (n=14), where learners
tives/outcomes, and learning activities (see 1.1-1.3 in can engage at a higher conceptual level through ex-
Table 3). periential and contextual learning (Lai and Cheong,
To look deeper into the relationship between the 2022). In the tertiary dialogue stage (n=20), learners’
learning stages and learning objectives in the learning developing understandings need to be tested through
requirements, this review adapted the two broad cate- elaborated mini-activities, such as reflective thinking
gories of cognitive learning outcomes from Ib´an˜ez and with themselves, synchronous or asynchronous discus-
Delgado-Kloos(2018),whoclassifiedthemeasuredcog- sion with peers, and real-time collaborative learning.
nitiveoutcomesintotwobroadcategoriesbasedonthe The findings suggest that researchers and designers
revised Bloom’s Taxonomy: the lower-level cognitive shouldspecifyrepresentativelearningactivitiestoeval-
category covered works dealing with simpler cognitive uate which stage the learner stays in.
processes including remembering and understanding;
the higher-level cognitive category covered works deal-
4.2 RQ2. What are the learner
ing with more complicated cognitive processes, includ-
ing applying, analyzing, evaluating, and creating. A specifics based on 4DF for behav-
bubblecharttorepresenttheconcentrationofthestud- ioral analysis in immersive learning
ies was prepared in the bottom left part of Fig 3. The environments?
bubble chart shows that the majority of studies with
thehigherechelonsofthelearningstage“dialogue”are The learner specifics dimension specified two concrete
possible, which also allow learners to “create” (n=9), research factors about the population information of
“apply”(n=4),“analyze”(n=2),and“evaluate”(n=2) learners: learner types and application domains (see
the learned knowledge, indicating that the dialogue 2.1-2.2 in Table 3).
learning stage depends on the learners’ ability to have Fig 4(a) presents the percentage of specific learner
adeeperunderstandingoftheconceptslearned,andto typesacrossallarticles. Sincetheremaybemorethan
carry out structured thought from debates and discus- one type of learner involved in the learning activities,
sionstoreflecttheexpertknowledge,andto“identify” such as children with their parents (Cheng and Tsai,
the subject matter (Fowler, 2015; Mayes and Fowler, 2014, 2016; Hsu et al., 2020), students with teachers
1999). Conversely, learners in the lower echelons of (Caietal.,2021;Yilmaz,2016),orstudentswithother
conceptualizationlearningstagesmayonlyacquirethe adults (Wu et al., 2019), the sum of all percentages
ability to remember (n=2) or understand (n=3) the were greater than 100%. The largest proportion of
learned concepts at the lower cognitive level. Inter- learners, comprising 52.5%, belonged to the K12 cate-
estingly, the bubble chart shows that in those studies gory, which includes primary, middle, and high school
with construction learning stages where learners have students. This finding suggests that research tend to
the essential ability to control the flow of learning in- use immersive technology to enable young learners to
formationthroughlearninginteractives,theimmersive experience media-rich virtual environments. Further-
learning systems can provide learners with affordances more, given that children nowadays tend to spend a
for obtaining not only higher cognitive learning out- considerable amount of time playing electronic games
comes (n=10), but also lower cognitive learning out- (Lee,2012),immersivelearningexperiencesintheform
comes (n=4). ofdigitalgamescontinuetoremainappealingtoyoung
The mini-activities are matched to the learning learners. In highly interactive immersive learning en-
stages. The short lists of typical Mini-activities (see vironments, it is possible to generate, observe and
3.1 in Table 3) retrieved from identified articles were track abundant learning behaviors. In-depth analysis
tabulated in Table 7. In those 6 articles that only im- of these behaviors can provide vital insights into the
plemented immersive learning at the primary concep- cognitive and affective processes of learners, the levels
8Figure3: Learningstagesandcognitivelearningobjectives/outcomes. Inthebottomrightbarchart,a
majorityofresearchershaveimplementedimmersivelearningforthehigherechelonsoflearningstages,i.e.,dia-
logue(n=20),followedbyconstruction(n=14)asthemediateechelonsoflearningstages,andconceptualization
(n=6) as thelower echelons of learningstages. Inthe upper-left barchart, the mostcommoncognitivelearning
outcomebasedonBloom’srevisedtaxonomywastheabilitytocreateknowledge(n=13). Remembering(n=5),
understanding(n=7),applying(n=6),andanalyzing(n=5)werethefollowingmostcommoncognitivelearning
outcomes that participants achieved in the immersive learning environments. Finally, in 4 studies, participants
acquired the ability to evaluate the immersive learning activities.
of engagement, and the learning outcomes. ical and theoretical information: instructional design
The application domains identified in the articles methodsandbehavioralcodingschemes(see3.1-3.2in
were firstly categorized into three broad categories: Table 3).
STEM, humanities, and general knowledge & skills,
Table 4 tabulates the instructional design methods,
as shown in Fig 4(b). Subsequently, 13 sub-categories
whichcomprisetheinstructionalstrategiesandinstruc-
were created to further refine the learner application
tional techniques according to Akdeniz (2016). Addi-
domains. This result suggests that researchers have
tionally, the retained literature was analyzed and di-
conducted experiments to analyze leanrers’ behavior
vided into five sub-categories of instructional strategy:
in immersive learning environments across broad ap-
presentation, discovery, inquiry, collaborative and col-
plication domains. The popularity of STEM as a ma-
laborative inquiry. Accordingly, six sub-categories of
jordomaininimmersivetechnology-basedlearningsys-
instructional technique were used to classify the re-
tems is consistent with the findings of Law and Heintz
viewed literature: observation, field trip, game, role-
(2021).
play, simulation, and project.
It should also be noted that the only three papers
Concerning the instructional strategies, eight differ-
thathaveaddressedthetargetedautisticlearnerswith
ent immersive applications reviewed followed the pre-
special needs have all decided to teach learners cogni-
sentation (n=8) instructional strategy, presenting the
tive & social skills to help them deal with social rela-
supplementary virtual learning materials to learners
tionships with other people.
usingtheimmersivetechnologies. Sevenstudiesimple-
mented the discovery (n=7) strategy, allowing learn-
4.3 RQ3. What are the pedagogic ers to construct knowledge in self-directed and con-
considerations based on 4DF for structivist conditions in immersive learning environ-
behavioral analysis in immersive ments. Nine studies followed the inquiry (n=9) strat-
egy, through which learners play more active roles in a
learning environments?
seriesofimmersivelearningactivities,includingraising
The pedagogic considerations dimension specifies two questions, drawing up learning plans, observing phe-
concrete research factors about the studies’ pedagog- nomena, and solving problems. A solid foundation of
9Figure 4: Learner specifics. a, learner types. The study participants were mostly primary school students,
with 12 papers accounting for 30% of the total, and higher education students, with 9 papers accounting for
22.5% of all papers. Other studies tended to recruit learners of adults (17.5%, n=7), high school students
(12.5%, n=5), kindergarten children (10%, n=4), middle school students, teachers (7.5%, n=3), and students
with special needs (7.5%, n=3). One paper, accounting for 2.5% of the total, did not specify the learner type
in the article content. b, application domain. More than half of the articles chose STEM (62.5%) as the
application domain of their learning systems. The second popular application domain was general knowledge
& skills (27.5%), where learners can learn basic social or art abilities to deal with daily affairs. The rest of
the articles chose to learn about knowledge in the humanities (10%). Specifically, in the category of STEM,
physics (17.5%), integrated science (17.5%), and biology (12.5%) were popular topics in the immersive learning
system. “Integrated science” refers to the specific subject that involves more than one scientific discipline in
the learning activities. In the humanities category, history (2.5%), culture (2.5%), and language learning (5%)
were the common topics. In the general knowledge & skills category, the literature highlighted three topics of
educative applications: art & design (7.5%), cognitive & social skills (12.5%), and reading (7.5%).
pertinentliteratureevidence(n=11)wasguidedbythe acters for learners outsides the traditional classroom
collaborative strategy, indicating that researchers are settings has been employed by five studies, including
more willing to plan and implement learning activities four studies that conducted AR-based learning activ-
through collaborative group work in immersive learn- ities outside the classroom and one study that devel-
ing environments. Furthermore, a relatively complex oped the virtual field trip in VR space supported by
learning strategy named collaborative inquiry (n=5) 360° panoramic images (Cheng and Tsai, 2019). As
wasadoptedtoguidefivestudies, whichindicatesthat a popular instructional technique to bring learning in-
learners conduct inquiry learning activities through terest and promote learning motivation for learners,
group work in immersive learning environments. educational games (n=6) were used in six studies re-
viewed. Asaninstructionaltechniquetosupportlearn-
Regarding the instructional techniques, observation
ers immersing in the characters of instructional activ-
(n=13) was the most often deployed technique in im-
ities, role-play (n=5) was used in five studies. Nine
mersive educational studies. Referring to the paper
studies adopted simulation (n=9) as the instructional
codes of the reference papers that deployed the ob-
technique, enabling learners to realize essential physi-
servation technique, it can deduce that the AR-based
calphenomenaintheimmersiveworldthataredifficult
studies mostly used observation in the instruction de-
to come into being in the real world. Finally, the rel-
sign, enabling learners to observe more superimposed
atively complex instructional technique name project
virtual information onto the real objects. The field
(n=7) was deployed in seven studies.
trip (n=5) technique that provides more active char-
10Table 4: Summary of instructional design methods.
Instructional design Categories Description Paper code
methods
Instructional Presentation Presentation is the instructional strategy that suggests learners get new A2, A4, A18,
Strategies knowledge through the presentation of learning tasks or material to A19, A20, V2,
strengthencognitiveorganization(Akdeniz,2016, pp. 65). V8,M1
Discovery Discovery is the instructional strategy that suggests learners get new A8,A9,V3,V5,
knowledge through discovering rather than being told about the infor- V6,V7,M5
mation(Akdeniz,2016, pp. 65).
Inquiry Inquiryistheinstructionalstrategythatemphasizesthatlearnersactively A1, A10, A13,
participateinthelearningprocess,wherethelearners’inquiries,thoughts, A15, V1, V4,
andobservationsareplacedasthefocalspotofthelearningprocess(Ak- V13,V14,M4
deniz,2016, pp. 67).
Collaborative Collaborativeistheinstructionalstrategythatsuggestslearnersgetnew A3, A5, A7,
knowledgethroughworkinginasocialsettingtosolveproblems(Akdeniz, A11, A14, A21,
2016, pp. 68). V10, V11, V12,
M2,M3
Collaborative Collaborative Inquiry is the instructional strategy that suggests learners A6, A12, A16,
Inquiry conductscientificinquirylearningthroughface-to-facecollaboration(Chi- A17,V9
angetal.,2014;Wangetal.,2022).
Instructional Observation Observationtechniqueistheinstructionaltechniquethatsuggestslearn- A1,A2,A3,A4,
Techniques ers monitor and examine the indicators or conditions of objects, facts A8, A9, A13,
or materials within a well-designed plan through eyes or available visual A13, A18, A20,
equipment(Gu¨ndu¨z,2016,pp. 204-205). A21,V9
Fieldtrip Field trip is the instructional technique that suggests learners gain ad- A6, A12, A15,
ditional knowledge through direct experiences in conducting the active A19,V5
research-orientedfieldproject(Gu¨ndu¨z,2016,pp. 196-198).
Educational Educational game is the instructional technique that suggests learners A5,A7,V6,V7,
Game gain knowledge through playing educational games to increase learning V8,M1
motivationandpromotecreativework(Gu¨ndu¨z,2016,pp. 201-203).
Role-play Role-playistheinstructionaltechniquethatsuggestslearnersplayspecific A7,V3,V6,V7,
roles in the explicitly established situation and gain knowledge through V12
experiencingtheir“character”(Gu¨ndu¨z,2016,pp. 172-174).
Simulation Simulationistheinstructionaltechniquethatsuggestslearnersgainknowl- A10, A11, A14,
edgeinacontrolleddetailedsituationthatintendstoreflectreal-lifecon- A16, A17, V2,
ditions(Gu¨ndu¨z,2016,pp. 187-189). M3,M4,M5
Project Projectistheinstructionaltechniquethatsuggestslearnersareinvolvedin V1, V4, V10,
whole-heartedpurposefullearningactivitiestoaccomplishaspecificgoal V11, V13, V14,
(Gu¨ndu¨z,2016, pp. 198-201). M2
The coding scheme is vital in learning behavioral quences analysis outcomes using various data process-
analysisbecauseitdefinesandclassifiesaspecificphase ing methods, such as cluster analysis (Cheng et al.,
ofthebehaviorsequence. Usingthecodingscheme,re- 2015)anddatatriangulationtechnique(Lorenzoetal.,
searchers can recognize and code each behavioral mes- 2012), without providing explicit coding schemes.
sagebymatchingthedominantcontentofthemessage
withtheitemdefinedinthecodingschemebestapplied
to the content of the message through various behav- 4.4 RQ4. How to construct immersive
ioral manual or automatic recognition methods (Hou, context based on 4DF for behav-
2010). In this review, three broad categories of coding ioral analysis?
schemes were detected from the identified literature:
coding scheme developed by the authors (n=13), cod- Context dimension focuses on the construction the
ing scheme based on previous literature (n=25), and specific environment where the learning process takes
not specified (n=2), as shown in Table 7. In those 13 place. In this review, the hardware and software used
articles where the coding schemes were designed and tosetuptheimmersivelearningcontextwereanalyzed
developed by the researchers themselves, the behav- from the literature (see 4.1-4.2 in Table 3).
ioral items defined in the schemes reflected the struc- Inrelationtothehardwaredevicesthatwereusedto
ture of the immersive learning activities (Chang et al., setupthelearningsystems, categorieshavebeensum-
2020; Ib´an˜ez et al., 2016), corresponding to the mini- marized according to the immersive technologies used
activities summarized in Table 7. The pervasive in- in the articles, as shown in Fig 5. This result indicates
vestigation of behavioral patterns in educational areas that the widespread adoption of mobile devices as the
has cultivated abundantly available coding schemes, primaryapparatusinmostARlearningsystemsisdue
whichprovidedtheoreticalbasesforsubsequentstudies to their low cost, high flexibility, and satisfactory per-
to improve and adjust new applicable coding schemes, formance (Mystakidis et al., 2022). Nonetheless, the
leading to the extensive adoption of such adaptation uniquenessoftheaugmentedreality(AR)devicescon-
of existing coding schemes in most studies. Finally, sideredintheincludedpaperscouldpotentiallyimpact
in two studies, the researcher obtained behavioral se- thegeneralizabilityofvaluableinsightsintothebehav-
11Figure5: Hardware devices. AsforARcondition,exceptforonepaperthatuseddesktopcomputingdevices
(n=1)toconstructthelearningsystem,allotherpapersusedmobiledevices(n=20)aspredominantapparatus.
As for VR conditions, the non-immersive VR was equipped with mobile devices (n=1) and desktop computing
devices (n=6). Full-immersive VR that adopted HMD devices (n=7) as infrastructure was widespread in the
immersive learning system construction. Two studies used zSpace as hardware devices, which is expected to
providelearnerswithasemi-immersiveexperienceinthisreview. AsforMRconditions, fourkindsofhardware
devices were used to set up MR systems: mobile devices (n=1), desktop computing devices (n=1), OST-HMD
(n=2), and projection-based apparatus (n=1).
ioral effects of general AR technologies. In VR condi- platform for advanced graphical and visual features as
tions, the study’s findings indicate that the investiga- well as flexible cross-platform capability to integrate
tionofbehavioralpatternsinVRenvironmentsencom- with extensive software development kit (SDK), such
passed the entire spectrum of VR devices, including asVuforia(Caietal.,2021)andARCore(Sarkaretal.,
non-immersive, semi-immersive, and fully immersive 2020). Eight studies did not specify certain software
systems. Though the number of studies that used MR toolsforcreatingimmersivelearningenvironments. Fi-
technologiestoanalyzespecificbehavioralpatternswas nally,therestofidentifiedpaperstendedtouseunique
small,thehardwaredevicesusedtosetupMRsystems software tools for immersive system development re-
werevariousinthisreview. Amongthesehardwarede- sulting in a total of 17 categories in software tool
vices, the optical see-through head-mounted displays classification, which indicates that there are plenty of
(OST-HMDs) are projected to be more widely used in software solutions that educators and researchers can
MR learning research for the advantages of a high de- leverage to set up the practical immersive systems no
gree of interactivity and scalability (Gao et al., 2019). matter what degree of programming skills they have
It is highly significant to observe the numerous soft- mastered.
ware tools available for constructing immersive learn-
ing systems in the context of behavioral analysis. The
4.5 RQ5. What are the representation
specificsoftwaretoolsutilizedineach articlewereout-
lined in the supplementary material. Native applica- dimension based on 4DF for behav-
tions (n=7) which were based on existing commercial ioral analysis in immersive learning
applications or program packages developed by previ- environments?
ous studies, and self-developed software tools (n=7)
weremostlyutilizedtocreateimmersivelearningenvi- Thelearningsystemcanbefinallyrepresentedinfront
ronments. Ontheoneside,thereasonforthepopular- oflearnersandinstructorsbyconsideringtherepresen-
ity of native applications may derive from the conve- tation in the learning specification stage, concerning
nienceandlowcostofnativeapplicationsforeducators thefactorssuchastheHCImethods,aswellasthebe-
andresearcherswholackadvancedprogrammingback- havior recoding and recognition methods (see 5.1-5.2
grounds (Cheng and Tsai, 2019; Zhang et al., 2016). in Table 3).
On the other side, for educators and researchers with According to Table 7, the typical human-computer
proficientprogrammingability,self-developedsoftware interactionmethodsestablishedintheimmersivelearn-
toolsensurethattheyhavemorefreedomtorealizethe ingsystemswerestronglyassociatedwiththehardware
design features of the learning system and make the used and the learning missions designed. In the AR
system easier to iterate (Lin et al., 2013, 2022). Sev- condition,“ARimagerecognition,andinteractionwith
eralpapersdevelopedtheirimmersivelearningsystems virtual models through mobile device touch screen”
frequently using Unity 3D (n=5) as the development was the most common interaction method for learn-
12Table 5: Summary of behavior recording and recognition methods.
Behavior recording methods Behavior recognition methods Paper code
Videotaping Manualcoding A1, A2, A5, A7, A13, A18, A19, V1, V2,
V4,V5,V9,V10,V11,V13,M1,M5
Automaticcoding A3,A4,A14
Videotapingcombinedwithothermanual Manualcoding A11,A16,A17
recordingmethods
Automaticcoding M4
Classroomobservationbyobservers Manualcoding M3
Automaticbehaviorrecording Manualcoding A6,A15,V3,V12
Automaticcoding A8,A9,A10,A12,A20,V6,V14
Mixedrecordingmethodscombiningmanual Manualcoding A21,V7
andautomaticmethods
Automaticcoding V8,M2
ers to be immersed into the AR environments since posed a challenge for future researchers to investigate
most of the AR studies used mobile devices as user in- moreeffectiveautomaticmethodstorecordandrecog-
terfaces, as illustrated in Fig 5. In the VR condition, nize interaction behaviors in immersive learning envi-
“head and handheld controller movement detection by ronments.
motion and infrared sensors, and interaction with vir-
tual models using handheld controllers.” for learners
4.6 RQ6. What behavioral patterns
using HMDs, and “interaction with virtual models us-
were constructed in immersive
ing computer keyboard/mouse and computer screen”
for learners using PCs were most popular HCI meth- learning environments?
ods. In the MR condition, “head motion detection by
The learning evaluation acts as the outcome stage
the sensors in OST-HMD and interaction with virtual
(Garris et al., 2002) in BAILF. To thoroughly inves-
models using hand gesture manipulation” was utilized
tigate the learning outcomes of behavioral analysis in
for learners using OST-HMD as the hardware medium
immersivelearningenvironments,twokeyconceptma-
withMRlearningspace. Tothisend,thelearnerscould
trix facets need to be carefully scrutinized from the
exploreandobservethesuperimposedvirtualinforma-
identified articles: behavioral analysis methods, and
tion onto the real environments through optical see-
behavioral pattern outcomes (see 6.1-6.2 in Table 3).
through displays and simultaneously interact with the
As one of the most important reviewed focus in
virtual models using gestures (hands-free) (Dosoftei,
this work, behavioral patterns have been utilized per-
2023; Prilla et al., 2019).
vasively in extracting specific behavioral patterns by
In relation to the behavior sequence recording and
examining the short-term temporal heterogeneity of
recognitionmethodsintheimmersivelearningenviron-
learning activities (L¨ams¨a et al., 2021). Researchers
ments, the details and the corresponding paper code
in the included papers constructed variant behavioral
are tabulated in Table 5. The videotaping combined
patterns(seeTable7)byconsideringthefollowingfac-
with manual coding methods (n=17) was the most
tors: the behavioral analysis techniques used in ana-
common in dealing with learners’ behavior sequence
lyzing the patterns, the research theme, and the tech-
issues. The automatic recording and coding methods
nological features used in learning context designing.
(n=7)werethesecondmostapplied,whichisexpected
toeliminatetheoutsideinterferencetolearnerstoper-
4.6.1 Techniques used in constructing behav-
form learning activities, decrease human errors by the
ioral patterns
software tools, and reduce human labor. Apart from
videotaping, several other manual behavior recording
Regarding the behavioral analysis techniques, various
methods emerged in the review process, including au-
behavioral pattern structures and visualizations were
diotaping combining transcribed verbatim (Lin et al.,
generatedbyadoptingdifferentbehaviorsequencehan-
2013; Wang et al., 2014; Wu et al., 2019), which is
dling methods. Using behavior frequency analysis
usually used together with videotaping simultaneously
(n=5), the basic model of interaction sequences can
to record learners’ interaction sequences, and class-
be represented by the distribution, percentage, and
roomobservation(Wanetal.,2021). Fourstudiesused
frequency of coded behaviors, and relationships be-
mixedrecordingmethodscombiningmanualandauto-
tween the basic models can be tested by various data
matic methods (n=4) to record the behavioral data of
analysis methods, such as t-test (Wu et al., 2019),
learners for precision and cross-validation.
and correlation analyses (Yilmaz, 2016). QCA (n=6)
Overall, the proportion of identified articles using modeled the behavioral content by providing the dis-
automatic methods to handle the behavior recording tribution, frequency, and count information of coded
(37.5%) and recognition (32.5%) was smaller than the behaviors and was usually used together with other
proportion of articles using manual methods, which behavioral analysis techniques (e.g., cluster analysis
13(ChengandTsai,2014),andLSA(Chiangetal.,2014; plored the creative process by building the relation-
Wang et al., 2022)) to complement reliable measure- ships between the brainwave status and learning be-
ment data. As the most prevalent behavioral analysis havior in a VR environment, in which participants’
method used in the included papers, LSA (n=29) un- painting behaviors using handheld controllers in the
covered the chronological relationship between those immersive environments were recorded by video and
event sequences that occurred most frequently, and EEG and analyzed using LSA. In the MR condition,
visualized the behavioral patterns using a behavioral Wuetal.(2020)analyzedthelearners’behaviorsusing
transition diagram. For example, Chen et al. (2021) HoloLens in construction education to obtain learning
conducted an LSA and constructed the behavioral productivity information.
transition diagram of teacher-student interactions to
reveal behavioral differences in the progressive ques-
4.7 RQ7. What are the challenges in
tion prompt-based peer-tutoring approach in VR con-
analyzing learners’ behavior in im-
texts. SNA (n=2) constructed the social relationships
betweenthegroupofparticipantstorevealwhichmem- mersive learning environments?
ber was situated in the central position of the network
Notably, the BAILF should be regarded as an itera-
at different learning activities and visually presented
tive model to inform and reflect the work-in-progress
therelationshipsintheformofsociallearningnetwork.
research of behavioral analysis in immersive learning
For instance, Lorenzo et al. (2012) conducted an SNA
environments. The learning iteration reflects the plan-
in an online MR learning platform and found clear so-
ning practices of practitioners and promotes learn-
cial connection between the elected tutor with other
ing effectiveness by structuring systematic judgments
learners through the learning network. The network
(de Freitas and Oliver, 2006). However, only a few
usedFreeman’sbetweennesstomeasurethepossibility
studies reported a clear iteration process in design-
of regulating information flow within the network, and
ingandimplementingbehavioralanalysisinimmersive
constructeddistributed-coordinatedlearningstructure
learning environments. Lin et al. (2019) customized
toinformthatmemberswerelikelytoproduceinterac-
new coding schemes based on the cluster analysis of
tive impact on each other in the MR learning context.
first-round behavioral data processing to get the spe-
Cluster analysis (n=5) was also used to classify learn-
cific and accurate coding scheme suitable for LSA in
ers’behaviorsequencesaccordingtothelearningorbe-
their investigation. Sarkar et al. (2020) conducted the
havioral characteristic defined in the coding schemes.
pilot study before the main studies to validate data
Forexample,ChengandTsai(2014)usedclusteranal-
instruments, timing, and execution. Two additional
ysis to identified behavioral features of specific groups
studies were carried out as the learning iterations,
ofchildrenandparentsintheARpicturebookreading.
wherethefirststudyverifiedthatlearnerspreferredto
perform AR activities in dyads, and the LSA was con-
4.6.2 Behavioral patterns reflecting research
ductedinthesecondstudywithstudentsindyads. The
themes
study with multiple iteration design showed promise
for the effectiveness and usability of system construc-
Intermsoftheresearchtheme,thebehavioralpatterns
tion and an in-depth understanding of the behavioral
ofimmersivelearningsituationshavebeeninvestigated
patterns.
in a wide range of educational topics in the included
literature, such as problem-solving collaborativelearn- Additionally, difficulties encountered by researchers
ing(Chengetal.,2019),inquiry-baseddiscussion(Chi- andthechallengesimposedbyimmersivetechniquesin
ang et al., 2014), dual-scaffolding learning (Hou and educational settings were also synthesized to provide
Keng, 2021), learn by doing (Chen et al., 2020), and prospectsforresearchers planning toinvestigatelearn-
co-creation (Wang and Sun, 2022). ing behavioral patterns in immersive environments in
future research(see Table 6).
4.6.3 Behavioralpatternsreflectingimmersive
features 4.7.1 Technology-related challenges
In terms of the technological features, behavioral pat- The technology-related challenges referred to the chal-
terns of immersive technologies tended to reflect the lengesthatresearchersencounteredwheninvolvingim-
interaction between learners and immersive hardware mersive technologies in educational settings. For AR
user interfaces. For example, in the AR learning con- condition, the reported challenges were that “the AR
dition, Hou and Keng (2021) designed a behavioral marker recognition showed low stability and correct-
analysis that involved the learners’ interaction with ness”(Changetal.,2014;Hwangetal.,2018)and“AR
hardware user interfaces in an AR board game and softwarerequiresexcessiveeffortindesigningcompati-
foundthatthedual-scaffoldingmechanismrepresented bleeducationalapplications”(Caietal.,2021). ForVR
by learners’ interactions with makers through mobile condition, thereportedchallengesshowedthattheVR
devices could facilitate cognitive learning and peer in- technology might bring prohibitive adverse effects on
teraction. In the VR condition, Yang et al. (2019) ex- learning, including the Hawthorne effect (Yang et al.,
14Table 6: The challenges in immersive technologies use within the behavioral analysis.
Challenge categories Challenge description Paper code
Technology-related ARsoftwarerequiresexcessiveeffortindesigningcompatibleeducational A1
challenges applications
LowstabilityandcorrectnessinARmarkerrecognition A2,A9
HighlyimmersiveVRcandistractstudents’attentionorHawthorneeffect V1,V14
Simulatorsickness V1
Huge tools and contexts differences between VR learning and practical V2
applications
VRlearningsystemstabilityproblem V5
ThenoveltyeffectofemergingVRtechnologies V13,V14
Implementation-related Smallsamplesizes A4,A7,A15,A21,V5,V6,
challenges V9,M4,M5
Researchtimerestriction A5,A12,V6,V13,V14
Absenceofcontrolgroup A7,A11,A15,A21
Equipment’squantitativerestrictions V4,V5
Knowledgediffusionbetweengroups V4
Unequalgenderratio V4,V11
UnfriendlyMRmanipulationandcontextsettingsforyoungchildren M1
Lowparticipationorresponserate. M3,M5
Analysis-relatedchallenges Insufficientinteractionoflearnerswithphysicallearningenvironmentus- A19
ingARsystem
Specialbehaviorsequencesrecordingrestriction V4,M4
Insufficient recording due to a limited number of equipment or observa- V9,M3
tions
Lackofobservationamonggroupmembersusingotherbehavioralanalysis V11
methods
5 Discussion
2018), simulator sickness (Chang et al., 2020), novelty
effect of emerging technologies (Yang et al., 2019).
In this study, 40 papers were retrieved from four
databases for further analysis to uncover behavioral
analysis’s potential and practical implementations in
4.7.2 Implementation-related challenges
immersive learning environments. The overview of in-
cluded studies shows that behavioral analysis in im-
Implementation-relatedchallengesreferredtothechal-
mersive learning environments has gained momentum
lenges that researchers encountered when implement-
in recent years. Based on the constructed framework
ing the learning activities in practical contexts, and
BAILFandtheempiricalevidenceretrievedfromliter-
the most common challenges were small sample sizes
ature analysis, significant findings along with address-
(n=9), research time restriction (n=5), and absence of
ingresearchquestions,researchlimitations,andfuture
the control group (n=4).
research agenda, are discussed in this section.
5.1 Future research agenda
4.7.3 Analysis-related challenges
The results by describing literature evidence from the
The analysis-related challenges referred to those en-
four perspectives are discussed to provide future re-
countered by researchers in recording and analyzing
search agenda in a systematic and integrated view.
learners’behaviorsequences,astheresearcherhaddif-
ficultiesgatheringrequisitebehavioraldata. Thefunc-
5.1.1 Focusing on meeting learning require-
tion of recording interaction sequences of learners in a
ments
physical learning environment is hard to integrate into
the holistic AR system (Zhang et al., 2020). Similarly, The review evidence about learning requirements
some kinds of unique behavior sequences, such as im- from learning stages, cognitive learning objec-
plicitthinkingbehaviors(Chenetal.,2020),eyemove- tives/outcomes, and learning activities suggests that
ment,andfocusofattention(Wuetal.,2019),arealso somesignificantresearchgapsaretobebridged. First,
hard to record through traditional videotaping. Insuf- itisworthnotingthatalloftheliteraturefactorsabout
ficient behavior recording due to the limited number learning requirements were manually synthesized and
ofequipmentorobservationswouldbethecommonre- consolidated by the authors of this review, indicating
strictionwhenconductingpracticalbehavioralanalysis that few concluded studies had proposed clear peda-
practice (Wan et al., 2021; Wang et al., 2022). gogical requirements in the article content. It is neces-
15sary to provide salient requirements by defining what was not reflected in the constructed behavioral pat-
stagethelearnerisat,envisagingwhatcognitiveobjec- terns. Furthermore, as Mystakidis et al. (2022) sug-
tiveshavetobeachieved,anddesigninganappropriate gested, instructional strategies and techniques should
set of learning mini-activities, reflecting the pedagogi- be carefully designed to satisfy learning requirements
cal“affordances”beforeimplementingthesystemsinto and learner characteristics at different levels. For ex-
the specification (Fowler, 2015). In addition, the de- ample, thepresentationstrategyandobservationtech-
sign of mini-activities should take into account several nique are appropriate options in those learning sys-
factors systematically, including technical affordances, tems designed for passive conceptual learning. When
data processing methods, and intended outcomes, es- learners have more freedom to interact actively in the
pecially the behavioral measures in this review. As immersive learning context, authors should incorpo-
shown in Table 7, representative mini-activities were rate learner-center instructional design methods, such
summarized from the article content of each paper. In as collaborative strategy and game technique. Finally,
these cases, the list of mini-activities usually had nar- as shown in Table 7, the coding scheme design should
rative features to illustrate the technical affordances consider the mini-activities and HCI in the immer-
of immersive technologies. However, the majority of sive learning system to demonstrate the technical af-
articles were absent in establishing a close relation- fordance of immersive technologies.
ship between mini-activities and behavioral measures, When it comes to context dimension, despite the
resulting in the incompleteness of the whole learning flexibility and popularity of mobile devices, the AR-
practice. For example, the coding schemes developed based learning system hardware was too singular. The
by authors or revised based on previous literature are potential behavioral impact of other hardware plat-
commonly held irrespective of the representative mini- forms, such as HMDs and CAVEs, can be explored.
activities designed in the learning systems. Although the number of MR applications was small,
there were still ambiguity and a non-homogeneous un-
derstanding of the hardware platform that can clearly
5.1.2 Elaborating on learning specification
be considered as “mixed reality” or XR.
This review makes efforts to explore the state-of-art Looking at the representation dimension, many pa-
practicalimplementationsofdifferenttypesoflearning persclaimtoautomaticallyrecordandrecognizelearn-
specificationsfromidentifiedliterature,lookingathow ers’ behavior sequences to minimize the interference of
to design specific learning activities to analyze learner interactivities between learners and virtual worlds. As
behaviors within the immersive environments by inte- shown in Table 7, when planning and envisioning the
grating 4DF into the BAILF to classify review content behavioral patterns, authors should consider the con-
into four broad categories: learner specifics, pedagogic crete HCI methods that bridge the learner’s physical
considerations, context dimension, and representation world with the virtual world of learning space.
dimension.
Regarding the learner specifics, the distribution of
5.1.3 Revealing more profound pedagogical
learner types and application domains revealed that
implication through learning evaluation
the demand for analyzing how learners interact in im-
mersive learning environments has arisen in a wide Thisreviewplacedthemainfocusonderivingtheprac-
range of learner ages and educational domains. Fur- tical application of analyzing how learners interact in
thermore, the analysis of specific behavioral patterns the immersive learning context. A few studies evalu-
of learners with special needs in immersive learning ated different learning outcomes, such as affective and
environments should be further investigated. The ap- cognitive outcomes. However, the extra learning eval-
parently small quantity of studies (only 3) and small uation and the constructed behavioral patterns were
samplesizeoflearners(aroundorless-than10)ineach commonly isolated, lacking a deeper interpretation of
studyremainsthestandardlimitationthatneedstobe the relation between the evaluated factors and behav-
addressed in future research (Parsons, 2016). ioral patterns. Moreover, because different behavioral
In terms of pedagogic considerations, the review ev- analysis methods can uncover various aspects of learn-
idence on the theoretical foundation of each literature ers’ behavioral characteristics, future research needs
wascollectedfromtwoaspects, includinginstructional to combine diverse analysis methods to mine deeper
designmethods(strategiesandtechniques),andbehav- behavioral information. In this review, only the be-
ioral coding schemes. Some significant research gaps havioral analysis techniques dealing with behavior se-
in pedagogic considerations were discovered in the re- quences assuming short-term temporal homogeneity
view process. First, the behavioral analysis and the (L¨ams¨a et al., 2021) were included. Other temporal
referenced learning theories were often disconnected, analysis methods that consider the long-term tempo-
whichwouldpreventthereproduciblefeatureandgen- ral heterogeneity, such as statistical discourse analysis
eralizability of that research (Radianti et al., 2020). and epistemic network analysis, may also reveal more
For instance, the authors introduced some learning characteristics of learners’ behavioral patterns in im-
theories to guide the development of immersive learn- mersivelearningenvironmentsbuthavenotbeenthor-
ing applications, but the specific pedagogical theory oughly studied.
165.1.4 Refining instructional implementation insights. Second,thoughbehavioralanalysisintheed-
through learning iteration ucationalenvironmenthasbeenstudiedforalongtime,
thestudyoflearners’behavioralpatternsintheimmer-
InthereviewprocessoftheBAILFiterationstage,the
sive learning environment is a relatively new academic
actual iteration design and implementation examples
focus. Since Cheng and Tsai (2013) advocated adopt-
point out some meaningful indications, which can be
ing mixed methods in analyzing students’ behavioral
used as a reference for the follow-up research:
patterns, relevant papers have only been published in
- Coding schemes can be designed in an iterative the last decade, resulting in a relatively small review
process to better match the coded behavior with sample size in this study.
the intended learning outcomes of behavioral as-
pects. 6 Conclusion
- Pilot studies and multi-round study designs can
Considering the fact that little review study has been
be considered to allow instructors to acquire prior
carried out to systematically synthesize and present
information about learners, including preferences
the current evidence of behavioral analysis in immer-
for immersive technologies, particular behavioral
sive learning environments. Meanwhile, the concep-
habits, or design defects, making sufficient prepa-
tual framework has seldom been set up to consolidate
ration for the final major study.
knowledge regarding factors emerging from identified
- Theresultsofvariousbehavioralanalysismethods articles into a theoretical concept matrix that scholars
inthesamebehavioralsequencedatacanbecom- can analyze, validate, and reuse. The purpose of this
pared to deeply understand the behavioral differ- study was twofold. First, considering the deficiency of
ences in the immersive learning environment from significant overarching research frameworks in the ed-
different perspectives. ucational behavioral analysis involving the use of im-
mersive technologies, this study developed a concep-
Additionally, the review results also retrieve some
tualframeworkthatamalgamatesseveralexistingped-
significant shortcomings or difficulties which, however,
agogicalmodels,includingthefour-dimensionalframe-
pave a pathway to potential hazards that require par-
work, design for learning framework, and IPO frame-
ticular attention from scholars, curriculum designers,
work(deFreitasetal.,2010;Fowler,2015;Garrisetal.,
and software developers in their behavioral analysis in
2002), to prescribe an outlook for future research in
immersive learning environments:
practice.
Second, a systematic review was conducted, on the
- Morestudiesdealingwithtechnology-relatedchal-
basis of the proposed theoretical framework, focusing
lenges are needed to enhance the stability and
on the research with the intended learning outcomes
usability of immersive systems. The adverse ef-
of behavioral analysis in immersive learning environ-
fectsoftheimmersionlearningsystemonlearners
ments. Immersive technologies, learning requirements,
shouldbeexamined, suchastheHawthorneeffect
learning specifications, evaluation elements, and re-
and simulator disease.
vealed iterations extracted in the recently published
- Regarding implementation-related challenges, literature on immersive technologies to analyze learn-
small sample sizes, research time restriction, and ers’ behavioral patterns were examined. Possible re-
theabsenceofacontrolgrouparethemostsevere search hurdles, essential research gaps, and future im-
challenges in the practical exercises and can plications were also examined. It is noteworthy that,
negativelyaffecttheevaluationofthistechnology. throughout this systematic review, in many practi-
cal pedagogical applications, it has been found that
- Regarding analysis-related challenges, advanced
thetechnicalaffordancesofimmersivetechnologiesand
instruments, and adequate equipment are needed
thepedagogicalaffordancesofbehavioralanalysiswere
to record requisite behavioral data for subsequent
normally isolated and not well integrated into the
analysis.
learningexperience. Hence,giventhepromisingfuture
ofmorewidespreadusageofimmersivetechnology,fur-
5.2 Limitations
ther empirical investigations are required to theorize
the behavioral impact of learners in immersive learn-
The present systematic review also suffers from some
ing environments by considering the research agenda
limitations. First,duetothenatureofthepaperfilter-
proposed in this study. This literature review is an-
ing process, some critical publications may be missed
ticipated to open up new research avenues and clear a
based on the inclusion and exclusion criteria. For ex-
route for scholars and investigators who want to com-
ample, considering that the identified articles were in-
prehendthepresentstatusofbehavioralanalysisinim-
cludedselectivelybyfocusingoninternationaljournals
mersive learning environments and create customized
andconferenceproceedings,itisconceivablethatsome
immersive applications based on BAILF for future in-
impressive research from book sections, reports, fo-
vestigation.
rums, or working papers could also provide additional
1718
mrofdegremmisnrettaplaroivahebdnametsysgninraelevisremminiICH
,semehcsgnidocroivaheb
,seitivitca-iniMgnidnopserrocehtdnasrepapdedoC
:7elbaT
.repap
hcae
snrettap
laroivaheB
gninrael
evisremmi
ni
ICH
semehcs
gnidoC
seitivitca-iniMrepaP
-ua
yramirP
metsys
edoC
roht
-retni
tneduts-rehcaet
fo
margaid
noitisnart
laroivaheb
ehT
-nidna,noitingoceregamiRA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;nonemonehpgnitneserp,stnemnorivnegnitaerC
.1
1A
)1202(.lateiaC
RAfoytilibixefldnaytixelpmoceht)1(tahtdelaeversnoitca
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitcaret
-lanAnoitcaretnIsrednalF
-ehp
gnizisehtnys
,smelborp
noitagitsevni
.2
-xeronoitareponostroffe’srenraelecneuflnidluowsmetsys
.snottublautrivgnisu
)SAIFi(metsySsisy
;nonemon
.msaisuhtnedewohsmetsysRAehtnisrenrael)2(;noitarolp
.snoisulcnocgnitcefler,snoitarolpxegnirahs
.3
-ersnoitcaretni’srotisivfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
-lwonk
gniterpretni
,noitamrofni
gnitpircseD
.1
2A
.la
te
gnahC
-oidua,dediugnonehtnisnrettaplaroivahebtnereffiddelaev
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
erutaretilsuoiverp
;egde
)4102(
.srotisivdediug-RAdna,dediug
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
;sliatedgnizylana;stnemgdujgnikam
.2
.neercs
.noissucsidreep
.3
delaever
ACQ
hguorht
sroivaheb
dedoc
eht
fo
noitubirtsiD
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;tnetnocgnidaer,tnetnocgnitarraN
.1
3A
iasT
dna
gnehC
laroivahebtnerap-dlihctnereffid;roivahebtneuqerftsomeht
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
erutaretilsuoiverp
;stnihgnitomorp,stnemmocgnikam
.2
)4102(
detcurtsnoc
erew
koob
erutcip
RA
eht
gnidaer
ni
snrettap
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.sesnopsergnidnapxe,stnemmocgnitaulave
.3
.sisylanaretsulcgnisu
.neercs
-caretni
tnerap-dlihc
fo
margaid
noitisnart
laroivaheb
ehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;tnetnocgnidaer,tnetnocgnitarraN
.1
4A
iasT
dna
gnehC
-tap
deliated
delaever
koob
erutcip
RA
eht
gnidaer
ni
snoit
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
erutaretilsuoiverp
;stnihgnitomorp,stnemmocgnikam
.2
)6102(
.3Anidezirogetacspuorgretsulcruoffosnret
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.sesnopsergnidnapxe,stnemmocgnitaulave
.3
.neercs
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;sledomgnivresbo,snoitseuqgnirewsnA
.1
5A
.la
te
gnehC
-droccanoitcaretnifosesahptnereffidtasnrettapehtdelaev
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
sisylanA
noitcaretnI
no
.noissesgnivlos-melborp
.2
)9102(
-ivnegninraelevitaroballocgnivlos-melborpaniMAIotgni
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
)MAI(ledoM
.tnemnor
.neercs
;ACQgnisudetaluclacsawsnoitisnartesahpfoycneuqerfehT
noitagivan
txetnoc
evisremmI
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;noitamrofnignidrocer,anemonehpgnivresbO
.1
6A
.la
te
gnaihC
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebeht
ni
deddebme
srosnes
hguorht
.rosseccusstidnaMAI
;slairetamgnirahs,smelborpnoitagitsevni
.2
)4102(
-droccanoitcaretnifosesahptnereffidtasnrettapehtdelaev
noitcaretni
,ecived
elibom
eht
.noitcefleregdelwonk,noissucsidreep
.3
.stnemnorivneRAninoissucsiddesab-yriuqniniMAIotgni
hguorht
sledom
lautriv
htiw
.neercshcuotecivedelibom
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;anemonehpgnivresbo,noitamrofnignidaeR
.1
7A
gneK
dna
uoH
-hgihneewtebsecnereffidehtdnasnrettaplaroivahebdelaev
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
erutaretilsuoiverp
;gniyalpelor,smelborpgnizylana
.2
)1202(
RA
gnidloffacs-laud
eht
ni
spuorg
wofl
evitcelloc
-wol
dna
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.snoissucsidreep,gnivlos-melborpevitaroballoc
.3
.ssecorpemagdraob
.neercs
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-retni
,noitingocer
tegrat
RA
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
.noitamrofnigniviecer,sledomgnivresbO
.1
8A
.la
te
gnauH
.erudecorpgninraelRAehtnisecnereffidrednegdelaev
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
srohtuaehtyb
)8102(
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.neercs
snoitcaretni
tneduts
fo
margaid
noitisnart
laroivaheb
ehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;noitamrofnigniviecer,secruosergnirehtaG
.1
9A
.la
te
gnawH
-gninrael
evitca
eht
rednu
secnereffid
roivaheb
delaever
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
erutaretilsuoiverp
.smelborpgnitagitsevni,stnemgdujgnikam
.2
)8102(
-nocgninraelRAelibomroodtuoehtnimsinahcemgnitomorp
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.txet
.neercs
-ivsnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
;stcafgnirevocsid,noitalumisgnivresbO
.1
01A
.la
te
zen˜a´bI
tnereffid
gnisu
nehw
secnereffid
nrettap
laroivaheb
dezilaus
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
srohtuaehtyb
.snoisulcnocgniward,stnemirepxegningised
.2
)6102(
.secivresgnidloffacs
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.neercs
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-ni
,noitingocer
rekram
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
.2;noitalumisgnivresbo,noitamrofnignivieceR
.1
11A
)3102(.lateniL
-nraeldaydRAfossecorpnoitcurtsnocegdelwonkehtdelaev
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitcaret
erutaretilsuoiverp
.egdelwonkgniylppa,snoitalergnitcurtsnoc
.sre
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.neercs
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;sledomgnivresbo,stpecnocgnidnatsrednU
.1
21A
)2202(.lateniL
dezilautxetnocehtotdragerhtiwsnrettaplaroivahebdelaev
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
erutaretilsuoiverp
;gnivlos-melborp,snosirapmocgnikam
.2
msinahcemevitcefler
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.gniknihtevitcefler,snoissucsidpuorg
.3
.neercs
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
-nocgnidnatsrednu,stnemnorivnegnitcurtsnoC
.1
31A
)9102(.lateniL
-nraelyriuqniecneicsdesab-RAfosnrettaplaroivahebdelaev
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
erutaretilsuoiverp
;stpec
.gni
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
;egdelwonkgniylppa,snoitpecnocsimgnilaever
.2
.neercs
.gniknihtevitcefler,noitarepoocpuorg
.3
egaptxennodeunitnoC19
deunitnoC
snrettap
laroivaheB
gninrael
evisremmi
ni ICH
semehcs
gnidoC
seitivitca-iniMrepaP
-ua
yramirP
metsys
edoC
roht
-dulcni,noitacinummocdnanoitcaretniehtfoycneuqerfehT
-bo
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
.sledomgnivresbo,stnemnorivnegnitcurtsnoC
.1
41A
dna
ahctaM
-ummocevitaroballocdnalellarap,gnitniop,gnikat-nrutgni
gnitalupinam
hguorht
stcej
srohtuaehtyb
)3102(ilbmaR
ycneuqerf
roivaheb
gnisu
detnuoc
erew
,ezag
dna
,noitacin
.srekam
.sisylana
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
noitagivan
txetnoc
evisremmI
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
;stpecnocgninialpxe,noitazilausivgnitneserP
.1
51A
.la
te
rakraS
noitaroballocRAehtnisnrettaplaroivaheb’srenraeldelaev
ni
deddebme
srosnes
hguorht
srohtuaehtyb
;snoitcudedgnikam,spihsnoitalergnizylana
.2
)0202(
.sdaydybssecorpgninrael
noitcaretni
,ecived
elibom
eht
.noissucsidreep,noitcudedtcartsba
.3
hguorht
sledom
lautriv
htiw
.neercshcuotecivedelibom
erew
sroivaheb
dedoc
eht
fo
ycneuqerf
dna
noitubirtsid
ehT
-ni
,noitingocer
rekram
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;noitalumisgnivresbo,noitamrofnignivieceR
.1
61A
.la
te
gnaW
fomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebeht;ACQhguorhtdeniatbo
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitcaret
erutaretilsuoiverp
.egdelwonkgniylppa,stcafgnitaulave
.2
)4102(
-ballocnisecnereffidlaroivahebdelaeversnoitcaretnitneduts
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
-alumislanoitidartdnadesab-RAnigninraelyriuqnievitaro
.neercs
.spuorgnoit
erew
sroivaheb
dedoc
eht
fo
ycneuqerf
dna
noitubirtsid
ehT
-ni
,noitingocer
rekram
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;noitalumisgnivresbo,noitamrofnignivieceR
.1
71A
.la
te
gnaW
fomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebeht;ACQhguorhtdeniatbo
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitcaret
erutaretilsuoiverp
.egdelwonkgniylppa,stcafgnitaulave
.2
)2102(
-ballocnisecnereffidlaroivahebdelaeversnoitcaretnitneduts
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
-alumislanoitidartdnadesab-RAnigninraelyriuqnievitaro
.neercs
.spuorgnoit
-niattaevitingocdnanoitcaretnis’nerdlihcfoycneuqerfehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
.stcafgnirevocsid,noitamrofnignivieceR
.1
81A
)6102(zamliY
gnirudsisylanaycneuqerfroivahebgnisudeniatboerewtnem
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
erutaretilsuoiverp
.seitivitcayotcigamlanoitacudeRA
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht .neercs
snoitcaretni
tneduts
fo
margaid
noitisnart
laroivaheb
ehT
-retni
,noitingocer
tegrat
RA
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
;stnalpgnivresbo,noitamrofnignivieceR
.1
91A
.la
te
gnahZ
-er
elpoep
rehto
dna
,secived
elibom
,stnalp
lacisyhp
htiw
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
srohtuaehtyb
;snosirapmocgnikam,snoitseuqgnirewsna
.2
)0202(
-repxednalortnocehtneewtebsecnereffidlaroivahebdelaev
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.noissucsidreep
.3
.segatselcycgninraeleerhtehtdnaspuorglatnemi
.neercs
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
.noitamrofnigniviecer,metsysehtgniretnE
.1
02A
.la
te
gnahZ
-nraeltnereffidhtiwsrenraelfosecnereffidlaroivahebdelaev
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
srohtuaehtyb
)6102(
ehtni,citehtseniKdna,yrotiduA,lausiVgnidulcni,selytsgni
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.seitivitcagninraeldetsissa-RA
.neercs
-bo
saw
krowten
gninrael
eht
fo
noitatneserper
lausiv
ehT
-retni
,noitingocer
egami
RA
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;noitamrofnigniviecer,snosselgniraperP
.1
12A
.la
te
gnahZ
ehtnidetautissirebmemhcihwlaeverotANSgnisudeniat
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitca
MAI
;egdelwonkgnitset,sledomgnitcurtsnoc
.2
)1202(
-eb
ehT
.sesahp
tnereffid
ta
krowten
eht
fo
noitisop
lartnec
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht
.gninraelevitaroballoc,noissucsiddeliated
.3
-ersnoitcaretnitneduts-rehcaetfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivah
.neercs
-droccanoitcaretnifosesahptnereffidnisnrettapehtdelaev
;MAIotgni
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-nesybnoitcetednoitomdaeH
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
;egdelwonknoitartsnomed,sledomgnivresbO
.1
1V
.la
te
gnahC
-xe
RV
evitaerc
ni
redro
noitcurtsnoc
egdelwonk
eht
delaev
-Sz
rof
;DMH
RV
eht
ni sros
srohtuaehtyb
;epytotorpgnitaerc,noitarenegngised
.2
)0202(
.gninraellaitneirep
-eye
dna
,nep
sulyts
eht
,ecap
.noissucsidreep,ecneirepxegnirahs
.3
htped
gnisu
decart
erew
raew
noitcaretni
,srotceted
egami
eht
gnisu
sledom
lautriv
htiw
.nepsulyts
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
rellortnoc
dlehdnah
dna
daeH
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
;noitanalpxelliks,noitanalpxemsinahceM
.1
2V
)1202(gnahC
dnatnemirepxeehtneewtebsecnereffidlaroivahebehtdelaev
noitomybnoitcetedtnemevom
srohtuaehtyb
;slliksgnitset,noitarepognicitcarp
.2
spuorglortnoc
-ni
dna
,srosnes
derarfni
dna
.tnemssessalliks
.3
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitcaret
.srellortnocdlehdnahgnisu
-caretnitneduts-rehcaetfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-nesybnoitcetednoitomdaeH
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;egdelwonknoitartsnomed,sledomgnivresbO
.1
3V
.la
te
nehC
-seuqevissergorpehtnisecnereffidlaroivahebdelaeversnoit
.DMHRVehtnisros
erutaretilsuoiverp
.smelborpgnirewsna,sgnidnfignizisehtnys
.2
)1202(
.stxetnocRVnihcaorppagnirotut-reepdesab-tpmorpnoit
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
nep
sulyts
eht
,ecapSz
nI
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;sledomnoitavresbO
.1
4V
.la
te
nehC
-moc
ytivitca
no-sdnah
eht
ni
secnereffid
laroivaheb
delaev
gnisudecarterewraeweyedna
erutaretilsuoiverp
;sgnidnatsrednugninialpxe,scipotgnirolpxe
.2
)0202(
.noitacudeMETSdna,ledomE6eht,RVgninib
-retni
,srotceted
egami
htped
.noitaulaveecnamrofrep;noissucsidpuorg
.3
-susledomlautrivhtiwnoitca
.nepsulytsehtgni
egaptxennodeunitnoC20
deunitnoC
snrettap
laroivaheB
gninrael
evisremmi
ni
ICH
semehcs
gnidoC
seitivitca-iniMrepaP
-ua
yramirP
metsys
edoC
roht
erew
sroivaheb
dedoc
eht
fo
noitubirtsid
dna
tnuoc
ehT
-nesybnoitcetednoitomdaeH
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
;tnetnocgnivresbo,noitcurtsnicipoT
.1
5V
iasT
dna
gnehC
fo
margaid
noitisnart
laroivaheb
eht
;ACQ
gnisu
deniatbo
.DMHRVehtnisros
srohtuaehtyb
-seuq
ot
gnidnopser
,noitamrofni
rof
gnihcraes
.2
)9102(
nisecnereffidlaroivahebdelaeversnoitcaretnitneduts-rehcaet
.snoit
.spirtdlefilautrivgnirudemitrevosdoireptnereffid
-ca
sisylana
retsulc
gnisu
deniatbo
erew
sretsulc
eroc
eerhT
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
defiicepstoN
-noitalergnihsilbatse,egdelwonkgnidnatsrednU
.1
6V
.la
te
gnehC
-rofrep
gnimag
,esu
retcarahc
emag-ni
’srenrael
ot
gnidroc
-yek
retupmoc
gnisu
sledom
;spihs
)5102(
.sELVnisemoctuogninraeltpecnocdna,ecnam
retupmoc
dna
esuom/draob
.smelborpgnitagitsevni,gniyalpelor
.2
.neercs
-hgih
fo
snrettap
gninrael
desab-emag
tnairav
eerhT
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
;stcafgnirevocsid,snoitcurtsniotgnidnopseR
.1
7V
nooM
dna
eK
-ylanaretsulcgnisudeniatboerewhtuoycitsituagninoitcnuf
-yek
retupmoc
gnisu
sledom
srohtuaehtyb
;gniyalp-elor,gnivloselzzup
.2
)8102(
.sELVnisis
retupmoc
dna
esuom/draob
-aitogen
lanosrepretni
,noisserpxe
ytitnedi-fles
.3
.neercs
.noit
-ebgnisudetnuocerewroivahebdedocfosegatnecrepnaeM
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
-amrofni
gnicudortni
,stnemnorivne
gniledoM
,1
8V
.la
te
tdimhcS
ottrahcrabagnisudezilausivdnasisylanaycneuqerfroivah
-yek
retupmoc
gnisu
sledom
erutaretilsuoiverp
;noit
)2102(
gninoitcnuf-hgihforoivaheblaicosfosmrofcfiicepsehtlaever
retupmoc
dna
esuom/draob
.slliksgniylppa,slliksgnicitcarp
.2
.sELVehtnihtuoycitsitua
.neercs
-vahebdedocfosnoitubirtsidegatnecrepdnatnuoclatotehT
-dom
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;snoitalumisgnitalupinam,stpecnocgniyfitnedI
.1
9V
.la
te
gnaW
-id
noitisnart
laroivaheb
eht
;ACQ
gnisu
deniatbo
erew
sroi
ecived
elibom
hguorht
sle
.rosseccusstidnaMAI
;snoisulcnocgniward;sesehtopyhgniyfirev
.2
)2202(
secnereffidlaroivahebdelaeversnoitcaretnitnedutsfomarga
.neercshcuot
.noitaitogenreep,srebmemgnidiug
.3
.sELVnigninraelyriuqnievitaroballocnispuorgruoffo
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
-curts
gnizilausiv
,stnemnorivne
gnitcurtsnoC
.1
01V
nuS
dna
gnaW
-droccanoitcaretnifosesahptnereffidtasnrettapehtdelaev
-yek
retupmoc
gnisu
sledom
MAI
.erut
)1202(
.ssecorpnoitaerc-ocRVD3ehtniMAIotgni
retupmoc
dna
esuom/draob
.neercs
-ersnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
-amrofnignirapmoc,stnemnorivnegnitcurtsnoC
.1
11V
nuS
dna
gnaW
-droccanoitcaretnifosesahptnereffidtasnrettapehtdelaev
-yek
retupmoc
gnisu
sledom
MAI
;noit
)2202(
.ssecorpnoitaerc-ocD2ehtdnaRVD3ehtniMAIotgni
retupmoc
dna
esuom/draob
;semoctuognitset,ecnanossidgniyfitnedi
.2
.neercs
.stnemeergagnikam,noitaitogenreep
.3
-hgih
fo
snrettap
gninrael
desab-emag
tnairav
eerhT
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;soedivgnihctaw,snoitomegniyfitnedI
.1
21V
.la
te
gnaW
-ylanaretsulcgnisudeniatboerewhtuoycitsituagninoitcnuf
-yek
retupmoc
gnisu
sledom
erutaretilsuoiverp
;snoisicedgnikam,gniyalp-elor
.2
)8102(
.sELVnisis
retupmoc
dna
esuom/draob
.noissucsidreep,snoisserpxegnirahs
.3
.neercs
-casnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
rellortnoc
dlehdnah
dna
daeH
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;sledomgnimrotsniarB
.1
31V
.la
te
gnaY
noitatidemdnanoitnettafoseulavevawniarbehtotgnidroc
noitomybnoitcetedtnemevom
erutaretilsuoiverp
.semoctuognitartsnomed,sledomgningised
.2
)9102(
tcudorptnereffidneewtebsecnereffidlaroivahebehtdelaever
-caretni
,srosnes
derarfni
dna
.stnemnorivneRVevisremminispuorgytivitaerc
gnisusledomlautrivhtiwnoit
.srellortnocdlehdnah
-casnoitcaretnitnedutsfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
rellortnoc
dlehdnah
dna
daeH
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
;sledomgnimrotsniarb,stxetnocgniretnE
.1
41V
.la
te
gnaY
noitatidemdnanoitnettafoseulavevawniarbehtotgnidroc
noitomybnoitcetedtnemevom
erutaretilsuoiverp
.sledomhtiwgnitcaretni,sledomgningised
.2
)8102(
licnep-dna-repapneewtebsecnereffidlaroivahebehtdelaever
-caretni
,srosnes
derarfni
dna
.snoitidnocRVevisremmidnasnoitidnoc
gnisusledomlautrivhtiwnoit
.srellortnocdlehdnah
-caretnidlihc-revigeracfomargaidnoitisnartlaroivahebehT
-nI
dna
RA
desab-noitacoL
no
desab
emehcS
gnidoC
.stcafgniterpretni,noitamrofnignidaeR
.1
1M
)0202(.lateusH
gninraelRMehtnisnrettapnoitcaretnilaicosdelaeversnoit
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitcaret
erutaretilsuoiverp
.stnemnorivne
hcuot
ecived
elibom
hguorht .neercs
-bo
saw
krowten
gninrael
eht
fo
noitatneserper
lausiv
ehT
lautriv
htiw
noitcaretnI
defiicepstoN
;sledomgnitneserp,stnemnorivnegnitcurtsnoC
.1
2M
.la
te
ozneroL
detautis
si
rotut
enilno
eht
woh
laever
ot ANS
gnisu
deniat
-yek
retupmoc
gnisu
sledom
;snoitcaretnisuonorhcnysa,gniyalp-elor
.2
)2102(
gninrael
RM
eht
ni
krowten
eht
fo
noitisop
lartnec
eht
ni
retupmoc
dna
esuom/draob
.noissucsidpuorg,noitaulaveevitaroballoc
.3
.txetnocmroftalp
.neercs
-nraelRMnielytslanoitcurtsni’stnatsissagnihcaetetaudarG
eht
yb
gnikcart
noitom
ydoB
fo
noisrev
defiidom
ehT
-artsnomed
gniwohs
,stnemecnuonna
gnikaM
.1
3M
.la
te
naW
sisylanaretsulcybdezirogetacerewstnemnorivnegni
ecived
tupni
gnisnes-noitom
-avresbO
yrotarobaL
eht
;snoit
)1202(
.)MTtceniK(
-rednU
rof
locotorP
noit
;snoitseuqgnisop,kcabdeefgnidivorp
.2
)SUPOL(METSetaudarg
.noissucsidssalc
.3
egaptxennodeunitnoC21
deunitnoC
snrettap
laroivaheB
gninrael
evisremmi
ni
ICH
semehcs
gnidoC
seitivitca-iniMrepaP
-ua
yramirP
metsys
edoC
roht
-ana
dna
detnuoc
saw
roivaheb
dedoc
fo
noitubirtsid
ehT
dlehdnah
dna
daeh
,RV
nI
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
-xe
.2;stcafgniterpretni,noitamrofnignirehtaG
.1
4M
)9102(.lateuW
-utsfoseussiytilibisseccaehtyfitnediottset-tagnisudezyl
-kcart
tnemevom
’srellortnoc
srohtuaehtyb
.seulavgnipoleved,sledomgnirolp
-RMdna-RVhtobnistrepxelanoisseforpdnasecivontned
derarfni
dna
noitom
yb
gni
stnemnorivnelautrivdetcurtsnoc
-om
daeh
,RM
nI
;srosnes
srosnes
eht
yb
noitceted
noit
noitcaretni
dna
DMH-TSO
ni
dnahgnisusledomlautrivhtiw
.noitalupinamerutseg
dedocfosnoitarudemitgnidnopserrocehtfonoitubirtsidehT
eht
yb
noitceted
noitom
daeH
depoleved
emehcS
gnidoC
.2
;noitamrofni
gnirehtag
,erutcurts
gnidliuB
.1
5M
)0202(.lateuW
-RM
ni
ytivitcudorp
yfitnedi
ot
detaluclac
saw
roivaheb
-ni
dna
DMH-TSO
ni
srosnes
srohtuaehtyb
.seulavgnipoleved,sledomgnirolpxe
-nam
sgniward
repap
dna
stnemnorivne
lautriv
detcurtsnoc
sledom
lautriv
htiw
noitcaret
.sren
-alupinam
erutseg
dnah
gnisu .noitReferences
Chang, K. E., Chang, C. T., Hou, H. T., Sung,
Y. T., Chao, H. L., and Lee, C. M. (2014). De-
Ak, O. (2012). A Game Scale to Evalu- velopment and behavioral pattern analysis of a
ate Educational Computer Games. Procedia mobile guide system with augmented reality for
- Social and Behavioral Sciences, 46:2477–2481. painting appreciation instruction in an art mu-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.sbspro.2012.05.506. seum. Computers and Education, 71:185–197.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.09.022.
Akdeniz, C., editor (2016). Instructional Process and
Concepts in Theory and Practice: Improving the
Chang, Y. S. (2021). Effects of virtual real-
Teaching Process. Springer Singapore, Singapore.
ity application on skill learning for optical-
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2519-8.
fibre fusion splicing. British Journal of
Educational Technology, 52(6):2209–2226.
Alkhabra, Y. A., Ibrahem, U. M., and Alkhabra,
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.13118.
S. A. (2023). Augmented reality technology in
enhancing learning retention and critical think-
Chang, Y. S., Chou, C. H., Chuang, M. J.,
ing according to STEAM program. Humanities
Li, W. H., and Tsai, I. F. (2020). Effects
and Social Sciences Communications, 10(1):1–10.
of virtual reality on creative design perfor-
https://doi.org/10.1057/s41599-023-01650-w.
mance and creative experiential learning. In-
Anderson, L. W. and Krathwohl, D. R. (2001). A tax- teractive Learning Environments, 0(0):1–16.
onomy for learning, teaching, and assessing: A revi- https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2020.1821717.
sion of Bloom’s taxonomy of educational objectives.
Chen, C. Y., Chang, S. C., Hwang, G. J., and
Longmans, New York.
Zou, D. (2021). Facilitating EFL learners’ ac-
Arksey, H. and O’Malley, L. (2005). Scoping studies: tive behaviors in speaking: a progressive question
towards a methodological framework. International prompt-based peer-tutoring approach with VR con-
Journal of Social Research Methodology, 8(1):19–32. texts. InteractiveLearningEnvironments,0(0):1–20.
https://doi.org/10.1080/1364557032000119616. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.1878232.
Azuma, R. T. (1997). A survey of aug- Chen, J. C., Huang, Y., Lin, K. Y., Chang, Y. S.,
mented reality. Presence: Teleoperators Lin, H. C., Lin, C. Y., and Hsiao, H. S. (2020).
and Virtual Environments, 6(4):355–385. Developing a hands-on activity using virtual re-
https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1997.6.4.355. ality to help students learn by doing. Jour-
nal of Computer Assisted Learning, 36(1):46–60.
Bakeman, R. and Quera, V. (2011). Sequential
https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12389.
Analysis and Observational Methods for the Be-
havioral Sciences. Cambridge University Press. Cheng, K. H. and Tsai, C. C. (2013). Affor-
https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9781139017343. dances of Augmented Reality in Science Learn-
ing: Suggestions for Future Research. Journal of
Benford, S., Greenhalgh, C., Reynard, G., Brown,
Science Education and Technology, 22(4):449–462.
C., and Koleva, B. (1998). Understanding
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-012-9405-9.
and Constructing Shared Spaces with Mixed-
Reality Boundaries. ACM Transactions on
Cheng,K.H.andTsai,C.C.(2014).Childrenandpar-
Computer-Human Interaction, 5(3):185–223.
ents’ reading of an augmented reality picture book:
https://doi.org/10.1145/292834.292836.
Analyses of behavioral patterns and cognitive at-
tainment. Computers and Education, 72:302–312.
Biggs, J. and Tang, C. (2011). Teaching for Qual-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.12.003.
ity Learning at University. Open University Press,
Maidenhead, UK.
Cheng, K. H. and Tsai, C. C. (2016). The
Bloom, B. S., Engelhart, M. D., Furst, E. L., Hill, interaction of child-parent shared reading with
W. H., and Krathwohl, D. R. (1956). Taxonomy of an augmented reality (AR) picture book and
EducationalObjectives: TheClassificationofEduca- parents’ conceptions of AR learning. British
tional Goals. Number1inTaxonomyofEducational Journal of Educational Technology, 47(1):203–222.
Objectives: TheClassificationofEducationalGoals. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12228.
Longmans, New York.
Cheng, K. H. and Tsai, C. C. (2019). A case
Cai, S., Niu, X., Wen, Y., and Li, J. (2021). Interac- study of immersive virtual field trips in an ele-
tionanalysisofteachersandstudentsininquiryclass mentary classroom: Students’ learning experience
learning based on augmented reality by iFIAS and and teacher-student interaction behaviors. Com-
LSA. Interactive Learning Environments, 0(0):1–17. puters and Education, 140(December 2018):103600.
https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2021.2012808. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103600.
22Cheng, M. T., Lin, Y. W., and She, H. C. de Freitas, S., Rebolledo-Mendez, G., Liarokapis, F.,
(2015). Learning through playing Virtual Magoulas, G., and Poulovassilis, A. (2010). Learn-
Age: Exploring the interactions among stu- ing as immersive experiences: Using the four-
dent concept learning, gaming performance, dimensional framework for designing and evalu-
in-game behaviors, and the use of in-game char- ating immersive learning experiences in a virtual
acters. Computers and Education, 86:18–29. world. British Journal of Educational Technol-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2015.03.007. ogy, 41(1):69–85. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-
8535.2009.01024.x.
Cheng, Y. W., Wang, Y., Cheng, I. L., and
Chen, N. S. (2019). An in-depth analysis of de Freitas, S. and Routledge, H. (2013). De-
the interaction transitions in a collaborative Aug- signing leadership and soft skills in educational
mented Reality-based mathematic game. In- games: The e-leadership and soft skills educa-
teractive Learning Environments, 27(5-6):782–796. tional games design model (ELESS). British
https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2019.1610448. Journal of Educational Technology, 44(6):951–968.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12034.
Chiang, T. H., Yang, S. J., and Hwang, G. J.
(2014). Students’ online interactive patterns Dede, C. J., Jacobson, J., and Richards, J. (2017). In-
in augmented reality-based inquiry activi- troduction: Virtual, augmented, and mixed realities
ties. Computers and Education, 78:97–108. in education. In Liu, D., Dede, C., Huang, R., and
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.05.006. Richards,J.,editors,Virtual,Augmented,andMixed
Realities in Education, pages 1–16. Springer Singa-
Connolly, T. M., Boyle, E. A., MacArthur, E., pore, Singapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-
Hainey, T., and Boyle, J. M. (2012). A 10-5490-7 1.
systematic literature review of empirical evi-
Dosoftei, C.-C. (2023). The Immersive Mixed Real-
dence on computer games and serious games.
ity: A New Opportunity for Experimental Labs in
Computers and Education, 59(2):661–686.
Engineering Education Using HoloLens 2. In Bo-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.03.004.
rangiu, T., Trentesaux, D., and Leit˜ao, P., editors,
Dalgarno, B. and Lee, M. J. (2010). What are Service Oriented, Holonic and Multi-Agent Manu-
the learning affordances of 3-D virtual environ- facturing Systems for Industry of the Future, pages
ments? British Journal of Educational Technol- 278–287, Cham. Springer International Publishing.
ogy, 41(1):10–32. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-24291-5 22.
8535.2009.01038.x8.
Draper, Z. A. and O’Connor, B. P. (2019). Package
‘LagSequential’.
Daponte, P., De Vito, L., Picariello, F., and Riccio,
M. (2014). State of the art and future develop-
Fabbri, S., Silva, C., Hernandes, E., Octaviano, F., Di
ments of the Augmented Reality for measurement
Thommazo, A., and Belgamo, A. (2016). Improve-
applications. Measurement: Journal of the In-
ments in the StArt Tool to Better Support the Sys-
ternational Measurement Confederation, 57:53–70.
tematic Review Process. In Proceedings of the 20th
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.measurement.2014.07.009.
International Conference on Evaluation and Assess-
mentinSoftwareEngineering,EASE’16,NewYork,
de Freitas, S. and Neumann, T. (2009). The
NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery.
use of ’exploratory learning’ for supporting
https://doi.org/10.1145/2915970.2916013.
immersive learning in virtual environments.
Computers and Education, 52(2):343–352. Fowler, C. (2015). Virtual reality and learn-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2008.09.010. ing: Where is the pedagogy? British
Journal of Educational Technology, 46(2):412–422.
de Freitas, S. and Oliver, M. (2006). How can
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12135.
exploratory learning with games and simulations
within the curriculum be most effectively evalu- Gao, Y., Liu, Y., Normand, J. M., Moreau, G.,
ated? Computers and Education, 46(3):249–264. Gao, X., and Wang, Y. (2019). A study on dif-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2005.11.007. ferences in human perception between a real and
an AR scene viewed in an OST-HMD. Journal of
de Freitas, S., Rebolledo-Mendez, G., Liarokapis, F., the Society for Information Display, 27(3):155–171.
Magoulas,G.,andPoulovassilis,A.(2009). Develop- https://doi.org/10.1002/jsid.752.
ing an evaluation methodology for immersive learn-
ingexperiencesinavirtualworld. Proceedings of the Garris, R., Ahlers, R., and Driskell, J. E. (2002).
2009 Conference in Games and Virtual Worlds for Games, motivation, and learning: A research and
Serious Applications, VS-GAMES 2009, pages 43– practice model. Simulation and Gaming, 33(4):441–
50. https://doi.org/10.1109/VS-GAMES.2009.41. 467. https://doi.org/10.1177/1046878102238607.
23Gu¨ndu¨z, G. F. (2016). Instructional Techniques. In ICCE2020-28thInternationalConferenceonCom-
Akdeniz, C., editor, Instructional Process and Con- puters in Education, Proceedings, 1:442–447.
cepts in Theory and Practice: Improving the Teach-
Huang, T. C., Chen, C. C., and Chou, Y. W. (2016).
ing Process,pages147–232.SpringerSingapore,Sin-
Animating eco-education: To see, feel, and discover
gapore. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-2519-
in an augmented reality-based experiential learning
8 4.
environment. Computers and Education, 96:72–82.
Han, I. (2021). Immersive virtual field trips https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2016.02.008.
and elementary students’ perceptions. British
Huang, Y. M. C., Wu, T. T., Huang, Y. M. C.,
Journal of Educational Technology, 52(1):179–195.
and Sandnes, F. E. (2018). Exploring learning
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12946.
behavior transformation patterns in an AR En-
Hou,H.-T.(2009). AFrameworkforDynamicSequen- glish system: A study of gender differences. Lec-
tial Behavioral Pattern Detecting and Automatic ture Notes in Computer Science (including subseries
Feedback/GuidanceDesigningforOnlineDiscussion Lecture Notes in Artificial Intelligence and Lec-
Learning Environments. In Hijon-Neira, R., editor, tureNotesinBioinformatics),11003LNCS:433–442.
Advanced Learning, chapter 19. IntechOpen, Rijeka. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319-99737-7 46.
https://doi.org/10.5772/8118.
Hwang, G. J., Chang, S. C., Chen, P. Y., and Chen,
Hou, H. T. (2010). Exploring the behavioural pat- X. Y. (2018). Effects of integrating an active
terns in project-based learning with online discus- learning-promoting mechanism into location-based
sion: Quantitative content analysis and progressive real-world learning environments on students’ learn-
sequential analysis. Turkish Online Journal of Edu- ing performances and behaviors. Educational Tech-
cational Technology, 9(3):52–60. nology Research and Development, 66(2):451–474.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-017-9567-5.
Hou,H.-T.(2012a).ApplyingMultipleBehavioralPat-
ternAnalysestoOnlineKnowledgeManagementEn- Ib´an˜ez, M. B. and Delgado-Kloos, C.
vironments for Teachers’ Professional Development. (2018). Augmented reality for STEM
In New Research on Knowledge Management Appli- learning: A systematic review. Com-
cationsandLessonLearned,pageCh.2.IntechOpen, puters and Education, 123(April):109–123.
Rijeka. https://doi.org/10.5772/33645. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2018.05.002.
Hou, H. T. (2012b). Exploring the behavioral Ib´an˜ez, M. B., Di-Serio, A´., Villar´an-Molina,
patterns of learners in an educational massively D., and Delgado-Kloos, C. (2016). Sup-
multiple online role-playing game (MMORPG). port for Augmented Reality Simulation Sys-
Computers and Education, 58(4):1225–1233. tems: The Effects of Scaffolding on Learn-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2011.11.015. ing Outcomes and Behavior Patterns. IEEE
Transactions on Learning Technologies, 9(1):46–56.
Hou, H.-T. (2018). Introductory Chapter: The Re-
https://doi.org/10.1109/TLT.2015.2445761.
search Trend and Applications in Behavior Anal-
ysis. In Hou, H.-T. and Ryan, C. S., editors, Johnson, D., Deterding, S., Kuhn, K.-A., Staneva,
Behavior Analysis, chapter 1. IntechOpen, Rijeka. A., Stoyanov, S., and Hides, L. (2016). Gamifica-
https://doi.org/10.5772/intechopen.76106. tion for health and wellbeing: A systematic review
of the literature. Internet Interventions, 6:89–106.
Hou, H. T. and Keng, S. H. (2021). A Dual-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.invent.2016.10.002.
Scaffolding Framework Integrating Peer-Scaffolding
andCognitive-ScaffoldingforanAugmentedReality- Kardong-Edgren, S. S., Farra, S. L., Alin-
Based Educational Board Game: An Analysis ier, G., and Young, H. M. (2019). A
of Learners’ Collective Flow State and Collabo- Call to Unify Definitions of Virtual Real-
rative Learning Behavioral Patterns. Journal of ity. Clinical Simulation in Nursing, 31:28–34.
Educational Computing Research, 59(3):547–573. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecns.2019.02.006.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0735633120969409.
Ke, F. and Moon, J. (2018). Virtual col-
Hsiao,H.S.andChen,J.C.(2016). Usingagesturein- laborative gaming as social skills training for
teractive game-based learning approach to improve high-functioning autistic children. British Jour-
preschool children’s learning performance and mo- nal of Educational Technology, 49(4):728–741.
tor skills. Computers and Education, 95:151–162. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12626.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2016.01.005.
Khan, K. S., Kunz, R., Kleijnen, J., and Antes, G.
Hsu, T. Y., Liang, H. Y., and Chen, J. M. (2020). (2003).Fivestepstoconductingasystematicreview.
Engaging the families with young children in mu- Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine,96(3):118–
seumvisitswithamixed-realitygame: Acasestudy. 121. https://doi.org/10.1258/jrsm.96.3.118.
24Lai, J. W. and Cheong, K. H. (2022). Adop- tasks. Computers and Education, 59(4):1361–1376.
tion of Virtual and Augmented Reality https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2012.06.002.
for Mathematics Education: A Scoping
Matcha, W. and Rambli, D. R. A. (2013). Ex-
Review. IEEE Access, 10:13693–13703.
ploratorystudyoncollaborativeinteractionthrough
https://doi.org/10.1109/ACCESS.2022.3145991.
the use of augmented reality in science learn-
L¨ams¨a, J., H¨am¨al¨ainen, R., Koskinen, P., Viiri, J., ing. Procedia Computer Science, 25:144–153.
and Lampi, E. (2021). What do we do when we https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2013.11.018.
analysethetemporalaspectsofcomputer-supported
Mayer, I., Bekebrede, G., Harteveld, C., Warmelink,
collaborative learning? A systematic literature re-
H.,Zhou,Q.,VanRuijven,T.,Lo,J.,Kortmann,R.,
view. Educational Research Review, 33(March).
and Wenzler, I. (2014). The research and evaluation
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2021.100387.
of serious games: Toward a comprehensive method-
Law, E. L. C. and Heintz, M. (2021). Aug- ology. British Journal of Educational Technology,
mented reality applications for K-12 education: 45(3):502–527. https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12067.
A systematic review from the usability and
user experience perspective. International Jour- Mayes, J. T. and Fowler, C. J. (1999). Learning tech-
nal of Child-Computer Interaction, 30:100321. nologyandusability: aframeworkforunderstanding
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2021.100321. courseware. Interacting with Computers, 11(5):485–
497. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0953-5438(98)00065-
Lee, K. (2012). Augmented Reality in Educa- 4.
tion and Training. TechTrends, 56(2):13–21.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11528-012-0559-3. Milgram, P. and Kishino, F. (1994). A taxonomy of
mixed reality visual displays. IEICE - Transactions
Lin, T. J., Duh, H. B. L., Li, N., Wang, H. Y., and on Information and Systems, 77(12):1321–1329.
Tsai, C. C. (2013). An investigation of learners’ col-
laborativeknowledgeconstructionperformancesand Miller, H. L. and Bugnariu, N. L. (2016). Level
behavior patterns in an augmented reality simula- of Immersion in Virtual Environments Impacts
tion system. Computers and Education, 68:314–321. the Ability to Assess and Teach Social Skills
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2013.05.011. in Autism Spectrum Disorder. Cyberpsychology,
Behavior, and Social Networking, 19(4):246–256.
Lin, X. F., Hwang, G. J., Wang, J., Zhou, https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2014.0682.
Y., Li, W., Liu, J., and Liang, Z. M.
(2022). Effects of a contextualised reflective Moher, D., Liberati, A., Tetzlaff, J., and Altman,
mechanism-based augmented reality learning model D. G. (2009). Preferred reporting items for sys-
on students’ scientific inquiry learning perfor- tematic reviews and meta-analyses: The PRISMA
mances, behavioural patterns, and higher or- statement. AnnalsofInternalMedicine,151(4):264–
der thinking. Interactive Learning Environments. 269. https://doi.org/10.7326/0003-4819-151-4-
https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2022.2057546. 200908180-00135.
Lin, X. F., Wu, Q., Shen, W., Zhu, Q., and Wang, Monahan, T., McArdle, G., and Bertolotto, M.
J. (2019). Primary school students’ science inquiry (2008). Virtual reality for collaborative e-learning.
learning and behavior patterns while exploring aug- Computers and Education, 50(4):1339–1353.
mented reality science learning. Communications https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2006.12.008.
in Computer and Information Science, 1048:79–90.
Mystakidis, S., Christopoulos, A., and Pellas,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-13-9895-7 8.
N. (2022). A systematic mapping review
Liu, S., Hu, Z., Peng, X., Liu, Z., Cheng, H. N., of augmented reality applications to support
and Sun, J. (2017). Mining learning behav- STEM learning in higher education. Educa-
ioral patterns of students by sequence analy- tionandInformationTechnologies,27(2):1883–1927.
sis in cloud classroom. International Journal https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-021-10682-1.
of Distance Education Technologies, 15(1):15–27.
Parsons, S. (2016). Authenticity in Virtual Reality for
https://doi.org/10.4018/IJDET.2017010102.
assessmentandinterventioninautism: Aconceptual
Liu,T.Y.,Tan,T.H.,andChu,Y.L.(2009). Outdoor review. Educational Research Review, 19:138–157.
naturalsciencelearningwithanRFID-supportedim- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2016.08.001.
mersive ubiquitous learning environment. Educa-
Petersen, G. B., Petkakis, G., and Makran-
tional Technology and Society, 12(4):161–175.
sky, G. (2022). A study of how immer-
Lorenzo, C. M., A´ngel Sicilia, M., and S´anchez, S. sion and interactivity drive VR learning.
(2012). Studying the effectiveness of multi-user im- Computers and Education, 179(January).
mersive environments for collaborative evaluation https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2021.104429.
25Poldner, E., Simons, P. R., Wijngaards, G., Sereno, M., Wang, X., Besancon, L., Mcguffin, M. J.,
and van der Schaaf, M. F. (2012). Quan- andIsenberg,T.(2020). CollaborativeWorkinAug-
titative content analysis procedures to anal- mented Reality: A Survey. IEEE Transactions on
yse students’ reflective essays: A methodolog- Visualization and Computer Graphics, 2626(c):1–1.
ical review of psychometric and edumetric as- https://doi.org/10.1109/tvcg.2020.3032761.
pects. Educational Research Review, 7(1):19–37.
Slater, M. and Sanchez-Vives, M. V. (2016). En-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.edurev.2011.11.002.
hancing our lives with immersive virtual re-
Prilla, M., Janßen, M., and Kunzendorff, T. ality. Frontiers Robotics AI, 3(DEC):1–47.
(2019). How to interact with AR head https://doi.org/10.3389/frobt.2016.00074.
mounted devices in care work? A study com-
Slater, M. and Wilbur, S. (1997). A framework
paring Handheld Touch (hands-on) and Gesture
for immersive virtual environments (FIVE):
(hands-free) Interaction. AIS Transactions on
Speculations on the role of presence in vir-
Human-Computer Interaction, 11(3):157–178.
tual environments. Presence: Teleopera-
https://doi.org/10.17705/1thci.00118.
tors and Virtual Environments, 6(6):603–616.
Radianti, J., Majchrzak, T. A., Fromm, J., and https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.1997.6.6.603.
Wohlgenannt, I. (2020). A systematic re-
Sun, D., Looi, C. K., Wu, L., and Xie, W. (2016).
view of immersive virtual reality applications
The Innovative Immersion of Mobile Learning into
for higher education: Design elements, lessons
a Science Curriculum in Singapore: an Exploratory
learned, and research agenda. Computers
Study. Research in Science Education, 46(4):547–
and Education, 147(November 2019):103778.
573. http://doi.org/10.1007/s11165-015-9471-0.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103778.
Tan, P.-N., Steinbach, M., Karpatne, A., and Kumar,
Radmehr, F. and Drake, M. (2019). Re- V. (2019). Introduction to data mining. Pearson,
vised Bloom’s taxonomy and major theories and London UK.
frameworks that influence the teaching, learn-
ing, and assessment of mathematics: a compari- Wan, T., Doty, C. M., Geraets, A. A., Nix, C. A.,
son. International Journal of Mathematical Edu- Saitta, E. K., and Chini, J. J. (2021). Evaluating
cation in Science and Technology, 50(6):895–920. the impact of a classroom simulator training on
https://doi.org/10.1080/0020739X.2018.1549336. graduate teaching assistants’ instructional practices
and undergraduate student learning. Physical
Riff, D., Lacy, S., and Fico, F. (2014). Analyzing me- Review Physics Education Research, 17(1):10146.
dia messages: Using quantitative content analysis https://doi.org/10.1103/PhysRevPhysEducRes.17.010146.
in research. Routledge, New York, 3rd ed. edition.
Wang, C., Xu, L., and Liu, H. (2022). Explor-
https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203551691.
ing behavioural patterns of virtual manipulatives
Rose, T., Nam, C. S., and Chen, K. B. (2018). Im- supported collaborative inquiry learning: Effect of
mersion of virtual reality for rehabilitation - Re- device-student ratios and external scripts. Jour-
view. Applied Ergonomics, 69(February 2017):153– nal of Computer Assisted Learning, 38(2):392–408.
161. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2018.01.009. https://doi.org/10.1111/jcal.12620.
Salipante, P., William, N., and Bigelow, J. (1982). A Wang,H.Y.,Duh,H.B.L.,Li,N.,Lin,T.J.,andTsai,
matrix approach to literature reviews. Research in C.C.(2014).Aninvestigationofuniversitystudents’
Organizational Behavior, 4:321–348. collaborative inquiry learning behaviors in an aug-
mented reality simulation and a traditional simula-
Sarkar, P., Kadam, K., and Pillai, J. S. (2020). Learn- tion. Journal of Science Education and Technology,
ers’approaches,motivationandpatternsofproblem- 23(5):682–691. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10956-014-
solving on lines and angles in geometry using aug- 9494-8.
mented reality. Smart Learning Environments, 7(1).
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-020-00124-9. Wang, H. Y., Lin, T. J., Tsai, C. C., Duh, H. B. L.,
and Liang, J. C. (2012). An investigation of stu-
Schmidt, M., Laffey, J. M., Schmidt, C. T., dents’sequentiallearningbehavioralpatternsinmo-
Wang, X., and Stichter, J. (2012). De- bile CSCL learning systems. Proceedings of the
veloping methods for understanding social be- 12th IEEE International Conference on Advanced
havior in a 3D virtual learning environment. Learning Technologies, ICALT 2012, pages 53–57.
Computers in Human Behavior, 28(2):405–413. https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALT.2012.133.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2011.10.011.
Wang, H. Y. and Sun, J. C. Y. (2021). Ex-
Scott, J. and Carrington, P. J. (2011). The SAGE ploring behavioral patterns of online syn-
Handbook of Social Network Analysis. SAGE publi- chronous VR Co-creation: An analysis of stu-
cations. dent engagement. Proceedings - IEEE 21st
26International Conference on Advanced Learn- Wu,W.,Sandoval,A.,Gunji,V.,Ayer,S.K.,London,
ing Technologies, ICALT 2021, pages 392–394. J., Perry, L., Patil, K., and Smith, K. (2020). Com-
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICALT52272.2021.00125. paring Traditional and Mixed Reality-Facilitated
Apprenticeship Learning in a Wood-Frame Con-
Wang, H. Y. and Sun, J. C.-Y. (2022). Influences struction Lab. Journal of Construction En-
of Online Synchronous VR Co-Creation on Behav- gineering and Management, 146(12):04020139.
ioral Patterns and Motivation in Knowledge Co- https://doi.org/10.1061/(asce)co.1943-
Construction. Educational Technology and Society, 7862.0001945.
25(2):31–47.
Yang, X., Cheng, P.-Y., Lin, L., Huang, Y. M., and
Wang, X., Ong, S. K., and Nee, A. Y. (2016). A
Ren, Y. (2019). Can an integrated system of elec-
comprehensive survey of augmented reality assem-
troencephalography and virtual reality further the
blyresearch. Advances in Manufacturing,4(1):1–22.
understanding of relationships between attention,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s40436-015-0131-4.
meditation, flow state, and creativity? Journal
of Educational Computing Research, 57(4):846–876.
Wang, X., Xing, W., and Laffey, J. M. (2018).
https://doi.org/10.1177/0735633118770800.
Autistic youth in 3D game-based collaborative vir-
tual learning: Associating avatar interaction pat-
Yang, X. X., Lin, L., Cheng, P. Y., Yang, X. X.,
terns with embodied social presence. British
Ren, Y., and Huang, Y. M. (2018). Examining
Journal of Educational Technology, 49(4):742–760.
creativity through a virtual reality support system.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12646.
Educational Technology Research and Development,
66(5):1231–1254. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11423-
Webster, J. and Watson, R. T. (2002). Analyzing
018-9604-z.
the Past to Prepare for the Future: Writing a Lit-
erature Review. MIS Quarterly, 26(2):xiii – xxiii.
Yilmaz, R. M. (2016). Educational magic toys
https://doi.org/10.1.1.104.6570.
developed with augmented reality technol-
ogy for early childhood education. Com-
Wei, X., Weng, D., Liu, Y., and Wang, Y.
puters in Human Behavior, 54:240–248.
(2015). Teaching based on augmented re-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.07.040.
ality for a technical creative design course.
Computers and Education, 81:221–234.
Yuen, S. C.-Y., Yaoyuneyong, G., and Johnson, E.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.10.017.
(2013). Augmented reality and education: Ap-
Wendler, R. (2012). The maturity of maturity model plications and potentials. In Huang, R., Kin-
research: A systematic mapping study. Infor- shuk, and Spector, J. M., editors, Reshaping
mation and Software Technology, 54(12):1317–1339. Learning: Frontiers of Learning Technology in a
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.infsof.2012.07.007. GlobalContext,pages385–414.Springer,Heidelberg.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-32301-0 17.
Wohlin, C. (2014). Guidelines for Snowballing in Sys-
tematicLiteratureStudiesandaReplicationinSoft- Zhang, J., Huang, Y. T., Liu, T. C., Sung,
ware Engineering. In Proceedings of the 18th In- Y. T., and Chang, K. E. (2020). Aug-
ternational Conference on Evaluation and Assess- mented reality worksheets in field trip learn-
mentinSoftwareEngineering,EASE’14,NewYork, ing. Interactive Learning Environments, 0(0):1–18.
NY, USA. Association for Computing Machinery. https://doi.org/10.1080/10494820.2020.1758728.
https://doi.org/10.1145/2601248.2601268.
Zhang, J., Ogan, A., Liu, T. C., Sung, Y. T., and
Wu, J. Y. and Nian, M. W. (2021). The dy- Chang, K. E. (2016). The Influence of using Aug-
namics of an online learning community in a hy- mented Reality on Textbook Support for Learn-
brid statistics classroom over time: Implications ers of Different Learning Styles. Proceedings of the
for the question-oriented problem-solving course de- 2016 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and
sign with the social network analysis approach. Augmented Reality, ISMAR 2016, pages 107–114.
Computers and Education, 166(May 2020):104120. https://doi.org/10.1109/ISMAR.2016.26.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2020.104120.
Zhang, N., Liu, Q., Zheng, X., Luo, L., and Cheng,
Wu, W., Hartless, J., Tesei, A., Gunji, V., Ayer, S., Y. (2021). Analysis of Social Interaction and
andLondon,J.(2019).DesignAssessmentinVirtual Behavior Patterns in the Process of Online to
and Mixed Reality Environments: Comparison of Offline Lesson Study: A Case Study of Chem-
Novices and Experts. Journal of Construction En- istry Teaching Design based on Augmented Real-
gineering and Management, 145(9):04019049. ity. Asia Pacific Journal of Education, 00(00):1–22.
https://doi.org/10.1061/(asce)co.1943- https://doi.org/10.1080/02188791.2020.1866493.
7862.0001683.
277 Competing interests
stages,i.e.,dialogue(n=20),followedbyconstruc-
tion (n=14) as the mediate echelons of learning
The authors declare no competing interests. stages, and conceptualization (n=6) as the lower
echelons of learning stages. In the upper-left bar
chart, the most common cognitive learning out-
8 Ethical approval
come based on Bloom’s revised taxonomy was the
ability to create knowledge (n=13). Remember-
This article does not contain any studies with human
ing (n=5), understanding (n=7), applying (n=6),
participants performed by any of the authors.
andanalyzing(n=5)werethefollowingmostcom-
moncognitivelearningoutcomesthatparticipants
9 Informed consent achieved in the immersive learning environments.
Finally, in 4 studies, participants acquired the
This article does not contain any studies with human ability to evaluate the immersive learning activ-
participants or animals performed by any of the au- ities.
thors. Informed consent is not applicable. • Fig. 4 Learner specifics. a, learner types. The
studyparticipantsweremostlyprimaryschoolstu-
10 Data availability dents, with 12 papers accounting for 30% of the
total, and higher education students, with 9 pa-
pers accounting for 22.5% of all papers. Other
All data generated or analyzed during this study are
studiestendedtorecruitlearnersofadults(17.5%,
includedinthisarticleanditssupplementaryinforma-
n=7), high school students (12.5%, n=5), kinder-
tion file.
garten children (10%, n=4), middle school stu-
dents, teachers (7.5%, n=3), and students with
11 Figures legends specialneeds(7.5%,n=3). Onepaper,accounting
for 2.5% of the total, did not specify the learner
• Fig. 1 Behavioral analysis in immersive typeinthearticlecontent. b,applicationdomain.
learning framework (BAILF) MorethanhalfofthearticleschoseSTEM(62.5%)
as the application domain of their learning sys-
• Fig. 2 Literature identification process de- tems. Thesecondpopularapplicationdomainwas
rived from the PRISMA framework. Using generalknowledge&skills(27.5%),wherelearners
the previously-defined key concept terms, this re- can learn basic social or art abilities to deal with
viewyielded676resultsfromdatabases. Withthe dailyaffairs. Therestofthearticleschosetolearn
aidoftheStArtsoftware,53duplicatepaperswere aboutknowledgeinthehumanities(10%). Specif-
found and deleted. During the screening phase, a ically, in the category of STEM, physics (17.5%),
review of the titles, abstracts, and keywords re- integrated science (17.5%), and biology (12.5%)
vealed 560 irrelevant articles, and 63 studies that werepopulartopicsintheimmersivelearningsys-
met the inclusion criteria were included for the tem. “Integrated science” refers to the specific
following selection stage. During the eligibility subject that involves more than one scientific dis-
phase,theentiretextoftheremainingarticleswas ciplineinthelearningactivities. Inthehumanities
scanned in detail to check the theoretical contri- category, history (2.5%), culture (2.5%), and lan-
butionintheareaoflearningimplementation,be- guage learning (5%) were the common topics. In
havior analysis, virtual communities, and the ex- the general knowledge & skills category, the liter-
tension of instruction theories. Thus, 24 studies ature highlighted three topics of educative appli-
with limited evidence on analyzing learner behav- cations: art & design (7.5%), cognitive & social
ior sequences or without immersive intervention skills (12.5%), and reading (7.5%).
were excluded. Additionally, another five articles
• Fig. 5Hardwaredevices. AsforARcondition,
wereclassifiedasineligibleduetothelackofrelia-
exceptforonepaperthatuseddesktopcomputing
bility in their contributions or inconsistent analy-
devices(n=1)toconstructthelearningsystem,all
sis. Then, the backward and forward snowballing
other papers used mobile devices (n=20) as pre-
method was carried out on Google Scholar to find
dominant apparatus. As for VR conditions, the
morerelevantliterature, includinganothersixpa-
non-immersive VR was equipped with mobile de-
pers in this review. In the end, 40 papers were
vices(n=1)anddesktopcomputingdevices(n=6).
ultimatelyclassifiedaseligibleandincludedinthe
Full-immersive VR that adopted HMD devices
final review.
(n=7)asinfrastructurewaswidespreadintheim-
• Fig. 3 Learning stages and cognitive learn- mersive learning system construction. Two stud-
ing outcomes. In the bottom right bar chart, a ies used zSpace as hardware devices, which is ex-
majority of researchers have implemented immer- pected to provide learners with a semi-immersive
sive learning for the higher echelons of learning experience in this review. As for MR conditions,
28four kinds of hardware devices were used to set
up MR systems: mobile devices (n=1), desktop
computing devices (n=1), OST-HMD (n=2), and
projection-based apparatus (n=1).
12 Equipment and settings
• Fig. 1 is processed using Microsoft Visio.
• Fig. 2 is processed using Microsoft Visio.
• Fig. 3 is processed using Microsoft Excel and Vi-
sio.
• Fig. 4 is processed using Microsoft Excel and Vi-
sio.
• Fig. 5 is processed using Microsoft Excel and Vi-
sio.
29