An agent-based model of modal choice
with perception biases and habits
Author(s) :
Carole ADAM, Univ. Grenoble-Alpes, LIG, France – carole.adam@imag.fr
Benoit GAUDOU, Univ. Toulouse Capitole, IRIT, France - benoit.gaudou@ut-capitole.fr
Keywords:
Agent-based modelling and simulation, modal choice, cognitive biases, user survey.
Abstract
Introduction.
To adapt cities to the issues of climate change and public health, urban policies are trying to encourage soft
mobility [14] in order to reduce traffic and pollution, via financial incentives or new infrastructure.
However, mobility evolves very slowly, and the share of the car remains significant (74% in France [9]),
despite increased public awareness of global warming, and increased concern for ecology. The pandemic
offered an opportunity to explore the impact of reduced car mobility and new urban planning policies, for
instance with temporary cycle paths [19]. But these public policies normally take longer to implement and
are not always well accepted by the car-loving population; many of these temporary cycle paths were
gradually returned to cars after the end of the lockdowns [6]. Many explaining factors of this inertia of
mobility and reluctance to shift from the car are already known, both contextual, such as a lack of
alternatives (limited public transportation options), individual constraints (transporting children or tools), or
higher costs of newer or electric vehicles...); and psychological, such as the difficulty to change habits [8,
17], individualism [12], or influence of cognitive biases [15, 13].
The SWITCH project1 aims at developing prospective tools to reflect on scenarios for transition of cities
towards more sustainable mobility [2, 1, 5]. In this context, we wish here to study the factors and obstacles,
particularly psychological, of a modal shift for urban commutes. We developed an agent-based modal
choice model integrating the influence of perceptual biases and habits, implemented in a Netlogo
simulator. We conducted an online survey and collected 650 answers, which provided realistic values to
initialise this simulator. We report here several scenarios run in this simulator to illustrate the impact of
biases on the efficacy of public policies.
Background.
Modal choice has been studied in sociology under several axes: definition of user profiles, and analysis of
modal choice criteria. The Mobil’Air study [10] presents 4 car user profiles with percentages of the
population in each category but does not consider other modes of mobility. It also notes the importance of
constraints, of the reason for travel (transporting children for example), and the strength of routines. Rocci
[20] proposes a more detailed classification with 6 profiles including other modes than car, but without
population distribution statistics. Similarly to Mobil’Air, her study also reports constrained or on the
contrary passionate use of the car. Rocci also shows inter-individual differences in perception of modes: for
example, convinced car drivers tend to underestimate its price and overestimate that of public transport.
She defines the notion of ’mobility capital’ as individual constraints for using a mode (owning a bicycle,
having a driving license, being fit to cycle or walk, living close to a bus stop...). Beyond these constraints,
everyone will evaluate different aspects, such as price, safety, or travel time. The choice must also minimise
mental load (e.g. number of connections). Finally, we retained 6 decision factors [4]: cost, time, practicality,
safety, comfort, and ecology.
Habits are essential in mobility decisions [8]: individuals tend to reproduce habitual decisions when in the
same context. This process can save decision time, but also lead to misadapted decisions in an evolving
environment. Habits can also modify perceptions: usual car drivers can overestimate travel time by public
transport and under-estimate travel time by car [20, 7]. Life cycle changes that disrupt habits (job change,
1 Simula(ng the transi(on of transport Infrastructures Toward smart and sustainable Ci(es: h;ps://www6.inrae.fr/switchmoving, birth, etc.) are favorable moments for breaking old habits and creating new ones [21]. Thus, the
COVID-19 pandemic has shown an unusual reset of habits that encouraged bicycle travel, at least
temporarily [6].
Cognitive biases are heuristics used by our cognitive system to facilitate decision-making [22], enabling fast
reasoning during stressful or complex situations, despite incomplete or uncertain information. Although
essential to our proper functioning, they can sometimes lead to irrational decision-making or errors.
Innocenti et al. innocenti2013car show that people tend to ’stick’ to the car, even when more expensive
than public transport, and explain this irrationality by the influence of cognitive biases. They conclude that
mobility policies must try to modify the perception of different modes of mobility. Another study [13] looks
at the reasons why drivers are generally reluctant to switch from their personal car to new more efficient
modes of mobility (carpooling or free-floating bikes and scooters). They find that mobility decisions are
influenced by various emotions and cognitive biases not considered by mobility operators. The halo bias
pushes motorists to amplify benefits of driving and ignore its disadvantages. The ambiguity bias pushes
them to prefer known to unknown risks, thus avoiding uncontrollable risks posed by public transport. The
anchoring bias pushes to retain a negative first impression and prevent future reuse of a new mode. The
status quo bias induces a preference to keep things as they are to save cognitive load, similarly to habits.
Agent-based model.
Our approach is agent-based modelling: autonomous entities called agents represent individuals; the model
describes their behaviour at the microscopic level; the behaviour of the society (macroscopic level) then
emerges from the agents’ interactions. Concretely, we will model individual modal choice decisions, and
observe the resulting modal distribution in the global population. Our objective is to integrate psychological
factors in these individual decisions, in order to illustrate their impact on the effectiveness of urban
development policies. The model user will be able to modify the urban environment and observe how the
modal distribution evolves in response, depending on whether the agent decisions are biased or not.
In our model, we consider 4 modes of mobility: car, bicycle, bus, or walking. They are evaluated according
to the 6 criteria established above: ecology, comfort, price, time, practicality, and safety. The environment
contains the objective values of the 4 modes with respect to the 6 criteria, representing the current urban
infrastructure, and accessible to all agents.
The agents are endowed with individual priorities for the 6 criteria. They also have a filter which biases their
perceptions; this filter contains a multiplying factor for each criterion of each mode (so 24 factors),
modifying the objective value perceived in the environment. This filter is dynamic, computed as an average
of the prototype filter for the usual mode and a neutral filter, weighed by the strength of habit: the more an
agent is used to a mode, the more it biases its perception. Each agent therefore has its own subjective
evaluation of the modes on all criteria (24 values), differing more or less from the objective values. The
agent can then calculate the scores of the 4 modes following a multi-criteria evaluation formula [16].
Concretely, agent i uses its priorities for each criterion c, denoted prio(i,c), and its values of mode m over
each criterion c, denoted val(m,c), to compute its score for mode m as follows:
score(i,m) = ∑ 𝑣𝑎𝑙(𝑚,𝑐)∗ 𝑝𝑟𝑖𝑜(i,𝑐).
!∈!#$%&
The rational mobility choice for the agent is the mode receiving the maximal score. Each agent also has a
home-work distance constraining its choices (walking available below 7km and cycling below 15km) and
they may or may not have access to the bus and the car. In addition, the agent maintains a list of the modes
used for its last journeys and uses it to deduce habits of each mode as their past frequency. This habit is
then used as a probability to reuse the same mode without evaluation [1]; if no habit is triggered, modes
are re-evaluated and the best one selected.
Mobility survey.
To realistically initialise the population of our model, we conducted a survey via an online form, sent to
various university mailing lists (students, laboratories, research groups, etc.) or via our personal networks
[11]. The questionnaire consists of three main parts. The first part concerns the responders profile (gender,
home-work distance, number of weekly journeys, accessible modes) and their mobility habits (usual mode),
without any identifying data. In a second part, participants are asked to report their priorities for the 6
decision criteria. The third part concerns their perceptions of the values of the mobility modes over these 6
criteria (24 scores). All ratings (priorities and values) are given on a Likert scale from 0 to 10. We collected
650 responses to this survey, between March and July 2023, available in open data [3].The question about usual commuting mode allows us to deduce the following modal distribution in our
sample: bicycle 31.38% (n=204), car 20.62% (n=134), bus 35.08% (n=228), walk 12.92% (n=84). In
comparison, the national statistics for France [18] provide a very different distribution: bicycle 2%, car 74%,
bus 16%, walk 6%. Our sample is therefore not representative at all, in particular because of the diffusion
biases of the survey (academia), and geographical biases (diffusion from Grenoble, where the share of
cycling is much greater than the national average2). However, the good coverage of each of the mobility
modes studied will allow us to deduce interesting statistics.
The question about home-work distance provides distance statistics per usual mode. After removing
aberrant responses (e.g. walking 550km, driving 2000km, etc.) and zero distances, we obtain the following
statistics: cyclists travel an average of 6.43 km (median 5km), pedestrians walk in average 1.8 km (median
1.5km), motorists drive in average 21.29km (median 15km), and bus trips are in average 11.16 km long
(median 5.55km). Beyond the distance, not all modes are accessible to all users. We calculated the number
of respondents using each mode and having expressed inaccessibility not due to distance. It is important to
note that these are purely declarative and can be subjective. To simplify, we consider walking and cycling as
accessible unless limited by distance. For the other 2 modes, we have found the following statistics: 57.46%
of bus users, 29.9% of cyclists, and 50% of pedestrians cannot use a car; 61.19% of car drivers, 10.29% of
cyclists, and 8.33% of pedestrians do not have access to public transport.
We have also computed the average priorities for the 6 criteria, in the total sample (n=650) and per usual
mode. We observe marked differences between users of different modes, for example a very low priority of
motorists for ecology (5.65 out of 10, compared to 7.08 in average) and price (5.63 out of 10, compared to
6.97 in average), of cyclists for safety (5.37 out of 10, vs 6.2 in average), or of pedestrians for time (6.7 out
of 10, vs 7.47 in average). We then computed average evaluations of modes on criteria, in the total sample,
and in users vs non-users of each mode. We noticed marked differences again, with users generally over-
evaluating their mode compared to the rest of the population. Furthermore, these evaluation deviations
are aligned with priority deviations: cycling is evaluated as very unsafe (4.62 in average, and even 4.28 over
non-users), walking as very slow (2.98 in average, 2.69 over non-users), and driving as very expensive (2.68
in average, 2.38 over non-users, compared to 6.87 in average for the bus, which is the closest in terms of
comfort) and not ecological (1.81 in average, 1.63 over non-users; compared to 9.81 in average for
walking). From there, we calculated the average deviations between the value of each mode on each
criterion, for its users, compared to the ’objective’ value taken as the median over all responses (24
deviation factors); this constitutes the perception filter prototype specific to users of this mode.
Modal choice simulator.
We implemented a Netlogo [23] simulator of modal choices, accessible online3. The environment is
extremely simplified, it contains neither buildings nor roads, but only the abstract numerical evaluation of
the 4 modes over the 6 criteria, considered as the objective values. These are initialised from the survey:
we calculated the median evaluation of all modes on all criteria, per usual mode; we then averaged these 4
different visions, weighed by the proportion of each mode in the French population [18] to adjust the
average values in our non-representative sample. We created a population of 200 agents with this same
distribution: 2% cyclists, 74% motorists, 16% bus users, and 6% pedestrians. Each agent is initialised with its
usual mode, and corresponding attributes. Average priorities are computed over users of this mode, with
an empirical random variation between -20 and +20% to obtain heterogeneous profiles. Its trip list initially
contains only the usual mode, and its perception filter is the prototype for this mode. Its home-work
distance is initialised by a random draw with a Gaussian distribution parameterised by the mean and
standard deviation calculated for this mode, and determines its access to walking and bike. Its access to car
and bus is drawn randomly according to the probability per mode. The number of agents created allows to
smooth out the effect of randomness to observe macroscopic level effects.
2 h;ps://www.grenoble.fr/uploads/Externe/73/215_984_Grenoble-2e-ville-cyclable-de-France-pour-les-ac(f.pdf (press release) and
h;ps://www.insee.fr/fr/sta(s(ques/2557426 (INSEE sta(s(cs)
3 Online simulator: https://nausikaa.net/index.php/2024/05/28/mobility-switch-simulator/Figure 1: Netlogo simulator interface
Figure 1 shows the Netlogo simulator interface. It firstly allows the user to modify the urban layout, in an
abstract way, by directly controlling the objective values of each mode on each criterion. These abstract
modifications have the advantage of capturing all concrete urban policies (increasing cycling safety can
correspond to building cycling lanes; decreasing car comfort can capture a reduction in parking spots), but
have the disadvantage of also allowing modifications with no concrete meaning (one cannot really reduce
the ecology of walking or make driving free). In the future, the simulator should provide the player with
concrete actions choices, then translated into criteria values; but to explore the effect of biases, these
abstract actions allow greater control. Along the same lines, the user can also modify the average priority of
criteria (simulating communication campaigns, e.g. promote ecology or road safety); this is also a
simplification to give more control and visualise the influence of these on macroscopic indicators. Finally,
with the idea of exploring the impact of individuals’ biases and habits, these two aspects of reasoning can
be activated or deactivated by the user.
Once the population is initialised, each agent is represented with a shape and color corresponding to its
current mobility. They do not move, we only model their decisions. At each time step, all agents perform a
random draw to find out if they activate their habit or if they re-evaluate the 4 modes; in addition, random
events (probability 1%) can prevent an agent from taking its usual mode, to simulate possible breaks in
habits (car broken down, bus strike...). The user can also reset the habits of all the agents, to simulate a
global crisis (e.g. pandemic): past journeys are deleted, and the frequencies reset to 0, forcing all agents to
reevaluate the available modes rationally until they build up new habits. Urban layout (objective mode
values) and priorities can be changed while the simulation runs. Several graphs allow the user to visualise
the evolution of macroscopic indicators: modal distribution (percentage of agents using each mode),
satisfaction (average score of each mode for its users); and decision counts (number of routine decisions,
biased decisions, and constrained decisions).
Experiments.
In a first scenario, we want to illustrate the modal transfer when the environment evolves, and its
obstacles, notably habit. We launch a simulation then gradually increase the safety of the bike. Initially the
modal distribution remains stable, however the number of biased decisions increases (agents subjectively
under-evaluating bicycle), as well as the number of constrained decisions (agents who would prefer bicycle
but cannot access it due to distance). Gradually, some bus users convert to cycling but progress is very slow.
If habits are reset during this evolution, some agents immediately shift from the 3 other modes to cycling;
the reset forced them to re-evaluate modes and allowed them to realise whether cycling had become best.
The number of routine decisions drops to 0, while the number of biased decisions increases (perception
biases modify the evaluation) and then falls again (when new habits take over).
In a second scenario, we want to show the impact of constraints and habits on the modal shift. We launch
the simulation without perceptual bias but with only habits to isolate their effect. We gradually reduce the
comfort of the car to simulate the increase in difficulties (traffic jams, less parking spots, etc.). We observe agradual shift of motorists with the shortest home-to-work distances towards walking. We notice that the
number of forced choices increases, because motorists living further away are forced to continue using the
car while its score decreases. If comfort is further reduced, motorists living further away then gradually
switch to the bus, less well rated than walking but the only option. If habits are reset, the shift happens
instantly. Ultimately, only constrained motorists remain, who continue to use the car because they cannot
access the bus.
In a third scenario we want to show the impact of the perception filter. With the initial layout and filters
enabled, the proportions of users of each mode remain stable, corresponding to the survey results. By
disabling filters, we observe that the proportion of bus users decreases gradually (or even instantly if we
also disable habits). Indeed, the initial layout is not very favorable to the bus (the plot shows bus users have
the lowest satisfaction), often chosen by default because of distance or access constraints. The perception
bias allows bus users to rationalise their choice a posteriori to improve satisfaction.
Conclusion
In this article, we presented a modal choice model, based on a multi-criteria evaluation, with individual
priorities and biased evaluations, and integrating habits. We have described the results of a survey to
calculate the parameter values of this model, these responses being published as open data [3]. We finally
introduced a Netlogo modal choice simulator implementing this model and presented some use case
scenarios. This simulator is extremely simplified but allows the visualisation of the impact of perception
biases and habits, and therefore shows the importance of considering them in the development of urban
development policies. Future work will enrich the simulator with other decision factors, such as social
pressure.
Acknowledgements. The survey was carried out as part of Chloé Conrad’s M1 internship [11]. This work is
funded by the ANR (French National Research Agency) as part of the SwITCh project, under number ANR-
19-CE22-0003.
References
[1] Carole Adam. Interactive simulation of inertia created by mobility habits. In 54th Int. Simulation and
Gaming conf., 2023.
[2] Carole Adam. Simulating the impact of cognitive biases on the mobility transition. In 54th ISAGA
Conference (Simulation and Gaming), 2023.
[3] Carole Adam. Answers to a survey about perceptions of mobility,
2024. https://doi.org/10.57745/ELLXJF.
[4] Carole Adam, Alice Jacquier, and Franck Taillandier. Simulation à base d’agents de stratégies urbaines
pour une mobilité plus durable. Academic Journal of Civil Engineering, 40(1):33–36, 2022.
[5] Carole Adam and Franck Taillandier. Un jeu sérieux pour sensibiliser aux enjeux d’une mobilité urbaine
durable. Academic Journal of Civil Engineering, 40(1):29–32, 2022.
[6] Luca Barbarossa. The post pandemic city: Challenges and opportunities for a non-motorized urban
environment, overview of Italian cases. Sustainability, 12(17), 2020.
[7] Tilmann Betsch, Susanne Haberstroh, Andreas Glöckner, Thomas Haar, and Klaus Fiedler. The effects of
routine strength on adaptation and information search in recurrent decision making. Organizational
behavior and human decision processes, 84(1), 2001.
[8] Olivier Brette, Thomas Buhler, Nathalie Lazaric, and Kevin Maréchal. Reconsidering the nature and
effects of habits in urban transportation behavior. J. of Institutional Economics, 10(3):399–426, 2014.
[9] Chantal Brutel and Jeanne Pages. La voiture reste majoritaire pour les déplacements domicile-travail,
même pour de courtes distances. Insée Première, 835:19, 2021.[10] Aina Chalabaev et al. Les apports de la littérature et des analyses préalables pour définir une intervention
visant un report modal durable. In MSFS, 2018.
[11] Chloe Conrad and Carole Adam. Identifying and modelling cognitive biases in mobility choices.
arXiv:2402.09921, 2024.
[12] Nils Epprecht, Timo Von Wirth, Christian Stünzi, and Yann Benedict Blumer. Anticipating transitions
beyond the current mobility regimes: How acceptability matters. Futures, 60, 2014.
[13] Joël Hazan, Benjamin Fassenot, Ammar A. Malik, and Joanna Moody. What drives drivers? how to
influence mobility behaviors. Technical report, Boston Consulting Group, Henderson Institute, 2020.
[14] Marie Huyghe. Les leviers pour une mobilité en transition. Ecologik, 2018.
[15] Alessandro Innocenti, Patrizia Lattarulo, and Maria Grazia Pazienza. Car stickiness: Heuristics and biases
in travel choice. Transport Policy, 25:158–168, 2013.
[16] A Jacquier and C Adam. Choice of mobility: an agent-based approach. In SAGEO, pages 127–138, 2021.
[17] Pietro Lanzini and Sana Akbar Khan. Shedding light on the psychological and behavioral determinants of
travel mode choice: a meta-analysis. Transport. research part F: traffic psychology & behaviour, 48:13–
27, 2017.
[18] Mathieu Perona. À pied, à vélo, en bus ou en voiture : les déplacements domicile-travail en France.
Technical report, CEPREMAP, 2023. Notes Observatoire du Bien-Etre.
[19] Patrick Rérat, Lucas Haldimann, and Hannah Widmer. Cycling in the era of covid-19: the effects of the
pandemic and pop-up cycle lanes on cycling practices. Transportation research interdisciplinary
perspectives, 15, 2022.
[20] Anaïs Rocci. De l’automobilité à la multimodalité? Analyse sociologique des freins et leviers au
changement de comportements vers une réduction de l’usage de la voiture. Le cas de la région parisienne
et perspective internationale. PhD thesis, Sociologie. Université René Descartes - Paris V, 2007.
[21] Alexander J Rothman, Peter M Gollwitzer, Adam M Grant, David T Neal, Paschal Sheeran, and Wendy
Wood. Hale and hearty policies: How psychological science can create and maintain healthy habits.
Perspectives on Psychological Science, 10(6):701–5, 2015.
[22] Amos Tversky and Daniel Kahneman. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: Biases in
judgments reveal some heuristics of thinking under uncertainty. science, 185(4157):1124–1131, 1974.
[23] Uri Wilensky. Netlogo, 1999. Center for Connected Learning and Computer-Based Modeling,
Northwestern University, Evanston, IL.