Learning to Change: Choreographing Mixed Traffic Through Lateral
Control and Hierarchical Reinforcement Learning
Dawei Wang1, Weizi Li2, Lei Zhu3, Jia Pan1
Abstract—The management of mixed traffic that consists
of robot vehicles (RVs) and human-driven vehicles (HVs) at
complex intersections presents a multifaceted challenge. Tradi-
tionalsignalcontrolsoftenstruggletoadapttodynamictraffic
conditions and heterogeneous vehicle types. Recent advance-
mentshaveturnedtostrategiesbasedonreinforcementlearning
(RL), leveraging its model-free nature, real-time operation,
and generalizability over different scenarios. We introduce a
hierarchical RL framework to manage mixed traffic through
precise longitudinal and lateral control of RVs. Our proposed
hierarchical framework combines the state-of-the-art mixed
traffic control algorithm as a high level decision maker to
improve the performance and robustness of the whole system.
Our experiments demonstrate that the framework can reduce
theaveragewaitingtimebyupto54%comparedtothestate-of-
the-artmixedtrafficcontrolmethod.WhentheRVpenetration
rate exceeds 60%, our technique consistently outperforms Fig. 1: Our framework starts with a perception system gathering
conventional traffic signal control programs in terms of the both macroscopic and microscopic traffic conditions. Next, high-
average waiting time for all vehicles at the intersection. level decisions, Go/Stop, are made for the RVs. Subsequently,
the framework generates low-level longitudinal and lateral control
I. INTRODUCTION commands for the RVs. Lastly, a safety mechanism is deployed
toresolveconflictingtrafficstreamsandpreventvehiclecollisions,
With continuous advancement of autonomous driving
ensuring safety in mixed traffic control at complex intersections.
technology, the efficient management of mixed traffic that
consists of robot vehicles (RVs) and human-driven vehicles velocity, for optimizing mixed traffic flow [7], as well as the
(HVs) holds paramount significance for our future trans- examinationofhowreal-worldhumandrivingbehaviorsmay
portation system. Effective control strategies can alleviate perturb established mixed traffic control strategies [8].
congestion, reduce travel times, and enhance overall traffic Considering mixed traffic control at large-scale complex
flow, thereby enhancing the efficiency and productivity of intersections,state-of-the-artapproach[9]haspredominantly
urban transportation networks. Examining our current road entailed the generation of high-level directives, primarily in
networks, intersections serve as pivotal points where diverse the form of binary Go and Stop decisions for the RVs.
streams of traffic converge, necessitating efficient manage- However, this strategy is demonstrably inadequate given
ment to ensure smooth and safe passage for all traversing theincreasinglyintricatedynamicsinherenttocontemporary
vehicles. Mixed traffic control through RVs represents a trafficenvironments.Consequently,thereisastrongdemand
frontier in traffic engineering innovation, offering promising to expand the operative action space to incorporate com-
avenues to enhance traffic management over road networks prehensive longitudinal and lateral controls, enabling fine-
including intersections. grain traffic regulation. Such a pivotal expansion not only
Recent research has underscored the efficacy of RL in fosters enhanced maneuverability and adaptability within
orchestrating mixed traffic across a variety of scenarios, mixed traffic but also lays the foundation for realizing more
including ring roads and figure-eight configurations [1], [2], sophisticated and responsive mixed traffic control methods.
highway bottlenecks and merge points [3], [4], two-way Our goal is to enhance the existing mixed traffic control
intersections [5], and roundabouts [6]. Furthermore, alterna- methodology by broadening the action space to encompass
tive investigations delve into the utilization of image-based full longitudinal and lateral control capabilities. To achieve
observations, as opposed toprecise metrics like position and robust performance, we introduce a hierarchical framework
that integrates the established high-level decision-making
1Dawei Wang and Jia Pan are with Department of Computer Sci- processesofpriorstate-of-the-artmixedtrafficcontrolmeth-
ence and TransGP at University of Hong Kong, Hong Kong SAR odswithanovelreinforcementlearning(RL)policygenerat-
dawei@connect.hku.hk; jpan@cs.hku.hk
2Weizi Li is with Min H. Kao Department of Electrical Engineering inglongitudinalandlateralactionsfortheRVs.Additionally,
and Computer Science at University of Tennessee, Knoxville, TN, USA we implement a safety mechanism within the framework
weizili@utk.edu
to mitigate conflicts and preempt collision risks within in-
3Lei Zhu is with Department of Industrial and Systems Engineer-
tersections. An overview of our framework is provided in
ing at University of North Carolina at Charlotte, Charlotte, NC, USA
lei.zhu@charlotte.edu Fig. 1. Validated through extensive experiments under real-
4202
raM
12
]OR.sc[
1v97841.3042:viXraworldtrafficsettings,ourframeworkshowcasesaremarkable some examples, Wang et al. [19] introduce an RL-based
capability, slashing the average waiting time by up to 54% method for vehicle lane-changing maneuvers. Following
comparedtothestate-of-the-artmixedtrafficcontrolmethod high-leveldecision-making,low-levelplannersareutilizedto
by Wang et al. [9]. Notably, when the penetration rate of generate feasible driving trajectories [20], [21]. Recently, an
RVs exceeds 60%, our method surpasses traditional traffic Multi-Agent RL (MARL) algorithm is developed to address
signal control in minimizing the average waiting time for traffic on-ramp merging by enhancing safety enhancements
all vehicles at intersections. To the best of our knowl- through a priority-based supervisor [22]. As another ex-
edge, our framework is the first to achieve comprehensive ample, an MARL strategy [23] is developed to improve
control, encompassing high-level decisions along with low- collaborative sensing by integrating Graph Convolutional
level longitudinal and lateral maneuvers, within large-scale Network(GCN)[24]andDeepQ-Network(DQN)[25].The
mixedtrafficcontrol.Thiscomprehensivecontrolenablesthe studyshowspromisingoutcomesinasimulatedenvironment
coordination of hundreds of vehicles traversing unsignalized featuring a three-lane freeway with two off-ramps. While
intersections with superior efficiency. these approaches offer effective and safe planning solutions
for RVs, none of them has demonstrated the capability to
II. RELATEDWORK
scaletolarge-scalemixedtrafficscenariosthatinvolvemany
We will first introduce studies regarding mixed traffic conflicting traffic streams, thus limiting their applicability.
control and then discuss previous work on the longitudinal
and lateral planning of robot vehicles (RVs).
III. METHODOLOGY
We give an overview of our framework followed by
A. Mixed Traffic Control
explaining its components in detail.
Conventionalmethodsformixedtrafficcontroloftenhinge
A. Overview
on mathematical modeling, such as formulating the task as
an optimization problem [10]–[12]. For example, Yang et The flowchart of our framework is shown in Fig. 1,
al. [13] develop an optimization strategy to manage mixed commencing with the perception system of the RVs, which
traffic flow at unsignalized intersections. Zhao et al. [14] retrieves observations for processing. These observations
address the challenge by optimizing traffic at roundabouts. include metrics such as the average waiting time of vehicles
While effective, conventional methods usually impose ar- in a queue and the length of the queue of a traveling
tificial assumptions about traffic flow or fail to encapsu- direction. Next, the high-level decisions of each RV, i.e.,
late heterogeneous traffic behaviors. Additionally, traditional Go or Stop, are made by an RL policy. These decisions
approaches often struggle to scale and generalize across serve as recommendations for each RV, signaling whether it
different scenarios. is advisable to enter or refrain from entering an intersection
In response, recent investigations have explored the effi- based on the current traffic condition. Following the high-
cacy of reinforcement learning (RL) as a viable alternative, level decisions, the low-level planner formulates longitudi-
leveraging its capacity to navigate the intricate behaviors nal and lateral control commands, including accelerations
inherent to mixed traffic environments without being en- and lane-changing decisions, to facilitate the navigation of
cumbered by the same set of assumptions regarding traffic the RVs passing through the intersection. Finally, a safety
flow dynamics. Recent studies have showcased the promise mechanism is implemented to preempt potential collisions
of RL-based mixed traffic control across various scenar- and conflicts within the intersection, ensuring the integrity
ios, encompassing ring roads, figure-eight configurations, of the framework and the safety of all vehicles involved.
highway bottlenecks, merge points, two-way intersections,
B. Intersectional Traffic Flow
roundabouts, and larger road networks [1]–[6], [15], [16].
Furthermore, emerging research delves into alternative ap- At a standard four-way intersection, traffic movement is
proaches, such as employing image-based observations for characterized by eastbound (E), westbound (W), northbound
control [7], investigating the impact of real-world human (N), and southbound (S), with three distinct turning options
driving behaviors on control strategies [8], and using large left(L),right(R),andcross(C).Forinstance,thenotationE-
language models (LLMs) to design reward function for Lsignifiesleft-turningtraffictravelingeastbound,whileE-C
mixed traffic control [17]. Recently, Wang et al. [9] present represents crossing trafficalso moving eastbound. We define
anRL-basedmethodforcontrollinglarge-scalemixedtraffic a ‘conflict’ as the convergence of two moving directions,
in real-world traffic settings. However, their mixed traffic such as E-C and N-C. In total, we identify eight traffic
control algorithm only generates high-level decisions (Stop streams that are prone to potential conflicts: E-L, E-C, W-L,
orGo)fortheRVs.Acompletelearning-basedRVcontroller W-C, N-L, N-C, S-L, and S-C. In contrast, the conflict-free
for large-scale mixed traffic remains blank. set C is set to be {(S-C, N-C), (W-C, E-C), (S-L, N-L), (E-
L, W-L), (S-C, S-L), (E-C, E-L), (N-C, N-L), (W-C, W-L)};
B. Longitudinal and Lateral Planning of RVs
any movement pair that is not in C may lead to conflicts.
The decision-making and planning of RVs can be mainly In our formulation, we exclude consideration of right-
divided into three categories: sequential planning, behavior- turning traffic based on the observation that, in our test
aware planning, and end-to-end planning [18]. To provide environment, the majority of intersections are equipped withFig. 2: Mixed traffic control at four real-world intersections situated in Colorado Springs, CO, USA, using actual traffic data sourced
directlyfrom theseintersections. RVsare inred andHVs are inwhite. TheRV penetration rate is50%. Ourframework enablesefficient
traffic flows at these intersections without the presence of traffic lights.
dedicated right-turn lanes. Consequently, right-turning vehi- distribution over next states given the current state and
cles either bypass the intersection entirely or occupy it only action, R represents the immediate reward received after
fleetingly. Moreover, traffic regulations in many countries, taking an action in a state, π represents the parameterized
θ
such as the U.S., often exempt right-turn vehicles from stochastic policy that maps states to probability distributions
waiting for a green light, further mitigating the need to over actions, V represents the parameterized function that
ϕ
coordinate their movements with traffic from other direc- estimates the expected return from a given state under the
tions.Ourexperimentsvalidatethatthisexclusionminimally currentpolicy,Drepresentsthecollectionofpastexperiences
impacts intersection traffic control and coordination. {(state,action,reward,nextstate,doneflag)}fortrainingthe
To improve the applicability of our framework for mixed policy and value function.
traffic control, we employ actual traffic data to reconstruct Deepneuralnetworksareusedtorepresentboththepolicy
trafficpatterns,subsequentlysubjectingthemtohigh-fidelity andvaluefunctioninourformulation.Inparticular,Proximal
simulations. We simulate mixed traffic conditions by ran- Policy Optimization (PPO) [26] is employed to optimize the
domly designating each spawned vehicle to be either RV or policy. The training loss comprises both the policy loss and
HV according to a pre-specified RV penetration rate. the value function loss:
L(θ)=LPPO(θ)+LVF(θ).
C. High-level Control Decisions
We adopt the state-of-the-art mixed traffic control algo- The policy loss is formulated as
rithmfromWangetal.[9]asthehigh-leveldecisionmakerin (cid:104) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:105)
LPPO(θ)=E min r (θ)Aˆ ,clip(r (θ),1−ϵ,1+ϵ)Aˆ ,
our hierarchical RL framework. The high-level action space t t t t t
is A = {Go,Stop}. The action at i ∈ A of an RV indicates where r (θ) = πθ(at|st) is the ratio between the current
whether vehicle i should proceed into the intersection or policy πt (a |s )π aθo nld d(at th|s et) old policy π (a |s ), Aˆ is the
come to a halt at the entrance of the intersection. The high- θ t t θold t t t
level observation space, on the other hand, of RV i at t is advantage estimate, and ϵ is a hyperparameter controlling
the policy update clipping and set to 0.3 empirically. The
ot =⊕J⟨lt,j,wt,j⟩⊕J ⟨mt,j⟩⊕⟨dt⟩, (1) value function loss is given by
i j j i
(cid:104) (cid:105)
where⊕istheconcatenationoperatorandJ =8isthetotal LVF(θ)=E (V (s )−V (s ))2 ,
t θ t target t
number of traffic moving directions. Here, dt denotes the
i
distance from RV i’s current position to the intersection. We where V θ(s t) is the value predicted by the value function
additionally track the queue length lt,j, the average waiting under the current policy, and V target(s t) is the target value.
timewt,j,andtheoccupancymapmt,j foreachoftheeight Observation Space: The low-level controller’s observa-
traffic moving directions within the intersection. tion comprises both macroscopic and microscopic observa-
tions. The macroscopic observation includes
D. Low-level Longitudinal and Lateral Control
oat =⊕J⟨lt,j,wt,j⟩⊕J ⟨mt,j⟩, (2)
i j j
Uponreceivinghigh-leveldecisions,therearetwoscenar-
ios: ‘Go’ indicating the recommended entry of the RV into whichmirrorsthestructureofthehigh-leveldecisionmaker’s
the intersection and ‘Stop’ indicating the recommended halt observation. The microscopic observation consists
decision for the RV. In response to ‘Go’, we apply maxi-
oit =⊕⟨dt⟩⊕⟨clt⟩⊕⟨crt⟩, (3)
mum acceleration to the RV; when encountering ‘Stop’, the i i i i
RL-based longitudinal and lateral control policy generates where dt denotes the distance from RV i’s current position
i
appropriate acceleration and lane changes for the RV. to the intersection, while clt and crt respectively indicate
i i
Weformulatethelow-levellongitudinalandlateralcontrol whethertheleftlaneandrightlanearecontrolledbytheRV.
of RV as a Partially Observable Markov Decision Process For instance, clt is set to 1 if at least one RV is detected in
i
(POMDP) which consists 7-tuples: (S,A,T,R,π ,V ,D), the left lane of the ego vehicle, otherwise clt is set to 0.
θ ϕ i
whereS representsthesetofallpossiblestates,Arepresents Action Space: The action space is continuous and com-
the set of all possible actions, T represents the probability prises of longitudinal acceleration (acc) and lane changingReducedAverageWaitingTime(%)
ComparedtoWang[9] ComparedtoTL
Intersection229 18.98% 6.66% * * * * 0.51% 30.94%
Intersection449 31.65% 28.23% 5.74% * 79.94% 76.71% 78.76% 69.71%
Intersection332 18.48% 11.73% 35.85% 26.59% 3.94% 11.73% 20.06% 41.58%
Intersection334 38.73% 54.67% 48.32% 45.82% 17.77% 39.44% 58.34% 47.82%
RVPenetrationRate 40% 50% 60% 70% 40% 50% 60% 70%
TABLE I: Reduced average waiting time in percentage at four intersections under various RV penetration rates—calculated as (ours−
baseline)/baseline. Our method achieves comparable or superior performance to the state-of-the-art mixed traffic control algorithm
by Wang et al. [9]. Our method outperforms traffic signals when the RV penetration rate is 40% or higher in general. * indicates no
improvement over the baseline methods.
probability (lc), both ranging from -1 to 1. If lc < −0.33, A. Mixed Traffic Simulation
a left lane-changing action is initiated; if lc > 0.33, a
To enable the interaction between RVs and HVs under
right lane-changing command is issued; if lc falls within
real-world traffic settings, it is imperative to reconstruct
[−0.33,0.33], the RV will stay in its current lane.
trafficpatternsusingreal-worldtrafficdatabeforeproceeding
Reward: The reward function aims to minimize the aver- with high-fidelity simulations. We reconstruct traffic dynam-
agewaitingtimeofallvehiclesapproachingtheintersection: ics via turning count data provided by the city of Colorado
(cid:88) Springs, CO, USA1. The data record vehicle movements
r(st,at,st+1)=− w , (4)
i as well as the digital maps. Vehicles in simulation are
where w represents the normalized waiting time of all routed using jtcrouter2 based on the turning count data.
i
vehicles within the intersection control zone (see Fig. 1). Upon entering the simulation, each spawned vehicle will
be randomly assigned as either an RV or HV, determined
E. Safety Mechanism by the RV penetration rate. HVs use Intelligent Driver
Managing a multi-agent system through RL poses many Model (IDM) [30] to calculate longitudinal acceleration.
challenges[27].Apivotalandopenchallengeisthedevelop- RVs,ontheotherhand,useourhierarchicalRLframeworkto
mentofamulti-agentautonomoussystemthatisnotonlyef- decide high-level decisions and low-level controls, including
fectivebutalsoprovablysafe[28].Therefore,weimplement longitudinalaccelerationandlaterallanechanging.Examples
a safety mechanism to post-process actions generated by are shown in Fig. 2.
the hierarchical RL policy. This ensures safety by resolving
B. Baselines and Evaluation Metric
potential conflicts within the intersection.
We evaluate our proposed method using two baselines:
Thesafetymechanismcomprisesseveralspeedlimitzones
TL: the traffic signal program deployed in the city of Col-
contingentonthedistancetotheentranceoftheintersection.
orado Spring, CO, and Wang [9]: the state-of-the-art mixed
Should a vehicle exceed the specified speed limit within
trafficcontrolmethodatintersections.Themetricweemploy
these zones, automatic braking is activated to decelerate the
for evaluation is the average waiting time. The waiting time
vehicle. The speed limits are defined as
for each vehicle is defined as the cumulative time it spends
 3 m/s, if 20 m<dt <=30 m; stationary within the control zone after entering it. The
2
m/s, if 10
m<di
t <=20 m; average waiting time for an intersection is determined as the
i (5) meanwaitingtimeforallvehiclespresentatthatintersection
1
0
m m/ /s s,
,
i if
f
5 dtm <=< 5dt
i
m< .=10 m;
and inside the control zone.
i
C. Intersection Performance
Apart from managing conflicts within the intersection,
We report the results of our hierarchical RL framework at
addressingtheriskofcollisionsbetweenvehiclesisalsocru-
four real-world intersections shown in Fig. 2. All training is
cial. We delegate this responsibility to the underlying traffic
conductedusingtheInteli9-13900KprocessorandNVIDIA
simulator SUMO [29]: if an RV is on a collision trajectory,
RTX 4090 graphics card.
either longitudinally or laterally with other vehicles, SUMO
Table I presents a comparison of the results obtained
will inhibit the RV from executing the control commands
using our method and the baseline methods. The findings
from the RL policy and instead activate an emergency
demonstrate a decrease in average waiting time across all
braking maneuver to prevent the collision.
four intersections and various RV penetration rates. Our
IV. EXPERIMENTSANDRESULTS approach consistently matches or surpasses the performance
of the latest mixed traffic control algorithm by Wang et
We begin by introducing mixed traffic simulation for
al. [9]. Our method also demonstrates superior performance
evaluation. Following that, we present the baseline methods
comparedtotrafficsignalcontrol(TL),particularlywhenthe
employed and outline the evaluation metric. Finally, we
present the overall results and provide a detailed analysis 1https://coloradosprings.gov/
of the effectiveness of RV lane-changing behaviors. 2https://sumo.dlr.de/docs/jtrrouter.htmlFig.3:TheoverallresultsmeasuredinaveragewaitingtimeatfourintersectionsbetweenourtechniqueandWangetal.[9].
The red line represents the average waiting time of traffic light control baseline (TL). Our method consistently outperforms
the TL baseline when RV penetration rate reaches 60% or higher. Furthermore, in the majority of scenarios, our approach
exhibits reduced average waiting times compared to Wang under the same RV penetration rates. For intersection 449, it is
worth noting that the TL baseline has a high value of 45 seconds, thus it is excluded from the plot. This indicates that, at
intersection 449, both our technique and Wang outperform TL under all tested RV penetration rates starting at 40%. For
both intersection 332 and 334. our method consistently outperforms TL and Wang when the RV penetration rate ≥40%. In
general, our technique also demonstrates much lower variance than Wang’s, showing improved robustness and performance
in mixed traffic control as a result of incorporating lateral and longitudinal control for the RVs.
RV penetration rate exceeds 40%. An asterisk (*) denotes noting that, while Wang manages to surpass the TL baseline
cases where no improvement over the baseline methods is with a minimum RV penetration rate of 70%, our technique
observed.Thereasonsforthisphenomenonisthefollowing. alsodemonstratessuperiorityovertheTLbaselineingeneral,
Comparedtopriorresearch[9],whentheRVpenetrationrate starting from an RV penetration rate 40%.
issufficientlyhigh,theneedforlateralcontroldiminishesas Intersection 334. The results in Fig. 3 highlight the
themajorityoftrafficinthenetworkcomprisesRVs,leading superior performance of our method over the TL baseline
to natural lane regulation. Consequently, the performance and Wang across all RV penetration rates. While Wang
enhancementachievedbymitigatinglaneirregularitiesisnot starts to surpass the TL baseline when the RV penetration
substantial as the RV penetration rate increases. rate exceeds 70%, our method achieves this phenomenon
startingat40%RVpenetrationrate.Additionally,ourmethod
Intersection 229. In Fig. 3, we show our method’s per-
achieves much lower variance compared to Wang.
formance at intersection 229. The impact of varying RV
penetration rates on the average waiting time is analyzed.
D. Analysis of Lane-changing Behaviors
Overall, the average waiting time consistently decreases
Previous research by Wang et al. [9] suggest a critical
as the RV penetration rate increases from 40% to 80%,
issue: when the RV penetration rate is low, managing mixed
shown in both Wang et al. [9] and our proposed method. In
trafficthroughRVsbecomesdifficult.Thisisduetoaninflux
mostscenarios,ourmethoddemonstratesbetterperformance
of HVs will enter the intersection causing gridlocks. While
compared to Wang under equivalent RV penetration rates.
the fundamental reason is the shortage of control sources,
However, occasional exceptions are observed due to varying
i.e., limited RVs due to a low penetration rate, the absence
traffic conditions and training inconsistencies. Similar to
of lateral control could also contribute to the issue – the RV
Wang, our proposed approach surpasses the TL baseline
cannotregulatetrafficinnearbylanesbypursuingstrategical
whentheRVpenetrationrateexceeds70%.Furthermore,our
lane changing. Our framework bridges this gap, enabling
method showcases reduced evaluation variance, indicating
more precise control of traffic flows at the intersection.
notonlysuperiorperformanceoverthestate-of-the-artmixed
An example illustrating the effectiveness of our approach
trafficcontrolalgorithm[9]butalsoenhancedstabilityacross
is depicted in Fig. 4. Initially, only two RVs traveling
evaluation scenarios.
southbound are positioned in front of the entrance line of
Intersection 449. The TL baseline at this intersection is
the intersection, regulating the traffic on the two lanes. In
muchhigherthanotherintersections,i.e.,45seconds.So,we
the absence of RVs, other lanes heading southbound remain
exclude it from the plot. In other words, at this intersection,
unregulated (one of them is highlighted in yellow). These
bothourtechniqueandWangsignificantlyoutperformtheTL
lanes are at risk of HVs unexpectedly entering the inter-
baselinewhentheRVpenetrationrate≥40%.Moreover,our
section, thereby increasing the likelihood of collisions and
frameworkexhibitssuperiorperformancecomparedtoWang
conflictswithinit.Subsequently,anincomingRVapproaches
whentheRVpenetrationratesare40%,50%,60%,and80%.
the intersection and detects the existence of unregulated
Intersection 332. The results depicted in Fig. 3 illustrate lanes. Recognizing the potential risk, the RV controlled by
that across all RV penetration rates, our framework consis- our framework initiates lane changing and switches to the
tently outperforms the baseline method by Wang. It is worth left (unregulated) lane. With the presence of an RV, the laneFig. 4: Lane-changing behavior for mixed traffic control. An example shows an RV detecting an unregulated lane and subsequently
switchingtoitinordertoregulateit.Initially,withlimitedRVpresence,HVscanexploitunregulatedlanes,causingpotentialrisktothe
traffic within the intersection. This risk is resolved when an incoming RV detects it and decides to switch to the unregulated lane. As a
result, a coordinated RV fleet forms to regulate southbound lanes, effectively mitigating conflicts and enhancing traffic efficiency within
the intersection.
is now regulated. Essentially, the RV fleet collaboratively bluelinerepresentsthepercentageofunregulatedlaneswhen
acts as traffic light control, strategically obstructing all lanes our method is engaged, while the orange line signifies the
to prevent both HVs and additional RVs from entering the performance ofWang’s approach[9]. Initially,both methods
intersection. As a result, it effectively coordinates the traffic exhibit nearly 100% unregulated lanes due to the absence
flow within the intersection, improving traffic efficiency. ofvehiclesinthebeginningofthesimulation.Subsequently,
as vehicles ingress the network, this percentage drops ac-
cordingly. Notably, our framework accelerates the reduction
compared to Wang. This expedited decline is attributed to
our method’s proactive lateral and longitudinal control over
RVs, facilitating lane changes and prioritizing the regulation
of unregulated lanes wherever feasible.
V. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK
We present a novel hierarchical reinforcement learning
framework for enhancing mixed traffic control at intersec-
tionsbyintegratinghigh-leveldecisionsandlow-levellongi-
tudinal and lateral maneuvers. Additional safety mechanism
is implemented to ensure the integrity of the framework
and the safety of all vehicles crossing the intersection. We
conduct extensive experiments to validate our framework
under real-world traffic settings. Our approach demonstrates
significant improvements in reducing the average waiting
time of mixed traffic (up to 54%) compared to state-of-the-
art mixed traffic control methods, particularly in scenarios
with high penetration rates of robot vehicles. Furthermore,
our approach outperforms conventional traffic signal control
in reducing the average waiting time for all vehicles at
intersections once the penetration rate of RVs surpasses
60%. To the best of our knowledge, our framework is
the first to comprehensively control and coordinate large-
Fig. 5: Comparison of the ratio of unregulated lanes between our scale mixed traffic traversing unsignalized intersections with
method and Wang et al. [9]. The RV penetration rate is 40%. superior efficiency. The outcomes offer valuable insights for
The blue line denotes the percentage of unregulated lanes when the advancement of future intersection traffic management
our method is employed, while the orange line represents Wang’s
systems with enhanced efficiency and adaptability.
performance.Ourmethodresultsinafasterreductioninunregulated
Therearemanyfutureresearchdirections.First,weplanto
lanes due to proactively lane-changing behaviors.
testourframeworkonheterogeneoustraffic,includingtrucks,
We show more systematic analysis of RV lane-changing buses, and motorcycles. This will enable us to assess the
behaviors on regulating traffic in Fig. 5. One prominent framework’s functionality and adaptability across a diverse
factor contributing to the suboptimal performance observed rangeofvehicletypesandtrafficscenarios.Second,wewant
in prior research by Wang et al. [9] is the absence of to conduct emission analysis and pursue potential emission
lane-changing behaviors of RVs in regulating traffic. To reductions within mixed traffic. Finally, we would like to
study the effectiveness of the addition of lane-changing extend our work to cover a larger urban area by integrating
behaviors, we conduct an assessment to quantify the ratio the framework with existing large-scale traffic modeling,
of unregulated lanes during our experiments. In Fig. 5, the estimation, and simulation techniques [31]–[34].REFERENCES [22] D. Chen, M. R. Hajidavalloo, Z. Li, K. Chen, Y. Wang, L. Jiang,
andY.Wang,“Deepmulti-agentreinforcementlearningforhighway
[1] C. Wu, A. R. Kreidieh, K. Parvate, E. Vinitsky, and A. M. Bayen, on-ramp merging in mixed traffic,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
“Flow: A modular learning framework for mixed autonomy traffic,” TransportationSystems,2023.
IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.38,no.2,pp.1270–1286,2022.
[23] J. Dong, S. Chen, P. Y. J. Ha, Y. Li, and S. Labi, “A drl-based
[2] H. Wei, X. Liu, L. Mashayekhy, and K. Decker, “Mixed-autonomy
multiagentcooperativecontrolframeworkforcavnetworks:Agraphic
traffic control with proximal policy optimization,” in 2019 IEEE convolutionqnetwork,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2010.05437,2020.
VehicularNetworkingConference(VNC). IEEE,2019,pp.1–8.
[24] T.N.KipfandM.Welling,“Semi-supervisedclassificationwithgraph
[3] E. Vinitsky, K. Parvate, A. Kreidieh, C. Wu, and A. Bayen, “La- convolutionalnetworks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1609.02907,2016.
grangiancontrolthroughdeep-rl:Applicationstobottleneckdeconges-
[25] V. Mnih, K. Kavukcuoglu, D. Silver, A. Graves, I. Antonoglou,
tion,”inIEEEInternationalConferenceonIntelligentTransportation
D.Wierstra,andM.Riedmiller,“Playingatariwithdeepreinforcement
Systems,2018,pp.759–765.
learning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:1312.5602,2013.
[4] S. Feng, X. Yan, H. Sun, Y. Feng, and H. X. Liu, “Intelligent
[26] J. Schulman, F. Wolski, P. Dhariwal, A. Radford, and O. Klimov,
drivingintelligencetestforautonomousvehicleswithnaturalisticand “Proximal policy optimization algorithms,” arXiv preprint
adversarialenvironment,”Naturecommunications,vol.12,no.1,pp.
arXiv:1707.06347,2017.
1–14,2021.
[27] R.Lowe,Y.I.Wu,A.Tamar,J.Harb,O.PieterAbbeel,andI.Mor-
[5] Z.YanandC.Wu,“Reinforcementlearningformixedautonomyin-
datch, “Multi-agent actor-critic for mixed cooperative-competitive
tersections,”inIEEEInternationalIntelligentTransportationSystems
environments,” Advances in neural information processing systems,
Conference,2021,pp.2089–2094.
vol.30,2017.
[6] K. Jang, E. Vinitsky, B. Chalaki, B. Remer, L. Beaver, A. A. Ma-
[28] S. Gu, L. Yang, Y. Du, G. Chen, F. Walter, J. Wang, Y. Yang, and
likopoulos,andA.Bayen,“Simulationtoscaledcity:zero-shotpolicy
A.Knoll,“Areviewofsafereinforcementlearning:Methods,theory
transfer for traffic control via autonomous vehicles,” in ACM/IEEE andapplications,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2205.10330,2022.
InternationalConferenceonCyber-PhysicalSystems,2019,pp.291–
[29] P.A.Lopez,M.Behrisch,L.Bieker-Walz,J.Erdmann,Y.-P.Flo¨ttero¨d,
300.
R. Hilbrich, L. Lu¨cken, J. Rummel, P. Wagner, and E. Wießner,
[7] M. Villarreal, B. Poudel, J. Pan, and W. Li, “Mixed traffic control “Microscopic traffic simulation using sumo,” in IEEE International
and coordination from pixels,” in IEEE International Conference on Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 2018, pp. 2575–
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),2024.
2582.
[8] B.PoudelandW.Li,“Beyondsimulateddrivers:Evaluatingtheimpact
[30] M.Treiber,A.Hennecke,andD.Helbing,“Congestedtrafficstatesin
of real-world car-following in mixed traffic control,” arXiv preprint empiricalobservationsandmicroscopicsimulations,”Physicalreview
arXiv:2311.12261,2023.
E,vol.62,no.2,p.1805,2000.
[9] D.Wang,W.Li,L.Zhu,andJ.Pan,“Learningtocontrolandcoordi-
[31] D. Wilkie, J. Sewall, W. Li, and M. C. Lin, “Virtualized traffic at
natemixedtrafficthroughrobotvehiclesatcomplexandunsignalized metropolitanscales,”FrontiersinRoboticsandAI,vol.2,p.11,2015.
intersections,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2301.05294,2023.
[32] W.Li,D.Wolinski,andM.C.Lin,“City-scaletrafficanimationusing
[10] S.Wang,M.Shang,M.W.Levin,andR.Stern,“Ageneralapproachto statistical learning and metamodel-based optimization,” ACM Trans.
smoothingnonlinearmixedtrafficviacontrolofautonomousvehicles,” Graph.,vol.36,no.6,pp.200:1–200:12,2017.
TransportationResearchPartC:EmergingTechnologies,vol.146,p.
[33] L. Lin, W. Li, and L. Zhu, “Data-driven graph filter based graph
103967,2023.
convolutional neural network approach for network-level multi-step
[11] J.Wang,Y.Zheng,Q.Xu,J.Wang,andK.Li,“Controllabilityanalysis trafficprediction,”Sustainability,vol.14,no.24,p.16701,2022.
and optimal controller synthesis of mixed traffic systems,” in 2019
[34] K. Guo, W. Jing, L. Gao, W. Liu, W. Li, and J. Pan, “Long-
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV). IEEE, 2019, pp. 1041–
term microscopic traffic simulation with history-masked multi-agent
1047. imitationlearning,”inIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionand
[12] M.Karimi,C.Roncoli,C.Alecsandru,andM.Papageorgiou,“Coop- PatternRecognition(CVPR),2024.
erativemergingcontrolviatrajectoryoptimizationinmixedvehicular
traffic,”TransportationResearchPartC:EmergingTechnologies,vol.
116,p.102663,2020.
[13] H. Yang and K. Oguchi, “Intelligent vehicle control at signal-free
intersection under mixed connected environment,” IET Intelligent
TransportSystems,vol.14,no.2,pp.82–90,2020.
[14] L. Zhao, A. Malikopoulos, and J. Rios-Torres, “Optimal control of
connectedandautomatedvehiclesatroundabouts:Aninvestigationin
amixed-trafficenvironment,”IFAC-PapersOnLine,vol.51,no.9,pp.
73–78,2018.
[15] D.Wang,W.Li,andJ.Pan,“Large-scalemixedtrafficcontrolusing
dynamicvehicleroutingandprivacy-preservingcrowdsourcing,”IEEE
InternetofThingsJournal,vol.11,no.2,pp.1981–1989,2024.
[16] M.Villarreal,D.Wang,J.Pan,andW.Li,“Analyzingemissionsand
energyefficiencyinmixedtrafficcontrolatunsignalizedintersections,”
in IEEE Forum for Innovative Sustainable Transportation Systems
(FISTS),2024.
[17] M.Villarreal,B.Poudel,andW.Li,“Canchatgptenableits?thecase
ofmixedtrafficcontrolviareinforcementlearning,”inIEEEInterna-
tionalConferenceonIntelligentTransportationSystems(ITSC),2023,
pp.3749–3755.
[18] W.Schwarting,J.Alonso-Mora,andD.Rus,“Planninganddecision-
makingforautonomousvehicles,”AnnualReviewofControl,Robotics,
andAutonomousSystems,vol.1,pp.187–210,2018.
[19] P.Wang,C.-Y.Chan,andA.deLaFortelle,“Areinforcementlearning
basedapproachforautomatedlanechangemaneuvers,”in2018IEEE
IntelligentVehiclesSymposium(IV). IEEE,2018,pp.1379–1384.
[20] Y.Shen,W.Li,andM.C.Lin,“Inversereinforcementlearningwith
hybrid-weight trust-region optimization and curriculum learning for
autonomousmaneuvering,”inIEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceon
IntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),2022,pp.7421–7428.
[21] W.Li,D.Wolinski,andM.C.Lin,“ADAPS:Autonomousdrivingvia
principledsimulations,”inIEEEInternationalConferenceonRobotics
andAutomation(ICRA),2019,pp.7625–7631.