Politics in Games - An Overview and Classification
Lisa Gutwenger∗, Stephan Keller†, Martin Dolezal∗, Bernhard Schno¨gl†, Sebastian Rous∗, Klaus Poier∗, Johanna Pirker†‡
∗University of Graz, Austria
†Graz University of Technology, Austria
‡Ludwig Maximilian University of Munich, Germany
Abstract—The representation of politics in media influences Categorization of GamesTherearedifferentwaystocate-
societal perceptions and attitudes. Video games, as a pervasive gorizegames.Wecancategorizegamesbasedontheirprimary
form of media, contribute significantly to this phenomenon. In
purpose (entertainment vs. serious gaming) and their persua-
this work, we explore political themes within video games by
sive intent [4], [5]. Another categorization is game genres [6]
analyzing politically-themed games on game distribution plat-
forms including Steam. We conducted a statistical examination basedonthein-gameactivities.Thepopularityofgenresvaries
of games with political context to identify patterns and use this regionally, with strategy, adventure, and simulation leading in
as a basis to introduce a first taxonomy to categorize and better the DACH region, contrasting with the US preferences [7],
understandtheinterplaybetweenpoliticsandvideogames.This
[8]. We can also categorize by political dimension. This can
taxonomyoffersafirstframeworkforanalyzingpoliticalcontent
be described by analyzing the representation of governance
in games and also sets a foundation for future research in this
field. systemsingamessuchasautocracy,democracy,oraselectable
Index Terms—politics, serious games, games with a purpose system. Examples include Sid Meier’s Civilization (selectable
system), or Papers, Please! and Beholder (autocratic themes).
I. INTRODUCTION
Age Recommendations Age ratings (ESRB, PEGI, USK)
Media, especially social media in recent years, has signifi- are vital in understanding the intended audience. However,
cantlyimpactedpoliticalopinions.Manypreviouspublications these systems are not without criticism [13], raising questions
have examined the influence of platforms like Twitter and about their efficacy and relevance in the context of political
Facebook on opinion formation [1]. One medium sometimes content and potential educational experiences.
overlooked in these analyses is video games. However, an Possible Consequences The impact of gaming on younger
increasingnumberofstudiesdemonstratetheirimpactonopin- generations has been a contentious topic, often skewed to-
ion formation and address issues like radicalization through wardsnegativeconsequencessuchasisolationandaggression,
games [2]. In this work, we want to understand the represen- culminating in the WHO’s classification of ”gaming disor-
tation of politics in video games on the Steam platform and der” in ICD-11. Nevertheless, this perspective is increasingly
build an overview of future research directions. challenged [9]. Research is now focusing on specific effects,
This research intersects various interdisciplinary domains, including the influence of games on political attitudes and
aiming to unravel how politics is portrayed in video games. behaviors. Fewer studies address this compared to traditional
Our study is threefold: examining player demographics to effectslikeaggression.Bacovsky[10]investigatesthepolitical
identify the audience, exploring game characteristics to un- engagement of gamers, while Dill et al. [12] and Saleem &
derstand political representations, and investigating the po- Anderson[11]explorethereinforcementofgenderstereotypes
tential consequences of such representations in video games. and racial prejudices in games. These studies highlight the
Following, we discuss characterization categories relevant to multifaceted impact of video games, extending beyond mere
understanding the context of politics in video games. entertainment to shaping societal views and behaviors.
Tounderstandbettergameswithafocusonpoliticalcontext,
II. DISCUSSINGGAMES
we can describe different categories:
To discuss games and understand the games we will use
different categories: player demographics, categorization, age • Based on activity (e.g. simulation, strategy, action)
recommendation, and possible consequences. • Based on purpose/intend (e.g. education, understanding,
assessment, persuasion, entertainment)
Player Demographics. A comprehensive understanding of
the audience is fundamental. According to the Entertainment • Based on the player perspective (e.g. leader of a country,
civilian, neutral)
Software Association [3] (2022), 65% of adults and 71% of
minors in the US are gamers and this number is growing. • Based on the historical context, setting
Also, over the past two decades, female participation has • The representation form of the government (e.g. democ-
racy, autocracy,..)
risen, reaching near parity. However, the age distribution has
remained stable, with the average gamer being 33 years old. Based on these categories, we want to understand games
These demographic shifts are pivotal in contextualizing the with political context published on game distribution plat-
reception and impact of political content in games. forms.
4202
nuJ
11
]CH.sc[
1v97370.6042:viXraIII. ANALYSIS pricing points to the accessibility of these games for a wide
spectrum of players. Additionally, the presence of free titles
Thisstudyfocusesontherepresentationofpoliticsinvideo
inourdatasetfurtherunderscorestheinclusivityofthisgenre.
games. We initially identified a sample of politically-themed
Thehistoricalcontextoftheseanalyzedgamesrangedfrom
gamesfromtheSteamandMicrosoftStoreplatformsusingthe
modern world issues, as seen in ”Realpolitiks New Power,”
keywords”politic”,”democrats”,”republicans”,”democracy”,
to historical and futuristic scenarios in ”Supreme Ruler:
and ”dictatorship”. After a manual refinement process by
Ultimate.”This diversity in historical settings suggests that
the authors to exclude irrelevant entries and the inclusion
politicalvideogamesarenotonlyamediumforentertainment
of games from relevant literature, our analysis encompassed
but also for education and reflection on both historical and
28 games. This collection of political-themed video games
contemporary political issues. Moreover, the availability of
offers a diverse exploration of global and historical political
thesegamesonpopularplatformssuchasSteamandMicrosoft
scenarios through various gameplay styles. In table I a list of
Store indicates their widespread accessibility, catering to a
the analyzed games is given and following we discuss a few
broad audience with varying interests in political themes.
examples in more detail.
In summary, our analysis underscores the significant role
”Realpolitiks New Power” immerses players in modern
of video games as a medium for exploring and understand-
geopoliticalchallenges,encouragingthemtonavigatecomplex
ing political themes. By offering a range of genres, player
international affairs. ”Dictators: No Peace Countryballs” and
perspectives, and historical contexts, these games provide
”Tropico 6” put players in the shoes of a dictator, blending
valuable insights into the dynamics of political systems and
strategy and simulation to shape national and global politics.
decision-making processes, thereby serving as a unique blend
”SupremeRuler:Ultimate”spanshistoricalandfuturisticcon-
of entertainment and educational tool.
texts, allowing players to lead any nation through tumultuous
times, while ”Suzerain” offers a narrative-driven experience
A. Classification Criteria
as a president amidst political drama. ”Democracy 4” and
”GovernmentSimulator”offersimulationsofgoverning,with The games were systematically categorized based on mul-
the former focusing on policy-making and re-election, and tiple criteria:
the latter on managing a country’s various aspects based on • Developer studio and publisher details, including the
real data. ”World Peace General 2017” provides a strategic instructing party in case of contract development.
challenge of world domination or destruction. ”Power & • Release year to trace historical trends.
Revolution” simulates being a state head with up-to-date • Game genre and its classification as either an entertain-
global issues, including the COVID-19 pandemic, and ”Rebel ment or serious game.
Inc: Escalation” tasks players with rebuilding a region post- • Age recommendation, based on ESRB, PEGI, and USK
conflict. ”China: Mao’s Legacy” delves into historical polit- ratings.
ical drama in post-Cultural Revolution China. Other games • Nature of the game (commercial or free).
like ”Smart City Plan” and ”Workers & Resources: Soviet • Content and platform of the game.
Republic”focusoncity-buildingandmanagement,integrating
• Representation of the form of government.
political decision-making. ”The Political Process” offers an
PrevalentRegimeClassification: Initialclassificationresults
in-depth simulation of the American political system, where
reveal a balanced distribution of political themes. Approx-
players can rise through the ranks of political office.
imately 39% of the games focus on democratic systems,
In our analysis of the representation of politics in video
another 39% on autocratic systems, and the remaining 22%
games, we observed a diverse array of genres with a predom-
allow players to choosye the government form.
inant focus on simulation and strategy. This categorization
AgeRecommendationsAnalysis: Whenaggregatingthedata
alignswiththeintricatenatureofpoliticalscenariosthatthese
from all three rating systems, the average recommended age
gamesaimtosimulate.Specifically,genressuchassimulation
is approximately 11.3 years (ESRB = 12.2 years, PEGI = 9.8
games and strategy were most prevalent. These genres are
years, USK = 12.2 years).
well-suitedtoconveythecomplexitiesandnuancesofpolitical
decision-making and governance. Also Text-Adventure/RPG
B. Steam Dataset Analysis
was a relevant genre with ”Suzerain” being an example.
The data also indicated a range of player perspectives, pri- To broaden our research scope, we utilized a dataset from
marilycenteringaroundleadershiproles.Titleslike”Realpoli- Kaggle containing information on 27,000 Steam games [14].
tiks New Power”, ”Tropico 6” place players in the position Due to the dataset’s size, we relied on automated keyword
of a country’s leader, often as a dictator or president. This searches rather than manual evaluation. We found that only
choice of perspective is critical in immersing players in the 0.16% (44 out of 27,000) of the games included relevant
responsibilitiesandchallengesinherentinpoliticalleadership. keywordssuchas”democracy”,”dictatorship”,or”autocracy”,
Regarding the price range, the games varied significantly, with”autocracy”appearingonlyonce.Expandingourkeyword
with some being as economical as 0.79C, while others like list provided further insights into the prevalence of political
”Tropico 6” were priced up to 39.99C. This variation in themes in games (Figure 1).different types of games may engage with political themes
in diverse ways, which could have profound implications for
game design and the study of political socialization. The way
these games are designed and the political narratives they
choose to convey can potentially influence players’ under-
standing and engagement with political concepts.
Overall, this work presents a first overview of games and
politics context to support our understanding of the inter-
section between politics and video games but also opens up
numerous possibilities for future research that can bridge the
gap between game studies and political science. The initial
categorization of games based on political themes shows
promise. However, there’s a need for finer granularity in
categorizing political aspects to capture the subtle nuances in
different games. This refinement will enable more precise and
meaningful analysis.
REFERENCES
Fig.1. Numberofgamescontainingeachkeyword(outofn=27,000). [1] Kruse,L.M.,Norris,D.R.,&Flinchum,J.R.(2018).Socialmediaas
a public sphere? Politics on social media. The Sociological Quarterly,
59(1),62-84.
[2] Lopez Naranjo, F., Maldonado, M. A., Cuadrado, E., & Moyano, M.
(2024).VideoGamesInterventionstoReduceRadicalizationandViolent
ExtremisminYoungPeople:ASystematicReview.GamesandCulture,
15554120231223067.
[3] EntertainmentSoftwareAssociation.(2022).2022EssentialFactsAbout
the Video Game Industry. Retrieved from theesa.com/resource/2022-
essential-facts-about-the-video-game-industry/
[4] Raessens, J. & Mayer, A. (2019). Game studies and the politics of
game platforms: the challenges of researching social power structures
in computer game culture. Media, Culture & Society, 41(1), 18-35.
doi:10.1177/0163443718783557
[5] Bopp,M.(2009).Theanalysisofvideogames.LAPLambertAcademic
Publishing.
[6] Breiner,J.M.,Harkness,W.L.,Johnson,C.C.,&Koehler,M.J.(2019).
Problem formulation and cognition: A collection of research studies.
JerseyCity,NJ:EducationalTestingService.
[7] Statista. (2022). Beliebteste Genres bei Videospielen in den USA
im Jahr 2022. Retrieved from de.statista.com/prognosen/1000410/usa-
beliebteste-genres-bei-videospielen?locale=de
[8] Statista. (2022). Beliebteste Genres bei Videospie-
len in Deutschland im Jahr 2022. Retrieved from
de.statista.com/prognosen/999755/deutschland-beliebteste-genres-
bei-videospielen?locale=de
[9] Darvesh,S.,Smith,R.,Moussa,S.,Baugher,L.,&Clarke,M.(2020).
Evidence on the link between playing video games and academic
performance. Journal of Educational Psychology, 112(5), 853-864.
Fig.2. Distributionofthekeyword”democracy”acrossgamecategories. doi:10.1037/edu0000429
[10] Bacovsky, D. (2021). No Gaming, No Life? An Analysis of the
Relationship between Video Games and the Life Satisfaction of Ado-
lescents in 32 Countries. Social Indicators Research, 154, 261-285.
IV. OUTLOOK
doi:10.1007/s11205-020-02595-7
[11] Saleem, M., & Anderson, C. A. (2013). The good, the bad, and the
Thisresearchhaslaidthegroundworkforanuancedunder- uglyofelectronicmedia.InE.L.Deci,&R.M.Ryan(Eds.),Oxford
standingofpoliticalthemesinvideogamesandtounderstand handbookofhumanmotivation,(pp.518-537).OxfordUniversityPress.
[12] Dill,K.E.,Gentile,D.A.,Richter,W.A.,&Dill,J.C.(2008).Violence,
betterclassificationoptions.Weobservedaprevalenceofpolit-
sex,raceandageinpopularvideogames:Acontentanalysis.Thompson
icalthemesinvideogames,whicharerepresentedinavariety EducationalPublishing.
of forms. This diversity in representation opens questions [13] Sophie Duffy & Jeffrey Derevensky (2022) Helping parents un-
derstand the content of video games: updating the ESRB rat-
about the influence of these games on societal and political
ing system, Journal of Children and Media, 16:4, 606-612, DOI:
perceptions, particularly among younger demographics. We 10.1080/17482798.2022.2124696
can see that these games have the potential to shape the [14] N. Davis, ”Steam Store Games,” Kaggle, 2019. Available: kag-
gle.com/datasets/nikdavis/steam-store-games.
political understanding and beliefs of their players, making
this an area of interest for further exploration. Furthermore,
ouranalysisrevealedapotentialcorrelationbetweenthegenres
of these games and their political content. This suggests thatGame Name Gov Year Genre Purpose Topic
Bad News Democracy 2018 Adventure Education Disinformation
Beholder Autocracy 2016 Adventure, Strategy Empathy, Un- Regime, Privacy
derstanding
Command & Conquer (RC) Autocracy 2020 Strategy Entertainment Military RTS
Crusader Kings III Autocracy 2020 Role-Playing, Simu- Education, Historical Accuracy
lation, Strategy Entertainment
Democracy:TheIsleofFive Democracy 2020 Simulation, Strategy Discussion, Cooperation vs. Compe-
Education tition, Empathy
Democracy 4 Democracy 2022 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment Political Action, Educa-
tion Potential
Dictators: No Peace Coun- Autocracy 2020 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment Dictator Simulation
tryballs
Dope Elections Democracy 2020 Platform Political Edu- Support for Elections in
cation CH
Europa Universalis IV Autocracy 2013 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment Historical Accuracy
Frostpunk Autocracy 2018 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment Decisions about
Systems
Government Simulator Democracy 2017 Simulation, Strategy Serious Game Real World Data, Simu-
lation
Leon’s Identity Democracy 2020 Adventure Extremism Education about Radi-
Prevention calization
Power and Revolution Selectable 2016 Simulation, Strategy Serious Game Geopolitical Simulator
Realpolitiks - New Power Selectable 2018 Strategy Entertainment RTS for Macromanage-
ment
Rebel Inc: Escalation Democracy 2021 Casual Simulation, Education, Counterinsurgency
Strategy Awareness
Rogue State Autocracy 2015 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment InfrastructureandBuild-
ing Simulation
Sid Meier’s Civilization VI Selectable 2016 Strategy Entertainment, Historical Accuracy
Education
Smart City Plan Democracy 2020 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment City Planning
Superpower 2 Selectable 2004 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment Strategy Simulation
Supreme Ruler Ultimate Selectable 2014 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment Strategy Simulation
Suzerain Democracy 2020 Adventure, Role- Serious Political Decisions as a
Playing Games President
The Political Process Democracy 2019 Simulation, Strategy Education Politics Simulation
Total War: Three Kingdoms Autocracy 2019 Action Strategy Entertainment World Simulation
Tropico 6 Autocracy 2019 Simulation, Strategy Education Democracy Simulator
Urban Empire Selectable 2017 Simulation, Strategy Entertainment Strategy Decisions as a
Ruler
Voting Rush Election Game Democracy 2016 Adventure Entertainment Sorting Game
World Peace General 2017 Autocracy 2017 Strategy Entertainment Resource Management
Papers, Please Autocracy 2013 Adventure, Puzzle Education, Moral Dilemma, Deci-
Awareness sions, Immigration
TABLE I: Summary of Games with their Government Forms, Genres,
and Purposes