Making Sense of Knowledge Intensive
Processes: an Oil & Gas Industry
Scenario
Juliana Jansen Ferreira Abstract
Vinícius Segura Sensemaking is a constant and ongoing process by
Ana Fucs which people associate meaning to experiences. It can
Visual Analytics & Comprehension be an individual process, known as abduction, or a
IBM Research, Brazil group process by which people give meaning to
Avenida Pasteur, 138 - Urca Rio de Janeiro - RJ, 22290-240 collective experiences. The sensemaking of a group is
{jjansen, vboas, anafucs} @br.ibm.com influenced by the abduction process of each person
about the experience. Every collaborative process
Rogério de Paula
needs some level of sensemaking to show results. For a
Visual Analytics & Comprehension
knowledge–intensive process, sensemaking is central
IBM Research, Brazil
and related to most of its tasks. We present findings
Rua Tutóia, 1157, Paraíso São Paulo - SP, 04007-005
from a fieldwork executed in knowledge-intensive
ropaula@br.ibm.com
process from the Oil & Gas industry. Our findings
indicated that different types of knowledge can be
combined to compose the result of a sensemaking
process (e.g. decision, the need for more discussion,
etc.). This paper presents an initial set of knowledge
types that can be combined to compose the result of
the sensemaking of a collaborative decision-making
process. We also discuss ideas for using systems
powered by Artificial Intelligence to support
sensemaking processes.
This paper was presented at the Sensemaking in a Senseless World Author Keywords
workshop during the 2018 ACM CHI Conference on Human Factors in
Computing Systems. Sensemaking; abduction; knowledge-intensive process;
social-technical process; decision-making, artificial
intelligence.ACM Classification Keywords in the sensemaking process to achieve that company’s
Social and professional topics → Socio-technical systems; goal. Our findings also suggest ways of using Artificial
Human-centered computing → Empirical studies in collaborative and Intelligence (AI) powered systems in support of
social computing sensemaking processes.
Introduction In this position paper, we present the related work for
According to Weick and Meader ([7], p. 232) sensemaking in knowledge-intensive contexts. Then,
sensemaking is the process of constructing “moderately we describe our fieldwork. After that, we present our
consensual definitions that cohere long enough for findings from the analysis of fieldwork data. And, in the
people to be able to infer some idea of what they have, last section, we discuss the findings, our ongoing
what they want, why they cannot get it, and why it related research, and next steps.
may not be worth getting in the first place.” In
Related work
professional practices, it is commonly related to
The sensemaking process has strong social
decision-making processes [6, 9], which directly affect
characteristics when, for instance, people face
business success. Several practices have challenges
obstacles and impasses [2]. In attempting to overcome
regarding sensemaking. Software development, for
them, people may try to answer a set of tacit
example, is a very social-technical process which
questions, such as, what is stopping me, what I can do
sensemaking goes from the early stages (e.g.
about it, and where I can find assistance in choosing
requirement elicitation) through software deploy and
and taking an action [1]. In the context of decision-
homologation. The development team among
making, which may present consequences related to
themselves [8] and with users are constantly looking to
how people surpass those obstacles and impasses, that
reach a common ground about innumerous impasses.
sensemaking may be more sensitive (e.g. decisions
For knowledge-intensive processes, sensemaking regarding people security, large amount of money,
appears even during the definition of the process itself. etc.).
For instances of these processes, the sensemaking is
Schön [6] says that sensemaking processes in
central. All people involved in that process need to be
professional practices are motivated by scenarios of
aligned and have a common understanding about the
complexity, instability, and uncertainty, combined with
sensemaking process results. Our sensemaking
indeterminacies and value conflicts. Uncertainty and
scenario was identified during a fieldwork in an Oil &
the need to making decision are characteristics of such
Gas company. We collected the data from 9 interviews
scenarios [9]. The sensemaking of a group is influenced
with interpreters with different formations,
by each person’s abduction process about the scenario
backgrounds, and industry experiences. Our findings
and the decision to be made. Abduction is the process
unveiled different types of knowledge that comprise
of forming explanatory hypotheses [4]. It is important
their sensemaking process. Those types of knowledge
for the study of meanings people assign to any
may help to identify the people who should be involvedexperience because it describes the logic of human involved may not be formally defined and may be
sensemaking, from practical mundane situations to identified as the process scenario unfolds [5].
more elaborate argumentation [3].
Our sensemaking fieldwork scenario
Sensemaking is intrinsic to software design and Our fieldwork to discuss sensemaking scenario is a
development processes. People need to make sense of knowledge intensive processes related to the seismic
a problem context, then design and build a solution for interpretation1 in an Oil & Gas company. Seismic
that problem, which can be, for example, a piece of interpretation is a central process in the Exploration &
software. The design rationale tells the story of that Production industry and its main goal is support other
process. From problem to solution, all involved people decision-making processes by reducing uncertainty. To
participate in sensemaking so as to attend a client’ achieve that goal, different people engage in multiple
requirement. Designers use different support tools (e.g. informal interactions and collaboration sessions,
whiteboard, flipcharts, wireframes, storyboards, etc.) to embedding biases, decisions, and reputation. Seismic
register a common understanding [8] and communicate interpretation is the process of inferring the geology of
the results of each step of their design sensemaking a region at some depth from the processed seismic
process. Software developers externalize their survey. A seismic survey is a data set of soundwaves
sensemaking relative to the users’ problems in different refracted and reflected through Earth’s crust measured
artifacts throughout the development process. They and recorded respect from a particular area of the
create documents, conceptual models, lines of code, Earth's surface, to evaluate the subsurface2. Figure 1
etc. to communicate their understanding to other and Figure 2 show examples of seismic data lines,
developers and also to end-users [3]. which is a portion of a seismic survey.
Software development scenario presents somehow a
structured process, but when the scenario is associated
with a knowledge-intensive process, the sensemaking
plays the role of the process itself. A knowledge-
intensive process is characterized by activities that
cannot be planned in advance, may change on the fly
and are driven by the contextual scenario in which the
process is embedded. Who should be involved and who
should be the right person to execute a particular step
are dictated by the scenario. Plus, the set of users
1 http://wiki.aapg.org/Seismic_interpretation 2 http://www.glossary.oilfield.slb.com/Terms/s/
seismic_survey.aspxHe collects more evidence to show to his peers in a
review meeting.
Figure 1. Seismic image example (Netherland - Central Graben
– inline 474)3
To perform a seismic interpretation, the interpreter
Figure 2. Same seismic line as Figure 1 with different
(which can be a geologist or a geophysicist) gets the
visualization characteristic3
seismic image and analyzes it based on a set of other
knowledges, from papers, reference books, knowledge To support his salt diapir hypothesis, Paul looks for
from previous projects, etc. In our sensemaking papers relating the Central Graben basin in the North
scenario, we have a fictional interpreter called Paul. He Sea to the salt diapir geological formation. He finds
analyzes the seismic image and identifies a particular papers, such as, “Geometry and late-stage structural
geological formation called salt diapir (Figure 1). He evolution of Central Graben salt diapirs, North Sea” 6 ,
knows that this kind of formation is frequently related which support his hypothesis of salt presence, with top
to regions that present potential for reservoir of salt indication in Figure 3.
hydrocarbonate, which means presence of oil or gas
that can be explored and provide revenue. Paul combines what he discovered in his interpretation
with the knowledge he acquired from the experiences
After raising the hypothesis of a salt diapir existence, of previous projects, documents, and his personal
Paul plays with seismic data using different filters and notes. He also talks to Gary, another interpreter, who
image representation (Figure 2) in different tools (e.g. worked in another project on the Central Graben basin
Petrel4, Paradigm5, etc.) to check if there are more a few years ago, to collect more information about that
visual evidences of that formation in the seismic data. basin. Once Paul is confident about his salt diapir
3 Images taken from the Open Seismic Repository, a free and 5 http://www.pdgm.com/solutions/seismic-processing-and-
public data set, of the Netherlands Offshore F3 Block - imaging/
https://opendtect.org/osr /
6 I Davison, I Alsop, P Birch, et al. 2000. Geometry and late-
4 https://www.software.slb.com/products/petrel stage structural evolution of Central Graben salt diapirs, North
Sea. Marine and Petroleum Geology 17, 4: 499–522.hypothesis, he puts together a report to discuss with We anonymized the fieldwork data to protect our
his peers. He prepares a presentation with his participant’s identities and any confidential information
assessment about investing money on Central Graben or data. This did not impact our findings or discussions.
basin area, showing all his steps to get to the
hypothesis and the related evidence of return-of- Findings related to sensemaking
investment. In the fieldwork, we identified two moments where the
sensemaking needs to be externalized in some way: 1)
when Paul puts together a report to be reviewed by his
peers (individual sensemaking), and 2) when all
interpreters involved in the review need to decide about
the investment in the investigated area (collective
sensemaking). This scenario in the Oil & Gas industry
reveals a significant and distinct system of
collaboration. Given the intrinsic risk and uncertainty
properties of seismic interpretation, we observed that
combining efforts in a teamwork is a way to construct a
better supported model and, in a simplified vision,
share responsibility over decisions in an Oil & Gas
project.
Throughout the interpretation process, the
Figure 3. Seismic line interpretation presented in paper about
salt diapirs in Netherland - Central Graben6 sensemaking is built with different types of knowledge.
The analyzed data from fieldwork allowed us to define
In the review meeting, there are a group of interpreters
three types of knowledge necessary in the process.
with different backgrounds, experiences, and
These knowledges combined construct the substantial
formations (geologist or geophysicists). Paul presents
asset of information used in the seismic interpretation
his findings, illustrating and sustaining his hypothesis
process. The types of knowledge are:
with a set of evidences. All interpreters participating in
the review meeting need to get into a common ground Domain knowledge – It concerns the information
about Paul’s findings in Central Graben basin. They someone knows about the activity he/she executes in
must decide if the company should invest in that area the project. For instance, an interpreter has a domain
or not. That decision is associated with the spending of knowledge of seismic image interpretation.
millions of dollars. They want to invest in areas that will
eventually have large revenue, generating company’s Context knowledge – Some people might have a vast
business value. experience in a specific context, such as a country, aregion, a field or a basin. This knowledge enables some As we described, individualities are a significant part of
inference of geological properties in a project. a team’s construction. As a teammate starts working in
a project, his/her inputs contribute to the workflow of
Historical knowledge – In the Oil & Gas industry it is data and expands the project’s resources
not unusual to observe experts that resort to previous (sensemaking) according to its knowledge type:
similar projects and apply prior learnings and domain, context, or historical. For instance, a less
knowledge while creating a new model. The history of experienced interpreter (Figure 4, A) may consult a
someone’s career in this industry matters in a very
significant way.
People with different profiles regarding types and levels
of knowledge are responsible of building data resources
for a project. This data stands for a result of what we
call “collaborative knowledge construction” and intends
to minimize uncertainties related to the project.
Participants in our fieldwork highlighted this
“collaborative knowledge construction”:
It always happens as a symbiosis. I'm not here working
statically. I work with a geologist to have the
information, to know what’s his opinion, what he thinks
about my project. 90% of the time the discussion ends
with these people: myself, Tom, Mary, and Mike. The
geologist is also always present. (Participant #1)
We work very close to a lot of them (interpreters). They
are geophysicist... petrophysicist too...very close of all!
We rely on them all. We integrate. (Participant #2)
Figure 4. Collaborative Knowledge Construction
The quotes above show the cooperative aspect of the
seismic interpretation and model creation process. colleague with context knowledge (Figure 4, B) to
Discussions, consulting, and feedback are some of the gather more significant data about the basin in which
systematically identified routines. We identified some his project is situated. Other colleagues with historical
interesting characteristics in that sensemaking process knowledge might collaborate (Figure 4, C, D)
of collaborative knowledge construction and categorized contributing to a much more structured information
them as showed in Figure 4. network that will grow dynamically, resulting in a lower
risk decision making situation.We confirm that one person might be required or was 5%. So, I realize with additional data that we need
demanded to participate in a team, considering all a new cutoff of 10% because 5% is not enough. There
aspects of his/her professional profile. A specific are adjustments to make. If this is not reported and
experience or past participation in the same or tracked, we lose information and it has a direct impact
analogue region is a strong reason for a contribution. on the final volume we calculate. (Participant #2)
Findings also defined profile needs. Specific experiences
establish key players in the process, as we might During the sensemaking process, the execution and its
observe in the excerpts below: results should consistently be reviewed and adjusted
according to the accumulated knowledge. Quality check
We ask for a participant according to what was found… is an established practice that clearly reduces risk along
types of gases, fluids etc. (Participant 3) the project.
Although they (other team) know how to calculate
We always try to set some criteria within a project. If
volume data conversions, they might sometimes not
it’s wrong it needs to stand consistently wrong so it’s
have sensitivity to realize if values are correct
much easier to get it corrected in the future. (…) When
(Participant #1)
analyzing uncertainty, we evaluate the volumes and we
have 4 to 5 controlling parameters. Our job is always to
I did take part in several studies so I already have
integrate more data to reduce uncertainty. (Participant
many case studies in my head (Participant #4)
#2)
The whole sensemaking process in our scenario is
Findings related to sensemaking
shrouded in uncertainty, so all stages need to be
The size of the Oil & Gas company (not a big company)
composed of pieces of evidence, which must be
influences the close collaborative interaction among
traceable at any time to support someone else’s
people. It helps the sensemaking process by knowing
decision or next step:
who to look for if a certain knowledge is needed in a
project. Some have experience in different phases in
When I receive the information, if it is not properly
the process, so those have an overall idea of the
audited or if we can’t track it, I take a risk using these
sensemaking necessary for making a decision in a
parameters. Tracking the work is very important for us.
project.
This will be successively accumulated (Participant #2)
The most interesting quotes were from people in the
Let’s suppose a colleague has used a cutoff he
middle of the process, those who rely heavily on other
considered the best choice for that project. Then I start
people assessment (individual sensemaking) to make
using a cutoff that doesn’t correspond at all with the
their own evaluation and send it to someone else. For
first one. For instance, if the rock does not have a
those people, tracing the data is very important. The
minimum porosity of 5%, it is so closed up that it
doesn’t interests us. A petrophysicist said the cutoffsensemaking process register is a huge and crucial become increasingly more complex and nuanced.
challenge. Therefore, the sensemaking related to complex
processes can benefit from AI to address situation like
Different profiles act on different parts in the process. the usage of large amounts of data, make relations
Details about people’s profile (geologist, petrophysicist, among data that people cannot do without
etc.) interfere in the sensemaking process. The computational aid, and so on.
identification of key people in a sensemaking process
might increase the success of the process result. We have been working on a context-aware advisor
powered by artificial intelligence technology for
Remarks and future work supporting knowledge-intensive processes [10]. The
Our fieldwork was executed in a small Oil & Gas idea of a context-aware advisor is to associate
company. In that context, people somehow know who knowledge from different domains, tasks, events, and
to look for in specific situations or decisions. Also, due contacts that are related to a user. A context-aware
to the small company context, people have an idea in advisor is an assistant, but it knows different contexts
which project colleagues are involved in that moment. of the user’s life: work, personal, hobbies, routines,
However, the current context of a company does not etc. It has the common features of an assistant like
give any indication about a person previous experience Google Assistant or Siri, but it can set its “mind” to
in other companies (historical knowledge), with more specific contexts and partner up with user to
other geological contexts (context knowledge), or execute a task. For example, a HCI researcher has her
other phases in the Oil & Gas decision-making process own annotated data collected throughout his research
(domain knowledge). That knowledge could enrich life. What if she could get a notification about of a new
the sensemaking of future projects by involving people paper that relates the same concepts that she
with the necessary knowledge to make better decisions. commented on another paper? It would be nice, right?
Our findings indicated the need of tracking resources to References
support the sensemaking process for decision-making 1. Albert M Selvin, Simon J Buckingham Shum, and
Mark Aakhus. 2010. The practice level in
at Oil & Gas industry. People rely on others
participatory design rationale: studying practitioner
sensemaking results to build their own. To trust the
moves and choices. Human Technology: An
input for their individual sensemaking, people need to
Interdisciplinary Journal on Humans in ICT
verify the sensemaking traces of that input. Environments.
2. Brenda Dervin. 1998. Sense‐making theory and
We are currently studying how Artificial Intelligence
practice: an overview of user interests in
(AI) Powered Systems could impact the sensemaking knowledge seeking and use. Journal of Knowledge
process in a knowledge-intensive context. With the Management 2, 2: 36–46.
rapid development and adoption of AI Powered
3. C.S. de Souza, R.F.G. Cerqueira, L.M. Afonso,
Systems, the humans-machines relationship has R.R.M. Brandão, and J.S.J Ferreira. 2016. SoftwareDevelopers As Users Semiotic Investigations in
Human-centered Software Development. Springer-
Verlag New York Inc.
4. Charles Sanders Peirce. 1974. Collected papers of
Charles Sanders Peirce. Harvard University Press.
5. Claudio Di Ciccio, Andrea Marrella, and Alessandro
Russo. 2015. Knowledge-Intensive Processes:
Characteristics, Requirements and Analysis of
Contemporary Approaches. Journal on Data
Semantics 4, 1: 29–57.
6. D. A. Schön. 1983. The reflective practitioner: how
professionals think in action. Basic Books, New
York.
7. Karl E Weick and David K Meader. 1993.
Sensemaking and group support systems. Group
support systems: New perspectives: 230–252.
8. Marian Petre and André van der Hoek, eds. 2014.
Software designers in action: a human-centric look
at design work. CRC Press, Taylor & Francis Group,
Boca Raton.
9. Mark Aakhus. 2003. Neither naïve nor critical
reconstruction: Dispute mediators, impasse, and
the design of argumentation. Argumentation 17, 3:
265–290.
10. Vinícius Segura, Juliana Jansen Ferreira, Ana Fucs,
Márcio Moreno Ferreira, Rogério de Paula, and
Renato Cerqueira. 2018. CoRgI: Cognitive
Reasoning Interface. Proceedings of 20th
International Conference on Human-Computer
Interaction (to appear).