Technological Shocks and Algorithmic Decision Aids
in Credence Goods Markets
Alexander Erlei∗ Lukas Meub†
Abstract
In credence goods markets such as health care or repair services, consumers
rely on experts with superior information to adequately diagnose and treat
them. Experts, however, are constrained in their diagnostic abilities, which
hurts market efficiency and consumer welfare. Technological breakthroughs
that substitute or complement expert judgments have the potential to alleviate
consumer mistreatment. This article studies how competitive experts adopt
novel diagnostic technologies when skills are heterogeneously distributed and
obfuscated to consumers. We differentiate between novel technologies that
increase expert abilities, and algorithmic decision aids that complement expert
judgments,butdonotaffectanexpert’spersonaldiagnosticprecision. Weshow
that high-ability experts may be incentivized to forego the decision aid in order
to escape a pooling equilibrium by differentiating themselves from low-ability
experts. Results from an online experiment support our hypothesis, showing
that high-ability experts are significantly less likely than low-ability experts to
invest into an algorithmic decision aid. Furthermore, we document pervasive
under-investments, and no effect on expert honesty.
JEL codes. C91, C92, C72, D82
Keywords. Credencegoods,expertability,diagnosticuncertainty,technology,
decision aid, experiment
∗Correspondingauthor. ChairforEconomicPolicyandSMEResearch,Georg-AugustUniversity
of Goettingen. alexander.erlei@wiwi.uni-goettingen.de
†Institute for Small Business Economics (ifh), Georg-August-University Goettingen.
We gratefully acknowledge financial support by the Federal Ministry of Education and Research,
project ”Handwerk mit Zukunft (HaMiZu)”, grant number 02K20D001.
4202
naJ
13
]NG.noce[
1v92971.1042:viXraCredencegoodsmarketsarecharacterizedbysevereinformationasymmetriesbetween
experts and consumers. This often translates into market inefficiencies, with experts
either resorting to insufficient treatments, or using their information advantage to
overcharge consumers, e.g. for unnecessary services. Due to the ubiquity of expert
services throughout important economic decision domains such as medicine, law, fi-
nancial advice or accounting, these patterns are highly consequential, and very costly
for both consumers and the overall economy. The theoretical literature usually at-
tributes these adverse outcomes to expert fraud. That is, given the right incentives,
experts would behave ”honestly” and treat consumers perfectly. However, in reality,
a second factor that can severely inhibit the provision of high-quality services is the
expert’s diagnostic ability. While this is obvious in a one-shot environment, the infor-
mation asymmetry in credence goods markets generally precludes many consumers
from adequately judging the quality of a performed service ex post. This reduces
their ability to effectively discipline experts, who in turn have little incentive to in-
vest in their abilities. For example, Zhi et al. (2013) document an under-utilization
rate of 44.8% for 46 of the most commonly used diagnostic rests between 1997 and
2012. Simultaneously, around 30% of health expenditures in the US are used for non-
beneficial interventions (Brody, 2010). Several studies show the detrimental effect of
insufficient skills on misdiagnoses as well as faulty prescription of aggressive medica-
tion such as antibiotics (Chan et al., 2022; Xue et al., 2019; Currie and MacLeod,
2017). Field experiments in the car repair industry point to under-treatment rates
of around 75% (Schneider, 2012), as well as a negative correlation between compe-
tency and low-quality services (Rasch and Waibel, 2018). In auditing, heterogeneity
in expert ability forces consumers to pay high premiums for skilled service providers
(Aobdia et al., 2021).
Possibly the most promising solution to these entrenched quality issues are technolog-
ical breakthroughs, specifically in algorithmic decision systems. Even today, predic-
tion models complement or substitute human judgments in many professional fields,
including legal search and bail decisions (Kleinberg et al., 2018), clinical diagnosis,
medical scans (Topol, 2019) or financial advice (Brenner and Meyll, 2020). Large
language models such as GPT-4 are increasingly able to assist lawyers in discovering
relevant information, generate and check legal documents, or predict court outcomes
(Alarie et al., 2018). According to a study by the Michigan Legal Help Program,
clients with access to a legal advice software were equally successful as clients with
an attorney when filing for divorce (Sandefur, 2020). Machine learning models have
1been shown to substantially exceed physicians in predicting heart attacks by avoiding
faulty human heuristics (Mullainathan and Obermeyer, 2022), and provide improved
cancer screening (Daysal et al., 2022). However, in order to actually realize these
potentially large welfare gains, experts need to adopt algorithmic decision systems at
scale. If that happens, or how long it might take, is an open, but very consequen-
tial question. Humans appear to have persistent biases against algorithmic decisions,
especially once they (inevitably) observe errors (Dietvorst et al., 2015). There are
also reputational concerns. Relying on an algorithmic decision system precludes the
expert from sending a competence signal, and may well indicate the opposite (Arkes
et al., 2007; Dai and Singh, 2020).
In this paper, we experimentally investigate the effects of technological shocks on
verifiable credence goods markets with diagnostic uncertainty and obfuscated, het-
erogeneous (high vs. low) expert abilities. Our experimental setup differentiates
between two different phases. In a first phase, expert abilities are exogenous, and
cannot be improved through investment. Contrary to prior experiments on credence
goods, experts diagnose consumers problems by completing a short prediction task.
High-ability experts are able to utilize more input variables than low-ability experts.
All diagnoses are uncertain. Consumers can never observe an expert’s ability type.
This traps high-ability experts in a pooling equilibrium with low-ability experts that
precludes them from exploiting their skill advantage. The second phase simulates
an external technological shock. Depending on treatment, experts receive the option
to increase their diagnostic precision by either (1) investing into their own abilities
(Skill) or (2) investing into an algorithmic decision aid (Algorithm). This allows us to
capture some distinct features of algorithmic decision aids, and compare them with
a baseline where technological improvements are perfectly predictable and quantifi-
able. Technological investments are always transferred onto consumers via prices,
representing e.g. many medical situations in which certain tests are not covered by
insurance. We hypothesize that high-ability experts may be incentivized to forego the
algorithmic decision aid, but not the skill investments, in order to signal consumers
their personal ability type. The intuition is that with decision aids, an expert’s per-
sonal ability type can still play a role in the consumer’s choice process. Decision aids
carry uncertainty, because consumers cannot perfectly predict whether an expert is
gonna (correctly) utilize the system’s information. Consumers also know that high-
ability experts derive relatively less benefits from the decision aid, and may therefore
rather compete through lower prices. Low-ability experts, on the other hand, cannot
2afford to imitate non-investing high-ability experts in the presence of Bayesian con-
sumers. This allows high-ability experts to escape the prior equilibrium, and then
exploit their skill advantage. To the best of our knowledge, this is the first paper to
analyze obfuscated expert abilities as a potential barrier to technological adoption in
professional services. Second, our experiment also empirically analyzes the efficiency
of credence goods markets when experts are heterogeneous and diagnosis is uncertain,
as well as the concurrent efficacy of expert investments after a technological shock.
Experimentalresultsconfirmtheimportanceofobfuscatedexpertabilitytypesforthe
costly adoption of algorithmic decision aids. In line with our predictions, there are no
differences in investment behavior between ability types for Skill, whereas high-ability
experts are much less likely to purchase the algorithmic decision aid than low-ability
experts. Furthermore, high-ability experts who forego the algorithm exhibit different
price-setting patterns from those who decide to invest, suggesting signalling behavior.
Overall, the market is remarkably efficient, with almost full consumer participation
despite common under- and overtreatment. Experts generally under-invest, which
may be partially driven by consumers not rewarding beneficial investment patterns.
Investments tend to shift the expert’s price menus towards more self-serving ones that
reward fraudulent undertreatment.
Our paper relates to the literature on credence goods markets with diagnostic uncer-
tainty. Most articles are theoretical, showing how price competition may negatively
affect diagnostic precision when experts need to exert effort (Pesendorfer and Wolin-
sky, 2003), that separating diagnosis and treatment can achieve first-best outcomes
when consumer evaluations are subjective (Bester and Dahm, 2018), or that fraud-
sensitive penalties can discipline experts whose diagnoses require proper incentives
(Chen et al., 2022). In recent empirical work, Balafoutas et al. (2020) show in a lab-
oratory experiment that diagnostic uncertainty decreases efficient service provision
and consumer market entry. Insurances reduce investments into diagnostic preci-
sion, while pro-social experts invest more. There is also evidence that diagnostic
uncertainty does not affect expert dishonesty or consumer trust, while reputation
mechanisms remain beneficial for overall market efficiency (Tracy et al., 2023).
A second relevant string is the literature on heterogeneous expert abilities on cre-
dence goods markets. Prior theoretical work shows that efficient equilibria are always
possible with heterogeneous, obfuscated expert abilities, but inefficient ones also ex-
ist (Liu et al., 2020). Incentives to invest into expert abilities may break down in
the presence of discounters (Dulleck and Kerschbamer, 2009), and heterogeneous cost
3functions generally prevent first-best solutions (Hilger, 2016; Frankel and Schwarz,
2014). Schneider and Bizer (2017a) find that in the presence of low-ability experts
who always misdiagnose consumers without exerting effort, a sufficient number of
high-ability experts allows for a second-best equilibrium without policy intervention.
Empirically, they show with a laboratory experiment that high-ability experts invest
less than theoretically predicted, that the market is more efficient than predicted, and
that price competition hurts overall welfare (Schneider and Bizer, 2017b).
Third and finally, this article contributes to the literature on decision aids in profes-
sional contexts. Especially in the medical literature, it is a widespread sentiment that
experts who strongly rely on complementary decision expertise e.g., through labora-
tory testing, tend to be less competent (Schroeder et al., 1974; Daniels and Schroeder,
1977;Yeh,2014;Halletal.,2019;Miyakisetal.,2006;Doietal.,2021;Groopmanand
Prichard, 2007). There is evidence that both patients and peers derogate the diagnos-
tic ability of physicians who rely on diagnostic aids (Cruickshank, 1985; Arkes et al.,
2007; Promberger and Baron, 2006; Shaffer et al., 2013; Wolf, 2014). Patients have
formulated preferences for physicians using intuition-based diagnoses versus statisti-
cal models (Eastwood et al., 2012) and general aversions towards statistical methods
(Dawes et al., 1989). While we do not measure consumers preferences or attitudes
towards decision aids, we do study how experts may strategically avoid algorithmic
support systems in order to influence consumer beliefs about the expert’s ability type.
Rather than projecting a general distrust of technology, we thereby explore another
possibility why the adoption of algorithmic systems may lag behind the optimal in-
vestment path. Skilled experts use the appearance of a novel diagnostic tool to reduce
consumer uncertainty about their ability and thereby differentiate themselves from
low-ability experts.
1 The Market
We study a credence goods market with competing experts who are not liable for
offering insufficient treatments. Consumers know that they have a big problem with
probability h or a small problem with probability (1-h). Once consumers approach
an expert, they are committed to receive the recommended treatment under the
offered price, meaning there is no separation of diagnosis and treatment, and con-
sumers cannot consult other information sources. Afterwards, consumers can verify
the treatment and observe their payoff. If the problem is solved, consumers receive
4a payoff of v, if it is not solved, they earn nothing. We assume that indifferent con-
sumers choose to visit the expert. Similarly, experts who are indifferent between
cheating and treating the consumer honestly always choose the correct treatment.
There are two commonly known expert types, high-ability (H, with probability γ)
and low-ability (L, with probability 1 − γ) experts, who differ in the probability to
perform a costless correct diagnosis: z ∈ [0.75,1] vs. q ∈ [0.5,0.75]. Let i ∈ {H,L}
and k ∈ {z,q}. Experts always charge for the implemented treatment (verifiability),
and a high quality treatment HQT (low quality treatment LQT) treatment induces
costs of c¯ (c), with c¯> c. The HQT solves both problems, the LQT only solves the
¯ ¯
small problem. Expert type ability probabilities are common knowledge. Consumers
therefore consider two possible types of misdiagnosis: diagnosing a major problem
when they actually have a minor problem, and diagnosing a minor problem in case
of a major problem. Consumers cannot observe an expert’s ability type. They can,
however, identify each individual expert, allowing for reputation. It is by assumption
always profitable for the expert to treat the consumer because v > c¯. Experts choose
apricemenuP = (p¯,p)afterlearningabouttheirtype, withp¯(major treatment) ≥ p.
¯ ¯
Investments. After n rounds, experts can choose to increase their diagnostic preci-
sion k for a fixed fee d. Investments automatically increase P by d. We assume that
the low-ability expert matches the high-ability expert’s skill by investing in the new
technology. Thus, the low-ability expert improves their diagnostic precision by an
additional z−q for any chosen precision level. There are two reasons for that. First,
in many cases, low-ability experts presumably make mistakes that are comparatively
easy to eliminate. This also implies low costs. Second, investing specifically in tan-
gible new technology like an algorithmic decision system does not only complement
the expert’s diagnosis, but often serves as an imperfect substitute for it Doyle Jr et
al. (2010); Dai and Singh (2020). Assuming that the low-ability expert’s mistakes
are relatively easy to fix, we’d expect algorithmic decision aids to mostly eliminate
them.1
1Even if the assumption that low-ability experts completely catch up to high-ability experts
might be too strong for many real-life cases, it is almost certainly true that the marginal benefits of
algorithmic systems will on average be larger for low-ability experts.
52 Experimental Design
We conduct two treatments of a pre-registered between-subject (Skill vs. Algorithm)
online group experiment where three experts compete over three clients. The exper-
imental parameters are fixed across treatments. Consumers have a big problem with
probability h = 0.4, receive v = 150 if their problem is solved, and earn σ = 15 when
choosing the outside option. The cost of providing the LQT is c = 20, the cost for the
¯
HQT is c¯= 60. Experts choose between three price vectors. The price for the HQT
is p¯= 100 and fixed. For Pm, we set p = 40; for Pe, we set p = 60; and for Ps, we set
¯ ¯
p = 80. Experts always have a markup of 40 for the HQT, and markups of 20/40/60
¯
for the LQT when choosing Pm/Pe/Ps. In each group, there are 2 low-ability ex-
perts and 1 high-ability expert. Low-ability (High-ability) experts receive the correct
signal with a probability of 50% (75%). Investing into additional diagnostic precision
costs d = 10 and increases an expert’s diagnostic precision to k = 0.9. Importantly,
investments also automatically increase p and p¯by 10 Coins, meaning that consumers
¯
pay for improved diagnoses. We apply the following conversion rate: 100 Coins = 60
cents. Data from 300 participants (40% female) was collected on Amazon Mechanical
Turk (MTurk) using oTree (Chen et al., 2016) and CloudResearch (Litman et al.,
2017). All participants are vetted for quality by CloudResearch, completed at least
50 prior tasks on MTurk with a minimal approval rating of 90%, and reside in the
US. The base payment was $4.50.
2.1 Procedure
Subjects play 25 rounds in groups of six. The first 10 rounds are constant across
treatments and always follow the same sequence. Experts choose their price vector,
and then diagnose all three consumers by completing a short prediction task. Here,
high-ability experts use 3 out of 5 possible input factors, and low-ability experts
use 2 input factors to identify the problem. Input numbers are pre-filled for each
expert, who automatically make a prediction by clicking on a ”diagnose” button.
Then, experts receive a diagnostic signal that depends on their ability type. Finally,
experts choose for each consumer whether they want to implement the HQT or the
LQT, and proceed to a summary screen that shows how many consumers approached
them and how much money they made that round. Consumers first decide whether
they want to leave the market, or choose one of the three experts. Consumers do
not observe an expert’s ability level, but they can identify each expert, which allows
6for reputation building. After choosing an expert or leaving the market, consumers
wait to be treated and proceed to a summary screen that shows which expert they
approached in this round (as well as in all previous rounds), what prices the expert
chose, and how much money they earned.
After 10 rounds, all subjects are informed that experts now have the opportunity to
invest into their diagnostic precision. There are two treatments. In Skill, subjects
either learn that experts can pay 10 Coins each round to increase their diagnostic
precision to 90%. In Algorithm, experts can pay 10 Coins each round to rent an algo-
rithmic decision aid that increases the expert’s maximum diagnostic precision to 90%
if used correctly. For the algorithmic decision aid, consumers also learn that experts
are not forced to use the system, but can choose to ignore it. All subjects know
that consumers pay for the investment by automatically paying 10 Coins more per
treatment if they choose to approach an investing expert. Then, subjects complete
another 15 rounds. Experts first decide whether they want to invest, then choose
their price vector, and proceed to diagnosis and treatment. Consumers observe each
expert’s investment decision. Otherwise, nothing changes. Upon completing the cre-
dence goods experiment, subjects proceed to a short post-experimental questionnaire
and answer a battery of demographic questions as well as a question about their risk
attitudes (Dohmen et al., 2011).
Predictions
2.2 Phase 1 Equilibria
To derive equilibria, we differentiate between the three possible markup scenarios: (i)
p¯−c¯> p−c; (ii) p¯−c¯< p−c; (iii) p¯−c¯= p−c. First note that in any equilibrium
¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯ ¯
where the expert chooses Ps or Pm and consequently always implements only the
high quality or low quality treatment, diagnostic precision does not matter and prices
as well as profits are the same as in the model with transparent expert abilities. That
is because consumers anticipate experts to follow their monetary self-interest. Under
Pe, experts signal honesty, because their markups for both treatments are the same.
We first derive consumer profits under Ps and Pm.
When (i) the profit margin for the HQT is larger than for the LQT, all expert types
alwaysrecommendtheHQT.Therefore,consumerproblemsarealwayssolved. Profits
are
πm = v −p¯. (1)
7When (ii) the profit margin for the LQT is larger than for the HQT, experts always
recommend the low quality treatment, irrespective of ability. Consumers infer the
markups from prices and anticipate undertreatment. Profits are
πs = (1−h)v −p. (2)
¯
Finally, there are equal markup scenarios. Here, heterogeneous expert abilities af-
fect consumer payoffs, because lower diagnostic precision leads to more mistakes
when treating consumers honestly. Under transparency, consumers anticipate dif-
ferent problems depending on expert type:
πe = (1−h+hk)v −p¯+(h+k −2hk)∆p (3)
Which markup scenario do experts choose? With perfect diagnosis and full trans-
parency,DulleckandKerschbamer(2006)showthatunderverifiability,expertsalways
efficiently serve consumers by setting equal markups. With diagnostic uncertainty,
that is no longer viable, because credible commitment to honesty does not imply that
a consumer is sufficiently treated. Under competition, experts choose prices that
maximize expected consumer income. Hence, the boundaries determining experts
price strategy are:
k∆p
πm ≥ πewhenh ≥ := hm. (4)
(1−k)v −(1−2k)∆p i
and
(1−k)∆c
πs ≥ πewhenh ≤ := hs. (5)
kv +(1−2k)∆p i
Under full obfuscation, however, consumers do not know whether to condition their
expected payoff on z or q. Therefore, they need to incorporate both possibilities, and
profits change to
πe = (1−h+hq(1−γ)+γhz)v−p¯+(h−2hq(1−γ)−γ2hz+q(1−γ)+γz)∆p. (6)
The boundaries determining experts price strategy are:
8∆p(q −γq +γz)
πm ≤ πewhenh ≤ := hm. (7)
v(1−q(1−γ)−γz)−∆p(1−2q(1−γ)−γ2z) o
and
∆p(q −γq +γz −1)
πs ≤ πewhenh ≥ := hs. (8)
v(q(γ −1)−γz)−∆p(1−2q(1−γ)−γ2z) o
Note that in comparison to the transparent scenario, expected consumer profits from
approaching the high-ability expert decrease. This makes a straightforward argument
why high-ability experts are incentivized to signal their true ability type.
We now turn towards three possible equilibria. We assume that consumers do not
meaningfully learn about an expert’s type over the 10 rounds of Phase 1. That is
because (1) low-ability experts can always mimic high-ability experts, (2) consumers
usually cannot verify dishonest overtreatment because they do not observe their prob-
lem, and (3) diagnostic uncertainty makes it even more difficult for consumers to dis-
cern between dishonesty and ability, e.g., in the case of undertreatment. Therefore,
from the expert’s perspective, their personal ability type is inconsequential. Given
full obfuscation, both expert types charge the same prices and earn the same profits
in equilibrium (see also Liu et al., 2020). If the high-ability expert would post a price
vector that increases expected consumer profits, the low-ability expert could simply
copy it. This works as long as obfuscation is strong enough such that consumers are
sufficiently unlikely to believe that an expert following the high-ability expert’s opti-
mal pricing path is, in fact, a high-ability expert. In any equilibrium where experts
choose Ps or Pm and consequently always implement only the high quality or low
quality treatment, diagnostic precision does not matter.
Inafirstequilibrium,expertsmayalwayschoosetheHQTandchargePm,irrespective
of type. This only manifests as long as consumer beliefs µ(P) that the expert is a
high ability expert are low enough. Otherwise, the high-ability expert would be able
to exploit their skill advantage by committing to treat consumers truthfully and offer
higher profits. Hence, the expected loss from inadvertently approaching the low-
ability expert who charges Pe (as compared to approaching an expert who charges
Pm) must be greater than or equal to the expected benefit from approaching the
high-ability expert who charges Pe.2 Then, consumer beliefs that the expert is a
2This only works for values of h and z under which the transparent high-ability expert would be
able to charge Pe. Otherwise, signalling better diagnostic precision has no impact on the expert’s
9Figure 1. Left: Price setting under fully transparent and fully obfuscated expert
abilities. The shaded areas represents the high-ability expert’s loss. Due to consumer
uncertainty, the high-ability expert cannot choose the profit-maximizing price vector
Pe as often as they would want to. Variables for this figure: q = 0.5, γ = 1/3. Right:
Variations for different consumer beliefs γ.
(cid:101)
high-ability expert do not exceed:
vh(1−q)−(h−2hq +q)∆p
γm := . (9)
(cid:101)
(z −q)(vh−2h∆p+∆p)
Equilibrium 1. Both expert types charge Pm, always perform the major treatment,
consumers believe µ(P) ∈ [0,γm] if the expert charges Pe, meaning p−c = p¯−c¯, and
(cid:102)
¯ ¯
consumers always visit the expert. Note that this also implies that the high-ability
expert could attract more consumers and thus increase profits in a scenario with only
partial obfuscation by increasing consumer beliefs such that γ > γm for h ∈ [hm,hm].
(cid:101) (cid:101) o H
Equilibrium 2. The analogous equilibrium for the case where experts always choose
the minor treatment implies:
−vhq −(h−2hq +q −1)∆p
γs := . (10)
(cid:101)
(z −q)(vh−2h∆p+∆p)
Both expert types charge Ps, always perform the minor treatment, consumers be-
lieve µ(P) ∈ [0,γs] if the expert charges Pe, meaning p−c = p¯−c¯, and consumers
(cid:101)
¯ ¯
always visit the expert. The high-ability expert could improve their profits in a sce-
nario with only partial obfuscation by changing consumer beliefs such that γ > γs
(cid:101) (cid:101)
for h ∈ [hs,hs ].
o H
Equilibrium 3. Finally, there are equal mark-up equilibria. Both expert types
price setting.
10charge Pe and consumers believe µ(P) ∈ [0,γ] because abilities are fully obfuscated
(cid:101)
and beliefs are fully determined by nature. Consumers always visit the expert. Con-
trary to the other two equilibria, treatment behavior is not obvious. We know that for
h ∈ [hs,hm], both expert types always follow their own diagnosis. However, within
L L
the gray area (see Figure 1) as well as at any point between h and h , the incen-
L H
tives of the two expert types to follow their diagnosis differ. That is because the
high-ability expert may have options to deliver better treatments for the consumer,
whereas the low-ability expert, knowing about their small diagnostic precision, could
be incentivized to completely rely on one treatment and thereby minimize diagnostic
mistakes. For the consumer, treatment choices do not make a difference, because un-
der full obfuscation, they cannot infer anything from prices or experience. Without
any additional constraints, treatment behavior could manifest in a variety of ways.
Thus, we propose:
Proposition 1. When expert abilities are fully obfuscated, the following scenarios
arise:
 
Ps ifh ∈ [0,hs],
 
 
Pe ifh ∈ [hs, hm], (11)
 
 Pm ifh ∈ [hm,1] 
2.3 Phase 1 Hypotheses
We can now insert the experimental parameters to derive our hypothesis. In Phase
1, consumers believe that an expert is of high ability type with γ = 1/3. Expected
consumer income equals πm = 50 under Pm, πs = 10 under Ps, and πe = 45.67
under Pe. This follows from consumers observing the mark-up incentives for experts
and adjusting their expectations accordingly. Therefore, experts always charge Pm
in equilibrium irrespective of type, with h = 0.4 > hm = 0.34 and γ = 1/3 < γm =
(cid:101)
0.59. There is no incentive to deviate from implementing the high-quality treatment,
meaning experts never under-treat clients, who therefore always enter the market.
Experts over-treat clients with a probability of 1 − h = 0.6. High-ability experts
cannot differentiate themselves from low-ability experts, and price-setting therefore
does not differ between types.
Hypothesis 1: Experts maximize expected consumer income by choosing Pm irre-
11spective of type.
Hypothesis 2: There is no difference between high-ability expert and low-ability
expert behavior.
Hypothesis 3: Consumers always enter the market.
2.4 Phase 2 Hypotheses: Skill
In Skill, experts can increase their diagnostic precision to k = 0.9 by paying d = 10
before choosing prices. Consumers observe whether an expert invested. Hence, by
in investing, an expert’s prior personal ability type becomes obsolete, and all invest-
ing experts are the same type. Expected client income from approaching an expert
who invested into their diagnostic precision equals πe = 57. Comparing πe to
inv inv
πm, πs and πe reveals a straightforward incentive for experts to invest. Under full
transparency, the low ability experts offers consumers an expected income of 40 un-
der Pe, and the high-ability experts offers an expected income of 57. Hence, even if
consumers infer something about the expert’s type when they invest, no expert type
can out-compete an investing expert. At most, consumers are indifferent between ap-
proaching the investing and the not-investing transparent high-ability expert, when
γ = 1. Otherwise, they prefer any expert who invested, regardless of their prior
(cid:101)
ability type. Assuming that high-ability experts cannot signal their ability type with
certainty by foregoing investments, consumer beliefs about an expert’s type are in-
consequential, and we propose:
Hypothesis 4: Low-ability experts in Skill always invest to improve their diagnostic
ability.
Hypothesis 5: Low-ability experts in Skill maximize expected consumer income by
choosing Pe.
Hypothesis 6: High-ability experts in Skill always invest to improve their diagnostic
ability.
Hypothesis 7: High-ability experts in Skill maximize expected consumer income by
choosing Pe.
2.5 Phase 2 Hypotheses: Algorithm
In Algorithm, experts can rent an algorithmic decision aid that increases their diag-
nostic precision to k = 0.9 by paying d = 10 before choosing prices. Compared to
12Skill, this setup exhibits some crucial differences. First, consumers know that experts
can choose to forego the decision aid’s information even after paying for the algo-
rithm. Second, because consumers do not have insight into the expert’s diagnostic
process, they may assume some positive correlation between ability type and deci-
sion aid efficacy. Hence, consumers still consider an expert’s personal precision when
anticipating their expected income. We argue that this allows high-ability experts to
differentiate themselves from low-ability experts, and escape the pooling equilibrium
derived earlier.
Lookingatexpertincentives, firstnotethatonceuncertaintyisreducedandconsumer
beliefs exceed certain thresholds γ, pooling equilibria break down because high-ability
(cid:101)
experts can e.g. change their pricing strategy in return for their increased estimated
diagnostic precision. The same is true for the low-ability expert, but reversed. Lower
uncertainty decreases their potential profits. Thus, as long as there is uncertainty,
high-abilityexpertsexperienceapenalty,whereaslow-abilityexpertscanchargemore.
Figure 1 illustrates how different levels of γ change price setting. Without invest-
(cid:101)
ments, high-ability experts have obvious incentives to persuade consumers of their
diagnostic type.
With investments, we have shown above that a transparent high-ability expert would
be indifferent between investing and not investing because in both cases, they offer
consumers an expected income of πe = 57 after choosing Pe. Introducing the afore-
mentioned uncertainty around decision aids changes that. Because consumers cannot
be certain that experts utilize the algorithmic decision aid (i) at all or (ii) effectively,
expected consumer income after investing changes to πe ≤ 57. Then, depending
alg,inv
on the level of uncertainty as well as consumer beliefs about an expert’s type, it may
beprofitableforhigh-abilityexpertstoforegoinvestments, iftheycanplausiblysignal
their type to consumers who judge the benefits of the decision aid as uncertain. Yet,
if that is the case, low-ability experts may also have incentives to once again imitate
high-ability experts, which is initially hidden to consumers because of obfuscated ex-
pert abilities. Note, however, that in order to imitate high-ability experts, low-ability
experts now also rely on Pe. In a one-shot game, this is irrelevant, because there is
no consumer belief formation. In Phase 1, it is irrelevant because the pooling equilib-
rium implies Pm, which masks the low-ability expert’s abilities. In Phase 2, however,
imitating low-ability experts cannot hide their relative diagnostic imprecision due to
consumer expectations of being treated honestly (the high-ability expert’s strategy).
Therefore, we now have to ask whether it is profitable for low-ability experts to imi-
13tate high-ability experts despite Bayesian consumers who update their beliefs, or not.
Following Mimra et al. (2016), we focus on behavior when consumers coordinate their
behavior ex ante.
First, to allow high-ability experts to try and differentiate themselves from low-ability
expertsbyforegoingthealgorithm, andtherebytoallowlow-abilityexpertstoimitate
them by foregoing the algorithm, consumers need to believe that an expert who does
not invest in round 11 is of high-ability type with µ(P) ∈ [γm,1] where γm = 0.59.
(cid:102) (cid:102)
Consumers then use Bayes’s rule to update their beliefs µ(P) each round. There
are three possible observations: (a) undertreatment (10 Coins), (b) overtreatment
or efficient treatment of big problem (50 Coins), and (c) efficient treatment of small
problem (90 Coins). An honest high-ability (low-ability) expert has respective ob-
servation probabilities of 0.1 (0.2), 0.45 (0.5) and 0.45 (0.3). Let n be the number
of relevant a-signals, m be the number of relevant b-signals, and o be the number
of relevant c-signals. Approaching a low-ability expert is an L-event, approaching
a high-ability expert is a H-event. Given any sample of observations, consumers
calculate the posterior probability:
Pr(n,m,o|L)Pr(L)
Pr(L|n,m,o) = . (12)
Pr(n,m,o|L)Pr(L)+Pr(n,m,o|H)Pr(H)
Pr(L) is the prior probability for event L that is determined by consumer beliefs at
the beginning of round 11 µ(P) ∈ [γm,1]. Using this, we can simulate a probability
(cid:102)
distribution of consumer beliefs. To demonstrate, let µ(P) = γ ∈ {0.6,0.8}. That
(cid:101)
is, consumers believe that their expert has high abilities with a probability of 60% or
80%. At this point, consumers would rather approach a not-investing expert with Pe
under full obfuscation than a Pm-expert who always successfully treats the problem
becauseγ > γm. Figure2showsaverageconsumerbeliefsthatarepresentativeexpert
(cid:101) (cid:102)
is of low-ability type over time, using 10.000 simulations. Here, we assume that low-
ability experts fully imitate high-ability experts by choosing Pe and following their
diagnosis.
It is clear that consumer beliefs change substantially over time, which constraints
the imitation of high-ability experts.3 A second possibility is that low-ability experts
imitate high-ability experts in price setting and investment behavior, but always
3On the equilibrium path, consumers do not switch away from an expert in Phase 1 because
there is no undertreatment, and expect some undertreatment in Phase 2 as long as it is optimal
to approach a Pe-expert. Therefore, consumers gather repeated observations from an individual
expert.
14Bayesian Consumer Beliefs (10.000 simulations)
0.60
0.55
0.50
0.45
0.40
0.35
0.30
0.25
0.20
2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Round
Figure 2. Consumer Belief Updating with Pr(L) = 0.4 and Pr(L) = 0.2.
choose the HQT in order to somewhat compensate their diagnostic disadvantage. As
shown in Figure 6 in the appendix, this strategy very quickly reveals the expert’s
ability type. Having demonstrated the limits for low-ability experts to imitate high-
ability experts, we now turn towards experts’ optimal strategies and use an example
to demonstrate that separating equilibria exist.
First, under which conditions does the high-ability expert deliberately forego the
decision aid? Let w ∈ [0,1] be the estimated probability from the consumer that an
investing expert does not (correctly) utilize the decision aid after renting it. Then,
expected consumer profit equals πe = (1−w)∗πe +w ∗(πe −10) = (1−w)∗
alg,inv inv o
57 + w ∗ (30 + 17 ∗ 1). In the event of w, consumers pay an additional d without
3
gaining diagnostic improvements. Because experts invest, there is no signal, and
γ = γ = 1/3. On the other hand, if the expert does not invest, they influence
(cid:101)
consumer beliefs γ ∈ [1,1]. Expected consumer profits are πe = 40 + 17 ∗ γ.
(cid:101) 3 alg,ninv (cid:101)
High-ability experts forego the decision aid along:
πe ≥ πe whenw ≥ 0.797∗(1−γ) := w , or (13)
alg,ninv alg,inv (cid:101) ninv
πe ≥ πe whenγ ≥ 1−1.255w := γ (14)
alg,ninv alg,inv (cid:101) (cid:101)ninv
In a one-shot setting, low-ability experts imitate high-ability experts. With repeated
15
trepxE
ytilibA-woL
gnieB
fo
ytilibaborPFigure 3. Heatmap of the number of rounds low-ability experts can imitate high-
ability experts with a maximum of 15 rounds, given different values of Pr(L) and
γ . Foranypoint”0”, high-abilityexpertscannotstrategicallyforegothealgorithm
(cid:101)ninv
because consumers are not persuaded by the signal.
interactions, imitation becomes less profitable. To demonstrate the existence of sep-
arating equilibria, let w = 0.1. In that case, for an expert to deliberately forego the
decision aid, consumers must believe that Pr(L) < 0.125, i.e. γ ∈ [0.875,1]. How
(cid:101)
long can the low-ability expert sustain their charade if they treat consumers hon-
estly? For Pr(L) ∈ {0.1,0.05,0.01}, consumer beliefs γ fall below the threshold after
(cid:101)
two, eight and twenty-four rounds respectively (see Figure 3). The ability to imitate
hinges on consumer priors and γ . If Pr(L) is extremely low, meaning consumers
(cid:101)ninv
take non-investments as a very strong signal that an expert is of high-ability type,
low-ability experts can imitate high-ability experts for a long time. In less extreme
cases, that duration quickly falls, as exemplified by the 2 rounds under Pr(L) = 0.1.
Now, assuming that Pr(L) = 0.1, what is the low-ability expert’s income if they
imitate the high-ability expert? Is it worth it?
Consumers ex ante coordinate on the low-ability expert. Because all experts choose
Pm and the HQT in Phase 1, the expert does not lose any consumers and treats all
16three of them. In round 11, the expert can choose to forego the decision aid, and
successfully imitate a high-ability expert. Then, each round the expert truthfully
treats their consumers, their average profit amounts to 3 ∗ 40 = 120 Coins. After
two rounds, consumers realize that the expert is not of high-ability type, and thus
treated them sub-optimally. Therefore, they leave for either an investing expert, or
another non-investing expert. Thus, the expert earns 2∗120+13∗15 = 435 Coins
over 15 rounds. If the expert had invested, they could have offered consumers an
expectedincome(givenw = 0.1)of54,98Coins. Inordertoleave, consumersmustby
assumption expect another expert to offer a better deal. Therefore, they do not leave
foranotherinvestingexpert. Ifanotherexpertdoesnotinvest,consumersdonotknow
whether that expert is the high-ability or the low-ability one. Because consumers do
not switch towards an investing expert, both other experts have incentives to forego
the investment. Therefore, expected consumer income when switching towards one
of the two non-investing experts is: πe = 48.5 Coins, which is lower than their
expected income when staying. The low-ability expert keeps their consumers, and
earns 15 ∗ 120 = 1800 Coins, which is more than the 435 Coins from imitating a
high-ability expert.
High-ability experts, on the other hand, are always incentivized to forego the decision
aidalongw becauseconsumerconfidenceintheirabilitytypeincreases,onaverage,
ninv
over time, sustaining the profitability of the strategy. Then, for any w > 0, non-
investing high-ability experts make consumers a better offer than investing experts.
Ifthehigh-abilityexpertinvested,low-abilityconsumerscouldtrytopoachconsumers
for a short time by acting like a high-ability expert. This is not sustainable, but may
still lead to income losses. Furthermore, if the high-ability expert invests, they offer
the same deal as all other investing experts. Under the assumption that consumers
do not switch away from an expert when they are indifferent between them and their
alternatives, this does not affect expert behavior. However, foregoing the decision
aid is robust to relaxing that assumption, and therefore beneficial to the high-ability
expert. It is also robust to consumers randomly exploring at the beginning of Phase
2. Hence, separating equilibria exist. Note, however, that there are many instances
where it is not profitable for high-ability experts to forego the decision aid (see Figure
3). In particular, low values of w as well as too low or too high values of Pr(H),
i.e. γ, in round 11 prohibit high-ability signalling. If γ < γ , high-ability experts
(cid:101) (cid:101) (cid:101)ninv
cannot send a strong enough signal, and therefore never forego the decision aid. If γ
(cid:101)
is too high, consumers’ priors are so strong that low-ability experts sustain imitation.
17We therefore hypothesize:
Hypothesis 8: Low-ability experts in Algorithm invest to rent the algorithmic de-
cision aid.
Hypothesis 9: Low-ability experts in Algorithm maximize expected consumer in-
come by choosing Pe.
Hypothesis 10: Less high-ability experts than low-ability experts in Algorithm in-
vest to rent the algorithmic decision aid.
Hypothesis 11: High-ability experts in Algorithm maximize expected consumer
income by choosing Pe.
3 Results
Table 1 provides summary statistics for the two periods. We first analyze subject
behavior and market efficiency in the first 10 rounds without diagnostic investments.
In contrast to the model’s prediction, experts do not generally maximize expected
consumer income by choosing Pm. The most popular price vector Ps has the highest
prices and lowest expected income for consumers (see also Figure 8 in the Appendix).
This replicates a common effect from prior credence goods experiments without diag-
nostic uncertainty and obfuscated ability heterogeneity: under verifiability, experts
rarely choose equal mark-up price vectors, and instead opt for the price vector that
splits the gains of trade most equally if expert behave honestly (Dulleck et al., 2011;
Kerschbamer et al., 2017). Consumers do not adequately punish undertreatment, and
therefore fail to enforce price competition between experts. This leads to efficiency
losses, as roughly 30% of big problems are treated with the LQT. Still, compared
to other experiments with expert price setting, both Pm and Pe are relatively com-
mon. In fact, experts shift towards the predicted price vector Pm over time (logistic
panel regression odds ratio: 1.08, p = 0.02, CI (95%): [1.01, 1.14]). Furthermore,
as predicted by the model, high-ability experts (Pm/Ps/Pe = 0.29/0.39/0.31) set
the same prices as low-ability experts (Pm/Ps/Pe = 0.28/0.41/0.31). High-ability
experts cannot exploit their diagnostic advantage due to ability obfuscation. Overall,
inefficiencies from over- and undertreatment are relatively common (see Figure 7),
but do not deter consumers from entering the market. Only 5% of consumers choices
fall on the outside option. This makes the market much more efficient than stan-
dard laboratory experiments with perfect diagnostic, suggesting a potential upside of
18Phase 2 Phase 2
Phase 1
Skill Algorithm
Market Entry Rate 0.95 0.98 0.98
Efficiency (relative) 0.61 0.65 (0.75) 0.63 (0.74)
Undertreatment 0.29 0.23 0.25
Overtreatment 0.55 0.43 0.49
Efficient Treatment 0.52 0.64 0.60
Efficient Provision 0.40 0.59 0.53
Total Expert Surplus 132 133 133
Total Client Surplus 131 138 133
Price Vectors Pm 0.28 Pm 0.33 Pm 0.26
Ps 0.41 Ps 0.41 Ps 0.40
Pe 0.31 Pe 0.26 Pe 0.34
N 300 150 150
Table 1. Summary statistics by phase and treatment. Efficiency is calculated as
(average actual profit - outside option)/(maximum possible average profit - outside
option). Relative Efficiency refers to the market’s efficiency without correcting for
the efficiency loss due to investment costs. Undertreatment is the share of treatment
choices where the consumer has a big problem but receives the LQT. Overtreatment
is the share of treatment choices where the consumer has a small problem but receives
the HQT. Efficient Treatment equals 1 when an expert makes the efficient treatment
decision. Efficient Provision equals 1 when the expert receives the correct diagnostic
signal and consequently chooses the efficient treatment.
uncertainty for market outcomes (see e.g. Tracy et al. (2023)).
3.1 Phase 2 – Expert Investments
Round 11 introduces either skill investments or an algorithmic decision aid as an
external technological shock. Each round, experts can increase their maximum diag-
nostic precision to 90% by paying 10 Coins, which also automatically increases their
prices by 10 Coins. Figure 4 shows investment shares for the two treatments and
expert types in Phase 2. As predicted, there are no differences between expert types
for skill investments. Over all 15 rounds, experts invest 64% of the time. Investments
start at around 80%, but deteriorate significantly (see Table 2).
Thus, while popular, investment shares lie substantially below the predicted (and
19Figure 4. Expert investment shares for Skill and Algorithm over the 15 rounds of
Phase 2.
Skill Algorithm
.8
.6
.4
.2
10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25
Investment Shares High Ability Expert Investment Shares Low Ability Expert
Table 2. Expert Investment Behavior in Phase 2
Skill Investment Skill Investment Algorithm Investment Algorithm Investment
High-Ability -0.022 -0.035 -0.257∗∗∗ -0.259∗∗∗
(0.081) (0.079) (0.067) (0.071)
Round -0.011∗∗ -0.001
(0.004) (0.004)
Risk 0.024 -0.003
(0.013) (0.016)
Female 0.005 -0.016
(0.083) (0.061)
Age -0.004 0.003
(0.004) (0.003)
N 1125 1125 1125 1125
Thistablereportsmarginaleffectsofpanellogisticregressionsusingsubject-levelrandomeffects
andacluster–robustVCEestimatoratthematchedgrouplevel(standarderrorsinparentheses).
The dependent variable is a binary variable that equals 1 if the expert invests into the new
diagnostic technology. ∗ p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
optimal) 100%.
In Algorithm, investment shares clearly diverge between expert types. In round 11,
84% of low-ability and 56% of high-ability experts rent the algorithm (χ˜2 = 6.91,p =
0.009). Across all 15 rounds, 73% of low-ability expert choose to invest, whereas
high-ability experts opt for the decision aid with a probability of only 45%. Logit
20panel regression with subject-level random effects and clustered standard errors at
the matched group level confirm a large and significant negative effect of being a
high-ability expert on investment shares (Table 2). This provides direct support for
our main hypothesis. When an expert’s initial ability type becomes inconsequential
through skill investments, there are no differences between high- and low-ability ex-
perts. With technological decision aids, however, some high-ability experts try to
signal their ability type by foregoing investments and offering lower prices. In line
with that hypothesis, the algorithmic decision aid does not appear to be less desir-
able overall. In both treatments, aggregated investment shares are 64%. That is
because, while high-ability experts exhibit a 19 percentage point drop in technology
adoption, low-ability experts are qualitatively more likely choose the decision aid.
Furthermore, investments into the algorithmic decision aid do not deteriorate over
time. This suggests that subjects’ do not predict consumers to be generally averse
towards algorithms.
Expert Price Setting. Figure 5 shows the share of experts choosing a specific price
vector depending on type, treatment and investment. We are primarily interested
in potential strategic differences between experts who invest and those who forego
investments. There are two potential effects. One, an expert may condition their
pricing strategy on their current investment choice (within-subject variance). For
instance, the standard model predicts a low-ability expert to change their pricing
strategy from Pm to Pe after investing. Second, experts who invest a lot may differ
from expert who do not invest or only invest occasionally (between-subject variance).
This would, e.g., be consistent with some proportion of high-ability experts foregoing
the investment choice to signal their type. Here, we do not expect any within-subject
variance, because experts generally do not invest enough to generate the necessary
varianceinthedata. Wefirstfocusonthesecondcase. Table3showspanelregression
results for price setting conditional on the number of rounds an expert chooses to
invest. For low-ability experts, and Skill treatments, there are no differences. The
number of investment choices does not predict price setting in either condition. For
high-ability experts, there are large and significant effects of investing frequency on
Ps and Pe in the Algorithm treatment. Those who often rent the algorithmic decision
aid are more likely to choose Ps – the price menu that (1) has the highest consumer
prices, (2) exhibits the highest expected value for experts and (3) splits the gains of
trade relatively equally if experts behave honestly. On the other hand, high-ability
experts who never or rarely invest into the decision aid are more likely to choose Pe
21Figure 5. Price setting depending on treatment, expert type and investment decision.
Algorithm Algorithm Algorithm
.8 .8 .8
.7 .7 .7
.6 .6 .6
.5 .5 .5
.4 .4 .4
.3 .3 .3
.2 .2 .2
.1 .1 .1
0 0 0
10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25
Invested HA Expert Share Pm Not Invested HA Expert Share Pm Invested HA Expert Share Ps Not Invested HA Expert Share Ps Invested HA Expert Share Pe Not Invested HA Expert Share Pe
Invested LA Expert Share Pm Not Invested LA Expert Share Pm Invested LA Expert Share Ps Not Invested LA Expert Share Ps Invested LA Expert Share Pe Not Invested LA Expert Share Pe
Skill Skill Skill
.8 .8 .8
.7 .7 .7
.6 .6 .6
.5 .5 .5
.4 .4 .4
.3 .3 .3
.2 .2 .2
.1 .1 .1
0 0 0
10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25
Invested HA Expert Share Pm Not Invested HA Expert Share Pm Invested HA Expert Share Ps Not Invested HA Expert Share Ps Invested HA Expert Share Pe Not Invested HA Expert Share Pe
Invested LA Expert Share Pm Not Invested LA Expert Share Pm Invested LA Expert Share Ps Not Invested LA Expert Share Ps Invested LA Expert Share Pe Not Invested LA Expert Share Pe
Table 3. Expert Price Setting Conditional on Investment Frequency
Low-AbilityExpert High-AbilityExpert
Skill Algorithm Skill Algorithm
Pm Ps Pe Pm Ps Pe Pm Ps Pe Pm Ps Pe
Investments 0.004 -0.002 -0.002 -0.009 0.001 0.013 0.001 0.006 -0.003 -0.004 0.045∗∗∗ -0.044∗∗∗
(0.065) (0.009) (0.008) (0.013) (0.011) (0.014) (0.013) (0.012) (0.012) (0.009) (0.006) (0.008)
N 750 750 750 750 750 750 375 375 375 375 375 375
Thistablereportsmarginaleffectsofpanellogisticregressionsusingsubject-levelrandomeffects
andacluster–robustVCEestimatoratthematchedgrouplevel(standarderrorsinparentheses).
The dependent variable is a binary variable that equals 1 if the expert chooses the respective
price vector. ∗ p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
– the price menu that maximizes expected consumer income if they approach (a) a
non-investing high-ability expert or (b) an investing expert.
These results are in line with our general proposition. In Algorithm, there appear
to be systematic differences between high-ability experts who invest into new diag-
nostic technology and those who do not. Because high-ability experts can influence
consumer perceptions, some of them strategically choose a low-investment path with
equal markup prices. Those who invest a lot tend to opt for Ps, which is again incon-
sistent with the standard model, but consistent with behavior in Phase 1 and prior
empirical evidence about the prevalence of selfish expert preferences (Kerschbamer
et al., 2017). In Skill, experts cannot differentiate themselves based on their origi-
nal ability type. Therefore, all experts face the same incentives, and we would not
expect two different ”groups” that strategically choose either a low-investment or a
high-investment strategy. Instead, experts should condition their behavior on their
current price menu. To test this, we opt for a fixed effects logistic panel regression
22Table 4. Expert Price Setting Conditional on Investment Decision
Low-AbilityExpert High-AbilityExpert
Skill Algorithm Skill Algorithm
Pm Ps Pe Pm Ps Pe Pm Ps Pe Pm Ps Pe
Invested -0.134∗ 0.114 0.019 -0.173∗ 0.235∗∗∗ -0.175∗∗∗ -0.119 0.207∗∗ -0.172∗ 0.009 -0.012 0.008
(0.063) (0.064) (0.077) (0.057) (0.029) (0.049) (0.105) (0.070) (0.082) (0.103) (0.087) (0.098)
N 510 555 540 540 645 630 210 210 255 195 255 210
This table reports marginal effects of fixed effects panel logistic regressions. The dependent
variableisabinaryvariablethatequals1iftheexpertchoosestherespectivepricevector. Ob-
servations vary due to the omission of groups where investment shares predict prices perfectly.
∗ p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
with a binary variable measuring whether an expert invested in a given round. This
captures within-subject differences in price setting conditional on the expert’s current
investment choice. Results from a pooled regression suggest that generally, investing
reduces the share of experts choosing Pm and Pe in favor of Ps (see Table 8). Sepa-
rating regressions with regard to expert type and treatment reveals that these trends
are present in all conditions, except high-ability experts in Algorithm (Table 4).
Thus, in our experiment, an investment into novel diagnostic technology that im-
proves accuracy and simultaneously increases prices shifts experts towards the most
expensive price menu with the lowest expected value for consumers. This tends to
be true for both expert types across the two conditions, except for high-ability ex-
perts after the introduction of an algorithmic decision aid. In contrast, high-ability
experts in Algorithm are the only group whose choices are explained by the abso-
lute number of investments, with non- or low-investing experts opting for Pe instead
of Ps. Results therefore support the conjunction that high-ability experts diverge
into two groups with the introduction of technological decision aids: one group that
strategically under-invests, possibly to signal their ability type to consumers, and one
group that follows the standard model’s prediction by purchasing the algorithm. As
predicted, this pattern only exists in Algorithm, but not in Skill.
Expert Undertreatment and Overtreatment. The prevalence of Ps may be
an indication that experts build a reputation of honesty and can therefore offer to
split the gains of trade equally. Table 5 shows that this is not generally the case.
Consumers who approach a Ps-expert are more likely to be undertreated, whereas
Pe is – as theoretically predicted – associated with lower rates of undertreatment.
This is true for both Phase 1 and Skill. Only in Algorithm, the chosen price menu
has no significant predictive power. Therefore, consumers cannot plausibly assume
23Table 5. Undertreatment Conditional on Expert Price Setting
Phase 1 Skill Algorithm
Undertreated (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3)
Pm -0.084 -0.153∗∗ -0.08
(0.054) (0.054) (0.065)
Ps 0.221∗∗∗ 0.252∗∗∗ 0.121
(0.041) (0.043) (0.066)
Pe -0.152∗∗ -0.131∗∗ -0.048
(0.049) (0.047) (0.074)
N 574 574 574 450 450 450 434 434 434
Thistablereportsmarginaleffectsofpanellogisticregressionsusingsubject-levelrandomeffects
and a cluster–robust VCE estimator at the matched group level (standard errors in parenthe-
ses). The dependent variable is a binary variable that equals 1 if the consumers experiences
undertreatment. ∗ p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
expertstotreatthemhonestlyirrespectiveofprices. Investmentchoicesdonotpredict
undertreatment.
We now look at undertreatment from the expert’s perspective. Each round, experts
receive three diagnoses, and make three treatment choices. Because of diagnostic
uncertainty, an expert may intent to undertreat a consumer, but does not actually
do so because of a wrong diagnosis. Therefore, we define the intent-to-undertreat
as experts who diagnose a big problem, but prescribe the LQT, irrespective of the
consumer’s actual underlying condition. The results (Table 6) confirm that across
all treatments, experts cheating behavior is strongly influenced by their chosen price
menu. Experts intent to undertreat consumers significantly more often under Ps,
and significantly less often under the two other menus. Investment choices are largely
irrelevant. There are no differences between expert types.
For overtreatment, we document all relevant regression analyses in the Appendix.
As expected, consumers experience more overtreatment when approaching an expert
with Pm or Pe in Phase 1 (Table 10). For Phase 2, the results are similar, albeit less
strong. In Skill but not Algorithm, consumers who approach an investing expert are
also significantly less likely to be overtreated. Focusing on expert choices confirms
the strong negative effect of Ps on overtreatment compared to both Pm and Pe.
Overall the results are in line with theory such that consumers should expect Ps-
experts to be much more likely to undertreat them. Across all rounds and conditions,
intention-to-undertreat rates are 40% under Ps, and only 12% and 11% for Pm and
Pe respectively. On the other hand, intention-to-overtreat rates are only 22% under
24Table 6. Expert Intent-To-Undertreat Conditional on Price Setting
Phase 1 Skill Algorithm
Undertreated (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3)
Pm -0.112∗∗∗ -0.128∗∗ -0.090∗
(0.028) (0.041) (0.039)
Ps 0.191∗∗∗ 0.213∗∗∗ 0.199∗∗∗
(0.031) (0.056) (0.066)
Pe -0.095∗∗ -0.097∗ -0.149∗∗∗
(0.049) (0.046) (0.038)
Invested -0.017 -0.026 -0.012 -0.039 -0.063∗ -0.047
(0.027) (0.026) (0.027) (0.028) (0.025) (0.028)
N 1312 1312 1312 928 928 928 910 910 910
This table reports panel regressions using subject-level random effects and a cluster–robust
VCE estimator at the matched group level (standard errors in parentheses). The dependent
variable is the share of choices where an expert chooses a LQT for a diagnosed big problem. ∗
p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
Ps, and 48%/43% for Pe/Pm. Investment choices generally do not affect cheating
intentions.
Consumer Choices. How do consumers react to undertreatment with diagnostic
uncertainty? Table 7 shows that experiencing undertreatment strongly predicts con-
sumer switching in the following round. This holds for both phases and treatments.
Overtreatment appears to have no or only little effect on consumer choices. Further-
more, consumers do not appear to condition their switching decision on the expert’s
chosen price menu. Yet, looking at the number of consumers an expert attracts con-
firms that the former do exhibit strong preferences against Ps, and for Pm (Table 11
in the Appendix). In line with consumer switching, undertreating consumers in the
previous round also significantly reduces an expert’s current number of consumers.
Investments do not meaningfully affect an expert’s ability to attract consumers. This
may be one reason why we find consistent under-investment by experts. Finally, a
three-way interaction of expert type, the expert’s investment choice, and Pe suggests
that high-ability expertsin Algorithm attractsignificantly moreconsumers whenthey
choose Pe and simultaneously forego the algorithmic decision aid. This result is in
line with our theoretical prediction, and does not hold for either Skill or low-ability
experts, nor for any other price menu. Thus, it provides supportive evidence for the
hypothesis that high-ability experts may strategically alter their utilization of costly
decision aids under obfuscation to influence consumer beliefs about their skill type.
25Table 7. Consumer Switching Behavior
SwitchedAway–Phase1 SwitchedAway–Phase1 SwitchedAway–Skill SwitchedAway–Skill SwitchedAway–Algorithm SwitchedAway–Algorithm
Undertreated 0.377∗∗∗ 0.374∗∗∗ 0.256∗∗∗ 0.259∗∗∗ 0.208∗∗ 0.217∗∗
(0.051) (0.049) (0.067) (0.059) (0.068) (0.063)
Overtreated 0.046 0.049 0.042 0.048 0.042 0.049∗
(0.026) (0.026) (0.038) (0.041) (0.028) (0.024)
Pm 0.024 -0.268 -0.229
(0.092) (0.253) (0.195)
Ps -0.004 -0.156 -0.209
(0.095) (0.248) (0.212)
Pe 0.039 -0.364 -0.162
(0.093) (0.238) (0.204)
Round -0.008 -0.011∗ -0.016∗∗∗
(0.006) (0.005) (0.004)
Risk 0.037∗∗∗ 0.027∗ 0.039∗∗∗
(0.009) (0.012) (0.011)
Invested 0.073∗ -0.006
(0.034) (0.039)
InvestedLR 0.115∗ 0.021
(0.046) (0.036)
N 3600 3600 1050 1050 1050 1050
Thistablereportsmarginaleffectsofpanellogisticregressionsusingsubject-levelrandomeffects
andacluster–robustVCEestimatoratthematchedgrouplevel(standarderrorsinparentheses).
The dependent variable is a binary variable that equals 1 if the consumer switched to a new
expert in the current round. Undertreated, Overtreated and Invested LR are lagged variables
(one round). ∗ p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
4 Concluding Remarks
Technological breakthroughs have the potential to significantly alleviate inefficien-
cies on credence goods markets. While full automation of expert tasks is usually
neither feasible, nor desirable or legal, algorithmic decision aids offer huge potential
in complementing or sometimes even substituting human expertise. In this paper,
we argue that two prevalent characteristics of real-life credence goods markets can
inhibit the effective adoption of novel diagnostic technologies: diagnostic uncertainty
and obfuscated heterogeneous expert abilities. Consumers know that experts cannot
perfectly identify their problem, but also that some are better than others. Informa-
tion asymmetries preclude consumers from accessing that information, hurting both
their welfare and the welfare of high-ability experts. Technological shocks, like the
invention of a new diagnostic medical test or large language models, offer an opportu-
nity for experts to influence consumer perceptions of their abilities. That is because,
one, consumers know that low-ability experts derive relatively larger benefits from
decision aids, two, consumers tend to associate the utilization of decision aids with
lower expert skills, and three, decision aids carry uncertainty. Furthermore, we show
that in many situations, low-ability experts cannot afford to imitate the high-ability
expert’s decision to forego an algorithmic decision aid. Then, by strategically ignor-
ing the decision aid, a high-ability expert can signal consumers their ability type, and
26simultaneously offer a more favorable price. In reality, the latter may represent (1)
lower diagnostic costs for experts or (2) less services for the consumer. In the medical
domain, for instance, it is common for patients to pay for additional or advanced tests
that are not covered by insurances but increase the chance of a correct diagnosis.
We test this idea using an online credence goods experiment in which experts ex-
perience a technological shock after 10 rounds and thereby receive the option to
costly increase their diagnostic precision. The experiment differentiates between skill
investments, and algorithmic decision aids. Skill investments over-ride an expert’s
prior ability type, representing for example advanced or specialized training. Al-
gorithmic decision aids complement the expert’s diagnosis, without affecting their
personal ability type. Therefore, experts who do not use or disregard the system may
still rely on their own diagnostic skill. Our results show no differences between high-
ability and low-ability expert for skill investments. With the algorithmic decision
aid, however, high-ability experts are far less likely to pay for increased diagnostic
precision. Auxiliary results suggest that investing and non-investing high-ability ex-
perts exhibit different pricing strategies, with those largely foregoing the decision aid
predominantly relying on price menus that signal honesty. On the other hand, in-
vesting experts opt for prices that are more favourable to them. These results offer
preliminary evidence that high-ability experts may strategically (under-)utilize tech-
nology to differentiate themselves from low-ability experts. They also suggest that
the adoption of algorithmic decision aids could be conditional on the distribution of
skills within a profession, and that negative consumer attitudes towards professionals
with decision aids may be rooted in actual ability differences.
Overall,expertsinourexperimentsubstantiallyunder-investintonewdiagnostictech-
nologies. This is one reason why efficiency gains are small to negligible. Investments
do not meaningfully affect expert fraud, which may be partially driven by very high
consumerparticipationrates. Throughouttheexperiment, 95%-98%ofconsumersen-
ter the market, which speaks to the potential efficiency of uncertain credence goods
markets under verifiability. Consumers react negatively towards undertreatment, but
not overtreatment, and generally do not reward expert investments. In contrast to
the predictions of the standard model, consumers also do not appear to reward ex-
pert prices that signal honesty. Instead, they avoid high prices with expert-incentives
to under-treat, but approach lower prices with expert-incentives to over-treat. This
strongly reduces investment incentives.
Our findings provide first evidence on the efficacy of algorithmic decision aids on
27credence goods markets with obfuscated, heterogeneous expert abilities. We hope
they provide some useful orientation for future research. In particular, there is much
tolearnabouttherelationshipbetweenexpertinvestments, technology, andconsumer
beliefs. For example, in this paper, we did not collect data on consumer beliefs.
However, carefully isolating and quantifying the mechanism behind (a) consumer
reactions towards experts with decision aids, and (b) high-ability experts shunning of
decision aids, is crucial to better understand the transformative impact of technology
oncredencegoodsmarkets. Thisnecessitatesabetterunderstandingofthebeliefsand
expectations of experts and consumers alike. One positive implication of our research
is that high-ability experts may be dis-incentivized to offer additional tests with low
marginal benefits. On the other hand, we find clear signs of under-investment, with
no indication that consumers incentivize experts towards the optimal diagnostic path.
28References
Alarie, Benjamin, Anthony Niblett, and Albert H Yoon, “How artificial
intelligence will affect the practice of law,” University of Toronto Law Journal,
2018, 68 (supplement 1), 106–124.
Aobdia, Daniel, Saad Siddiqui, and AndresVinelli,“Heterogeneityinexpertise
in a credence goods setting: Evidence from audit partners,” Review of Accounting
Studies, 2021, 26, 693–729.
Arkes, Hal R, Victoria A Shaffer, and Mitchell A Medow, “Patients derogate
physicians who use a computer-assisted diagnostic aid,” Medical Decision Making,
2007, 27 (2), 189–202.
Balafoutas, Loukas, Helena Fornwagner, Rudolf Kerschbamer, and
Matthias Sutter, “Diagnostic uncertainty and insurance coverage in credence
goods markets,” 2020.
Bester, Helmut and Matthias Dahm, “Credence goods, costly diagnosis and
subjective evaluation,” The Economic Journal, 2018, 128 (611), 1367–1394.
Brenner, Lukas and Tobias Meyll, “Robo-advisors: a substitute for human finan-
cial advice?,” Journal of Behavioral and Experimental Finance, 2020, 25, 100275.
Brody, Howard, “Medicine’s ethical responsibility for health care reform—the top
five list,” New England Journal of Medicine, 2010, 362 (4), 283–285.
Chan, David C, Matthew Gentzkow, and Chuan Yu, “Selection with vari-
ation in diagnostic skill: Evidence from radiologists,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2022, 137 (2), 729–783.
Chen, Daniel L, Martin Schonger, and Chris Wickens, “oTree—An open-
sourceplatformforlaboratory,online,andfieldexperiments,”Journal of Behavioral
and Experimental Finance, 2016, 9, 88–97.
Chen, Yongmin, Jianpei Li, and Jin Zhang, “Efficient liability in expert mar-
kets,” International Economic Review, 2022, 63 (4), 1717–1744.
Cruickshank, PJ, “Patient rating of doctors using computers,” Social Science &
Medicine, 1985, 21 (6), 615–622.
Currie, Janet and W Bentley MacLeod, “Diagnosing expertise: Human capital,
decision making, and performance among physicians,” Journal of labor economics,
2017, 35 (1), 1–43.
Dai, Tinglong and Shubhranshu Singh, “Conspicuous by its absence: Diagnostic
expert testing under uncertainty,” Marketing Science, 2020, 39 (3), 540–563.
29Daniels, Marcia and Steven A Schroeder, “Variation among physicians in use of
laboratory tests II. Relation to clinical productivity and outcomes of care,” Medical
care, 1977, pp. 482–487.
Dawes, Robyn M, David Faust, and Paul E Meehl, “Clinical versus actuarial
judgment,” Science, 1989, 243 (4899), 1668–1674.
Daysal, N Meltem, Sendhil Mullainathan, Ziad Obermeyer, Suproteem K
Sarkar, and Mircea Trandafir, “An Economic Approach to Machine Learning
in Health Policy,” Univ. of Copenhagen Dept. of Economics Discussion, CEBI
Working Paper, 2022, (24).
Dietvorst, Berkeley J, Joseph P Simmons, and Cade Massey, “Algorithm
aversion: people erroneously avoid algorithms after seeing them err.,” Journal of
Experimental Psychology: General, 2015, 144 (1), 114.
Dohmen, Thomas, Armin Falk, David Huffman, Uwe Sunde, Ju¨rgen
Schupp, and Gert G Wagner, “Individual risk attitudes: Measurement, de-
terminants, and behavioral consequences,” Journal of the european economic asso-
ciation, 2011, 9 (3), 522–550.
Doi, Dimitria, Romulo Ribeiro do Vale, Jean Michell Correia Mon-
teiro, Glauco Cabral Marinho Plens, Mario Ferreira Junior, Luiz
Augusto Marcondes Fonseca, Sandro F´elix Perazzio, Bruno Adler
Maccagnan Pinheiro Besen, Arnaldo Lichtenstein, Leandro Utino
Taniguchi et al., “Perception of usefulness of laboratory tests ordering by in-
ternal medicine residents in ambulatory setting: A single-center prospective cohort
study,” Plos one, 2021, 16 (5), e0250769.
Dulleck, Uwe and Rudolf Kerschbamer, “On doctors, mechanics, and computer
specialists: The economics of credence goods,” Journal of Economic literature,
2006, 44 (1), 5–42.
and , “Experts vs. discounters: Consumer free-riding and experts withholding
advice in markets for credence goods,” International Journal of Industrial Organi-
zation, 2009, 27 (1), 15–23.
, , and Matthias Sutter, “Theeconomicsofcredencegoods: Anexperimenton
the role of liability, verifiability, reputation, and competition,” American Economic
Review, 2011, 101 (2), 526–555.
Eastwood, Joseph, Brent Snook, and Kirk Luther, “What people want from
their professionals: Attitudes toward decision-making strategies,” Journal of Be-
havioral Decision Making, 2012, 25 (5), 458–468.
Frankel, Alexander and Michael Schwarz, “Experts and their records,” Eco-
nomic Inquiry, 2014, 52 (1), 56–71.
30Groopman, Jerome E and Michael Prichard, How doctors think, Vol. 82,
Houghton Mifflin Boston, 2007.
Hall, Stephen F, Colleen Webber, Patti A Groome, Christopher M Booth,
Paul Nguyen, and Yvonne DeWit, “Do doctors who order more routine medi-
cal tests diagnose more cancers? A population-based study from Ontario Canada,”
Cancer medicine, 2019, 8 (2), 850–859.
Hilger, Nathaniel G, “Why don’t people trust experts?,” The Journal of Law and
Economics, 2016, 59 (2), 293–311.
Jr, Joseph J Doyle, Steven M Ewer, and Todd H Wagner, “Returns to
physician human capital: Evidence from patients randomized to physician teams,”
Journal of health economics, 2010, 29 (6), 866–882.
Kerschbamer, Rudolf, Matthias Sutter, and Uwe Dulleck, “How social pref-
erences shape incentives in (experimental) markets for credence goods,” The Eco-
nomic Journal, 2017, 127 (600), 393–416.
Kleinberg, Jon, Himabindu Lakkaraju, Jure Leskovec, Jens Ludwig, and
Sendhil Mullainathan, “Human decisions and machine predictions,” The quar-
terly journal of economics, 2018, 133 (1), 237–293.
Litman, Leib, Jonathan Robinson, and Tzvi Abberbock, “TurkPrime. com:
A versatile crowdsourcing data acquisition platform for the behavioral sciences,”
Behavior research methods, 2017, 49 (2), 433–442.
Liu, Fang, Alexander Rasch, Christian Waibel, and Marco A Schwarz, “The
role of diagnostic ability in markets for expert services,” 2020.
Mimra, Wanda, Alexander Rasch, and Christian Waibel, “Price competition
and reputation in credence goods markets: Experimental evidence,” Games and
Economic Behavior, 2016, 100, 337–352.
Miyakis, Spiros, Georgios Karamanof, Michalis Liontos, and Theodore D
Mountokalakis, “Factors contributing to inappropriate ordering of tests in an
academic medical department and the effect of an educational feedback strategy,”
Postgraduate medical journal, 2006, 82 (974), 823–829.
Mullainathan, Sendhil and Ziad Obermeyer, “Diagnosing physician error: A
machine learning approach to low-value health care,” The Quarterly Journal of
Economics, 2022, 137 (2), 679–727.
Pesendorfer, Wolfgang and Asher Wolinsky, “Second opinions and price com-
petition: Inefficiency in the market for expert advice,” The Review of Economic
Studies, 2003, 70 (2), 417–437.
31Promberger, Marianne and Jonathan Baron, “Do patients trust computers?,”
Journal of Behavioral Decision Making, 2006, 19 (5), 455–468.
Rasch, Alexander and Christian Waibel, “Whatdrivesfraudinacredencegoods
market?–Evidence from a field study,” Oxford Bulletin of Economics and Statistics,
2018, 80 (3), 605–624.
Sandefur, Rebecca L, “Legal advice from nonlawyers: consumer demand, provider
quality, and public harms,” Stan. JCR & CL, 2020, 16, 283.
Schneider, Henry S,“Agencyproblemsandreputationinexpertservices: Evidence
from auto repair,” The Journal of Industrial Economics, 2012, 60 (3), 406–433.
Schneider, Tim and Kilian Bizer, “Effects of qualification in expert markets
with price competition and endogenous verifiability,” CEGE Discussion Papers,
Number, 2017.
and , “Expert qualification in markets for expert services: A Sisyphean Task?,”
CEGE-Discussion Papers, Number, 2017.
Schroeder, Steven A, Alan Schliftman, and Thomas E Piemme, “Variation
among physicians in use of laboratory tests: relation to quality of care,” Medical
Care, 1974, pp. 709–713.
Shaffer, Victoria A, C Adam Probst, Edgar C Merkle, Hal R Arkes, and
Mitchell A Medow, “Why do patients derogate physicians who use a computer-
based diagnostic support system?,” Medical Decision Making, 2013, 33 (1), 108–
118.
Topol, Eric, Deep medicine: how artificial intelligence can make healthcare human
again, Hachette UK, 2019.
Tracy, Dustin, Eric Schniter, and Vojtˇech Z´ıka, “Uncertainty and Reputation
Effects in Credence Goods Markets,” Available at SSRN 4513820, 2023.
Wolf, James R, “Do IT students prefer doctors who use IT?,” Computers in Human
Behavior, 2014, 35, 287–294.
Xue, Hao, Yaojiang Shi, Lei Huang, Hongmei Yi, Huan Zhou, Chengchao
Zhou, Sarah Kotb, Joseph D Tucker, and Sean Y Sylvia, “Diagnosticability
and inappropriate antibiotic prescriptions: a quasi-experimental study of primary
care providers in rural China,” Journal of Antimicrobial Chemotherapy, 2019, 74
(1), 256–263.
Yeh, D Dante, “A clinician’s perspective on laboratory utilization management,”
Clinica chimica acta, 2014, 427, 145–150.
32Zhi, Ming, Eric L Ding, Jesse Theisen-Toupal, Julia Whelan, and Ramy
Arnaout, “The landscape of inappropriate laboratory testing: a 15-year meta-
analysis,” PloS one, 2013, 8 (11), e78962.
335 Appendix
Bayesian Consumer Beliefs (10.000 simulations) Bayesian Consumer Beliefs (10.000 simulations)
1.0 0.30
0.9 0.25
0.8
0.20
0.7 0.15
0.6
0.10
0.5
0.05
0.4
0.00
2 4 6 8 10 12 14 2 4 6 8 10 12 14
Round Round
Figure 6. Left: Consumer Belief Updating with Pr(L) = 0.4 (blue) and Pr(L) =
0.2 (orange) when Low-Ability Experts only choose the HQT. Right: Pr(L) ∈
{0.1,0.05,0.01}.
Phase 1 Treatment: Skill Investments Treatment: Algorithmic Decision Aid
.7 .7 .7
.6 .6 .6
.5 .5 .5
.4 .4 .4
.3 .3 .3
.2 .2 .2
.1 .1 .1
0 0 0
0 2 4 6 8 10 10 15 20 25 10 15 20 25
share undertreatment share overtreatment share undertreatment share overtreatment share undertreatment share overtreatment
Figure 7. Share of undertreatment and overtreatment in (left) the first 10 rounds
(middle) Phase 2 of Skill and (right) Phase 2 of Algorithm
.
.5 .5 .5
.4 .4 .4
.3 .3 .3
.2 .2 .2
.1 .1 .1
0 0 0
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
High Ability Expert Share Pbig Low Ability Expert Share Pbig High Ability Expert Share Psmall Low Ability Expert Share Psmall High Ability Expert Share Pequal Low Ability Expert Share Pequal
Figure 8. Expert price setting Pm, Ps and Pe in Phase 1.
34
trepxE
ytilibA-woL
gnieB
fo ytilibaborP
trepxE
ytilibA-woL
gnieB
fo ytilibaborPTable 8. Consumer Approaching Behavior
Pm Ps Pe
Invested -0.122∗∗ 0.159∗∗∗ -0.088∗
(0.039) (0.031) (0.040)
N 1,455 1,665 1,635
This table reports marginal effects of a pooled fixed effects panel logistic regression. The
dependent variable is a binary variable that equals 1 if the expert chooses the respective price
vector. ∗ p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
Table 9. Frequencies of expert prices in Phase 2.
Expert
HA Invested HANotInvested LA Invested LA Not Invested
Pm: 18.6% Pm: 20.2% Pm: 26.3% Pm: 39.5%
Algorithm Ps: 61.1% Ps: 31.2% Ps: 40.3% Ps: 29%
Pe: 20.4% Pe: 48.6% Pe: 33.3% Pe: 31.5%
Pm: 44.9% Pm: 50.4% Pm: 25.9% Pm: 27.1%
Skill Ps: 35.7% Ps: 24.1% Ps: 46.2% Ps: 44.9%
Pe: 19.3% Pe: 25.5% Pe: 27.9% Pe: 27.9%
35Table 10. Overtreatment Conditional on Expert Price Setting
Phase 1 Skill Algorithm
Overtreated (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3) (1) (2) (3)
Pm 0.094∗ 0.120 0.111
(0.047) (0.054) (0.084)
Ps -0.228∗∗∗ -0.232∗∗ -0.199∗∗
(0.041) (0.054) (0.066)
Pe 0.119∗ 0.081 0.055
(0.046) (0.084) (0.082)
N 856 856 856 652 652 652 664 664 664
Thistablereportsmarginaleffectsofpanellogisticregressionsusingsubject-levelrandomeffects
and a cluster–robust VCE estimator at the matched group level (standard errors in parenthe-
ses). The dependent variable is a binary variable that equals 1 if the consumers experiences
overtreatment. ∗ p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
36Table 11. Consumer Approaching Behavior
Phase 1 Skill Algorithm Algorithm
Undertreated -0.519∗∗ -0.539∗∗∗ -0.465∗ -0.473∗
(0.169) (0.212) (0.220) (0.221)
Overtreated 0.089 0.047 0.075 0.088
(0.098) (0.097) (0.038) (0.095)
Pe Baseline Baseline Baseline Baseline
Pm 0.574∗∗ 0.620∗∗ 1.174∗∗∗ 1.297∗∗
(0.174) (0.225) (0.283) (0.402)
Ps -0.770∗∗∗ -0.803∗∗∗ -0.748∗∗∗ -0.661∗∗
(0.167) (0.215) (0.138) (0.229)
Not Invested 0.059 -0.262 -0.386
(0.276) (0.166) (0.209)
High-Ability 0.905
(0.503)
Not Invested × Pe 0.393
(0.375)
High-Ability × Pe -0.683
(0.363)
Not Invested × High-Ability × Pe 0.849∗
(0.431)
N 1,350 1,125 1,125 1,125
This table reports results of a panel ordered logistic regressions using subject-level random
effects and a cluster–robust VCE estimator at the matched group level (standard errors in
parentheses). The dependent variable is an ordinal variable that captures the number of con-
sumers (0 - 3) who approached the expert in the current round. Undertreated and Overtreated
are lagged variables (one round). ∗ p<0.05, ∗∗ p<0.01, ∗∗∗ p<0.001
37