This article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
Intelligent Collective Escape of Swarm Robots
Based on a Novel Fish-inspired Self-adaptive
Approach with Neurodynamic Models
Junfei Li, Member, IEEE, and Simon X. Yang, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Fishschoolspresenthigh-efficiencygroupbehaviors manycollectivefeaturesinfishschools[9].Thus,thefountain
throughsimpleindividualinteractionstocollectivemigrationand maneuver model was copied into the robotic system, pro-
dynamic escape from the predator. The school behavior of fish
viding a solution to control robots with distributed control
is usually a good inspiration to design control architecture for
architecture. Cioarga et al. [10] implemented collision-free
swarm robots. In this paper, a novel fish-inspired self-adaptive
approachisproposedforcollectiveescapefortheswarmrobots. fountainmaneuvers,andvariationsofflashexpansionbasedon
In addition, a bio-inspired neural network (BINN) is introduced mobilerobots.Berlingeretal.[11]usedthefountainmaneuver
to generate collision-free escape robot trajectories through the model for the underwater robotic platform while keeping a
combination of attractive and repulsive forces. Furthermore, to
constantly visible angle to the predator. The artificial virtual
cope with dynamic environments, a neurodynamics-based self-
forces from nearby neighbors based on relative distance are
adaptive mechanism is proposed to improve the self-adaptive
performance of the swarm robots in the changing environment. anothermethodofachievingthecollectivebehaviorsofswarm
Similar to fish escape maneuvers, simulation and experimental robots.Berlingeretal.[12]usedapotentialfield-basedmodel
results show that the swarm robots are capable of collectively to mimic collective behaviors for underwater robots in 3D
leaving away from the threats. Several comparison studies
environments. Novák et al. [13] proposed an animal-inspired
demonstrated that the proposed approach can significantly im-
fastescapemethodthatallowsswarmrobotstoavoiddynamic
provetheeffectivenessandefficiencyofsystemperformance,and
the flexibility and robustness in complex environments. obstacles. Min and Wang [14] proposed a fish-inspired escape
algorithm based on Newton-Euler dynamics equations, which
Index Terms—Self-adaptive motion, escape behaviors, swarm
is able to escape the predator rapidly and avoid collision
robots, neural networks, and bio-inspired algorithms.
with obstacles. As mentioned in the literature reviews, the
I. INTRODUCTION limitationsofmostexistingstudiesaresummarizedasfollows:
Theself-organizingcollectivebehaviorsarewildlyobserved 1) Manystudiesonlyconsideredthecollision-freeorstatic
in nature, where a large number of group animals are able to obstacle environment
accomplishmagnificentcooperativebehaviorsonlydepending 2) Many studies required that the robot has full knowledge
on relatively simple interactions [1]. The collective behaviors about the environment, including the position of threat,
enable animals as a whole to be greater than the sum of obstacle, and other robots.
individuals. Recently, many types of research have involved 3) Many studies have become computationally expensive
exploiting the understanding of mechanisms to achieve the when considering the large size of robots.
collective behaviors of swarm robots [2]–[4].
The purpose of this paper is to infuse swarm robots with
The escape of multiple robots is a classic and prevalent
“fish-like” intelligence and properties that will enable safe
issue in the research field of robotics. Traditional approaches
navigation and efficient cooperation among the autonomous
considered robot escape as a pursuit-evasion game, in which
robots, and successful completion of escape tasks in changing
the robot tries to avoid being captured by the threat [5]–
environments. The swarm robots are considered as a group
[7]. However, traditional approaches exhibit a lack of envi-
of simple robots that are autonomous and only have limited
ronmental adaptability and fall short in facilitating inter-robot
neighborinformation.Itisimportanttonotethattheproposed
collaboration. Fish are known to have the ability to navigate
collectiveescapeisfish-inspired,butthecoreoperationdeparts
and respond effectively to dynamic environments through the
from the real fish through the introduction of the neuro-
use of simple mechanisms. Through cooperation and limited
dynamics model. In real-world fish schools, the individual
implicit communication, fish schools are able to accomplish
fish can detect the water movement to perceive neighbors
complex tasks that would be beyond the capabilities of an
throughtheirlaterallines[1].Inthispaper,theneurodynamics
individual fish [8]. Methods about how to achieve collective
model is incorporated to improve self-adaptive performance
escape behaviors in robotics are currently an active focus of
in dynamic environments. In addition, a bio-inspired neural
research. The fountain maneuver model is able to reproduce
network(BINN)isintroducedtogeneratecollision-freeescape
ThisworkwassupportedbytheNaturalSciencesandEngineeringResearch trajectoriesandvirtualforces.Theproposedfish-inspiredself-
Council(NSERC)ofCanada.(Correspondingauthor:SimonX.Yang.) adaptiveapproachtothecollectiveescapeoftheswarmrobots
TheauthorsarewiththeAdvancedRoboticsandIntelligentSystemsLab-
has been shown to have several advantages over existing
oratory,SchoolofEngineering,UniversityofGuelph,Guelph,ONN1G2W1,
Canada.Emails:{jli64;syang}@uoguelph.ca escape methods, including faster operation, higher efficiency,
4202
beF
6
]OR.sc[
1v82240.2042:viXraThis article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
and improved reliability. Simulation and experimental results and T is the position of the threat within the detection
have demonstrated the effectiveness of the proposed approach range R . Assume that there is no inter-robot communication
s
forensuringsafeescapeandefficientself-adaptivecooperation between individual robots. Therefore, the robots cannot share
among autonomous robots in changing environments. The neighboring robots information p and M , or environmental
d d
main contributions of this paper are summarized as follows: informationO andT withotherrobots.Theinputoftherobot
• A novel collective escape is proposed to swarm robots is solely dependent on its own observations. In addition, the
in changing environments. The proposed approach is robots is required self-adaptive to changing environments and
inspired by the group behavior of fish with only local maintain the desired distance R d from their neighbors during
sensing ability. the escape process.
• Anovelcollision-freevirtualforcesapproachisproposed Therefore,thefish-inspiredescapestudiedinthispapercan
to guide swarm robots based on the BINN. During the be described as: for a group of m robots and given the initial
escape process, there are no learning procedures for the positions of robots p e(0) with e = 1,...,m. Since the i-
movement of robots. th robot detects a threat, the i-th robot begins to escape and
• A novel neurodynamics-based self-adaptive mechanism generate a collision-free trajectory, that is, P Escape ∈ O ft ree,
is proposed to consider the effects of obstacles, which until achieving a safe distance d s. Other robots generated
enables swarm robots to dynamically adjust their param- collision-freetrajectories,thatis,P Follow ∈O ft ree,tofollowthe
eters in complex environments. i-th robot with the desired distance R d to neighboring robots.
This paper is organized in the following manner. Section II During the escape process, the swarm robots are required to
givestheproblemstatement.SectionIIIdescribestheproposed be self-adaptive to adapt to changing environments.
approaches. Section IV shows the simulation and comparison
results. Section V provides a real robot experiment. Section III. PROPOSEDAPPROACH
VI analyses the characteristic of the neurodynamics model. In In this section, a fish-inspired system for robot escape
Section VII, the result is briefly summarized. behaviorandaneuralnetworkstructureareintroducedtogen-
erate collision-free virtual forces. In addition, a self-adaptive
II. PROBLEMSTATEMENT mechanism based on the dynamic landscape of neural activity
For a swarm of m robots, their time-varying location at is proposed.
time instant t in the 2D Cartesian workspace W, can be
uniquely determined by the spatial position p = (x ,y ),
e e e A. Fish-inspired Behavioral Modeling and Organization
e = 1,...,m. The maximum speed of the e-th robot is
Fish schools exhibit highly efficient group behaviors
denoted by V > 0. Suppose each robot is considered
max
throughsimpleindividualinteractions.Inthispaper,theescape
as an omnidirectional robot, which can change the moving
behavior is modeled as a mode transition process. Each robot
direction without delay. The next location of the e-th robot at
hasthreemodes:Alignmode,Escapemode,andFollowmode.
time instant t+1 can be given as
The behavior of the robot is determined by a current mode.
(x e)
t+1
=(x e) t+v k∆tcos(θ e)
t
(1) As shown in Fig. 1, the swarm robots start in the Align
mode. In the case that the robot has not detected a threat
(y ) =(y ) +v ∆tsin(θ ) (2)
e t+1 e t k e t within the sensor range R and any mode transitions from
s
where the v
k
< V
max
is the current speed of the robot; θ
e
neighboringrobots,therobotstaysinAlignmode.Iftherobot
is the moving direction of the robot; and ∆t is the unit time detects the threat, its Align mode transitions into the Escape
interval. In addition, there is a sequence of static and moving mode. In the case that the robot detects that any neighboring
obstacles in W. Let O be an obstacle scenario. The time- robots transition into the Escape or Follow mode, this robot
varying collision-free area pertaining to O can be defined as transitions into the Follow mode. In the case that the Follow
Ot =(cid:8) (x,y)∈R2 :Γ>1(cid:9) , where robotdetectsanewthreat,thisrobottransitionsintotheEscape
free
mode, whereas the original Escape robot transitions into the
(x−xt)2 +(y−yt)2
Γ= o o (3) Follow mode. In the event that the Escape robot achieves the
λ
o safe distance d , the escape task is finished.
s
where (xt,yt) is the center of the obstacle which is updated In addition, the fish organization was considered an egal-
o o
with respect to a constant moving speed v and λ is the itarian organization. Therefore, the traditional fish-inspired
o o
size of the obstacle. The regions meeting Γ = 1, Γ > 1, or approaches assumed that swarm robots are an egalitarian
Γ<1 denote the surface, exterior, or interior of the obstacle, organization[12].However,themostcurrentstudiesfoundthat
respectively. The robot is equipped with sensors with 360◦ the hierarchical organization might exist in some species of
visual capability and a detection range R to recognize the fish[1].Therefore,inspiredbyNagyetal.[15],ahierarchical
s
position of the threat, obstacle and other robots. The input for organization is incorporated into the swarm robots. As shown
e-th robot can be represented as in Fig. 2, once a robot detects the threat, the escape of this
robot begins. At this time, a hierarchical index system is built
I ={p ,M ,O,T} (4)
e d d to organize the swarm robots. The hierarchical index of the
wherep isthepositionofthed-throbotwithinthedetection Escape robot is 1. The hierarchical index of robots within the
d
range R ; M is the current mode state of the d-th robot detection range of the Escape robot is 2. For robots outside
s dThis article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
Start
Excitatory input
Mode 1: Align
Detect Unknown Environment
Observation Data Inhibitory input
Obstacles Position
Sensors Threat Velocity
Other Robots Direction No
Yes Detect No D Me ote dc et
Record Threat Position Threat? Transition?
Update Robot Position Yes
Ln
Generate ColM liso iod ne - 2 fr: e E e s Ec sa cp ae pe Trajectory Yes TD hNe ret ee w ac t t ? Self-adM apo tid ve e 3 C: oF lo lel clo tiw ve Motion
NeurodynamicsModel Escap Oe R Robot ExcA itt at tr oac ryti v Ine put Attractive Force
No Low-index Robot （a） （b）
Obstacles Inhibitory Input Repulsive Force
Obstacles Inhibitory Input Repulsive Force TO D ht e rh t eee acr tts ? Yes Neighbor Robot ExcR ite ap tou rls yi v Ine p ut Fig. 3: Examples of the bio-inspired neural network. (a)
structure of the neural network with only local connections;
Threat Excitatory Input No
No Ac Sh ai fe ev e (b) the dynamic landscape of neural activity.
Distance?
Yes
End BINN is proposed to generate attractive and repulsive forces.
Fig. 1: The flowchart of the model transmission. Mode 1: the ThestructureoftheBINNisshowninFig.3(a).Theproposed
swarm robots detect the environment, including information neuralnetworkarchitectureischaracterizedbyadiscretetopo-
on the threats, obstacles, and other robots. Mode 2: if one logically organized map. In this configuration, each neuron
robot detects the threat, this robot records the position of the uniquely represents a specific environmental location. Note
threatandgeneratestheescapetrajectory.Mode3:theresultant that the distance between neurons L is assumed to be equal
n
force combines the attractive and repulsive forces, where two toλ ,whichcanguaranteetheneuronone-to-onerepresenting
o
self-adaptive weights are used to adjust the influence of the the obstacle. Therefore, the receptive field of the neuron is
attractive and repulsive forces. represented by a circle with a radius of r and has lateral
0
connections only to its eight neighboring neurons. The fish-
inspired organization is used to reduce computational com-
2 plexity. Only the Escape robot needs to use a neural network
3 with the one-to-one environment representing to dynamically
Threat generate the escape trajectory. The Follow robot can use a
smaller neural network to leave the threat.
2 1 TheshuntingmodelwasdevelopedbyGrossberg[17]based
3 on Hodgkin and Huxley’s model [18]. The shunting equation
can be written as
dx
3 2 k =−Ax +(B−x )Se−(D+x )Si (5)
dt k k k k k
Fig.2:Theillustrationoffish-inspiredcollectiveorganization. where x denotes the neural activity of k-th neuron; Se and
k k
The robots cannot share information with neighbors, only the Si are the excitatory and inhibitory inputs to the neuron,
k
first robot to detect the threat is aware of the threat position. respectively; A is the passive decay rate; B, and D are the
upper and lower bounds of the neural activity, respectively.
Several robotic navigation and control algorithms have been
the detection range of Escape robot, the hierarchical index is developed depending on the shunting model [19]. The neural
equal to the lowest hierarchical index of its neighbors plus activity for k-th neuron is written as
1. The hierarchical organization can reduce the computation (cid:32) n (cid:33)
cost when the system considers a large number of robots. dx k =−Ax +(B−x ) [I ]++(cid:88) w [x ]+
Only the Escape robot needs to be notified of the position dt k k k kl l
of the threat and dynamically generate the escape trajectory. (cid:32) l= n1 (cid:33) (6)
(cid:88)
If the threat is observed by multiple robots, robots that detect −(D+x ) [I ]−+ g [x −σ]−
k k kl l
threatwilltransitionintotheEscapemodeandmultipleescape
l=1
trajectories will be generated. Other robots will follow the wherex representstheneuralactivityofneighboringneurons
l
closest Escape robot when observing multiple Escape robots to k-th neuron; n represents the amount of neighboring neu-
within their detection range. rons to k-th neuron; [a]+ is defined as [a]+ = max{a,0};
[a]− isdefinedas[a]− =max{−a,0};andσ isthethreshold
of the inhibitory lateral neural connections. The connection
B. Virtual Forces Based on Bio-inspired Neural Network
weight, w and g , are defined as
kl kl
During the past decades, there have been many models to
(cid:40)
mimic fish shoaling [12]. Many models consider the virtual µ/|kl|, 0<|kl|≤r 0
w =f(|kl|)= (7)
forces to be an effect of individual fish [16]. In this paper, a kl 0, |kl|>r
0This article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
and where C is a positive constant; P is the current position of
A c
g =βw , (8) the robot. Because the neuron of the obstacle has a negative
kl kl
activity value, the robot will not choose the obstacle neuron
respectively, where β is a positive constant, β ∈ [0,1]; |kl| as the next position. Therefore, the attractive force f (k,l) is
A
represents the Euclidean distance between k-th neuron to l- also collision-free to the obstacle.
th neuron; µ is a positive constant. The excitatory signal 2) Repulsive Force: Based on the modeling of the fish-
S ke is designed to the term [I k]+ + (cid:80)n l=1w kl[x l]+. The inspired behavior, when robots transition into the Escape
term (cid:80)n l=1w kl[x l]+ calculates the sum of positive neural mode, the Escape robot needs to leave away from the threat.
activities from its neighboring neurons. For each neuron, Meanwhile, the swarm robots are required to maintain the
the computation of its neural activity involves calculations desired distance R to each other. Thus, the external input
d
dfr eo sm igni ets
d
n toeig thh ebo tr ei rn mg [n Ieu ]−ron +s. (cid:80)T nhe ginh [i xbit −ory σ]s −ig .n Ta hl eS tki ermis I
rep
is defined as
k l=1 kl l 
(cid:80)n l=1g kl[x
l
− σ]− guarantees that negative neural activity E, if it is a threat or neighbor robot
can propagate in a small region because the existence of I = −E, if it is an obstacle (13)
rep
the threshold σ affects the inhibitory lateral connections. 0, otherwise.
Only negative neural activity that reaches the threshold can
If the corresponding position of the neuron is a threat or
propagatetoitsneighboringneurons.Therefore,theexcitatory
signal Se globally influences the whole state space, while the neighbor robot, the external input becomes a large positive
k
inhibitory signal Si has only a local effect in a small region, value.Ifthecorrespondingpositionisanobstacle,theexternal
k
input becomes a large negative value. The command neuron
as shown in Fig. 3(b). The external input I varies with the
k
of the repulsive force can be given as
generation of force, which can be defined as
(cid:40) P ⇐x =min{x ,l=1,2,...,n;x ≥0} (14)
I att, if generate a attractive force rep Prep l l
I = (9)
k
I , if generate a repulsive force where P represents the command neuron of the robot;
rep rep
x represents the neural activity of the command neuron
where I and I are external inputs when generating the
Prep
att rep of the repulsive force. The repulsive force of the Follow robot
attractive and repulsive forces, respectively. Based on the
f (k,l) can be defined as
R
BINN,theattractiveandrepulsivevirtualforcescanbedefined
(cid:40)
as follow. C Prep−Pc if 0<D(k,l)≤R
1) Attractive Force: Based on the modeling of the fish-
f R(k,l)=
0,R∥Prep−Pc∥
if D(k,l)>R
d
(15)
d
inspired behavior, the Follow robots need to track the Escape
robotorthelowesthierarchicalindexFollowrobot.Thelower where C R is a positive constant; D(k,l) is the distance
hierarchical index robot indicates it is closer to the Escape between two neighboring robots k and l. The repulsive force
robot, which has higher probabilities of the correct moving of the Follow robot takes effect only if the distance between
direction to the Escape robot. Thus, the external input I
att
is the neighboring robots is less than R d. Because the neuron of
defined as the obstacle has a negative activity value, the robot will not
 choosetheobstacleneuronasthenextposition.Therefore,the
E, if it is a Escape or lowest index robot
 attractive force f R(k,l) is also collision-free to the obstacle.
I att = −E, if it is an obstacle The Escape robot has information about the threat position,
0,
otherwise thus the Escape robot only receive the repulsive force from
(10) the threat to generate the collision-free escape trajectory. The
where E is a positive constant. If the corresponding position repulsive force of the Escape robot F can be defined as
RT
of the neuron is the Escape robot or the lowest index robot, (cid:40)
C Prep−Pc if 0<D(i,Th)≤d
theexternalinputbecomesalargepositivevalue.Ifthecorre-
F
RT
=
R∥Prep−Pc∥ s
(16)
sponding position is the obstacle, the external input becomes 0, if D(i,Th)>d
s
a large negative value. The command neuron of the attractive
where D(i,Th) is the distance between the i-th Escape robot
force can be given as
and threat. The repulsive force of the Escape robot takes
P ⇐x =max{x ,l=1,2,...,n} (11) effect only if the distance is smaller than the safe distance
att Patt l
d . The stability and convergence of the proposed model
s
where P att represents the command neuron of the attractive can be rigorously proved using the Lyapunov stability theory.
forceintheneuralnetwork;x Patt representstheneuralactivity Equation(6)canbewrittenintoGrossberg’sgeneralform[17],
of the command neuron of the attractive force. From (11), the
(cid:32) n (cid:33)
robot keeps searching for maximum neural activity from its dx k =a (x ) b (x )−(cid:88) c d (x ) (17)
neighborhoods. When a robot advances to a new position, the dt k k k k kl l l
l=1
newpositionbecomesitscurrentposition.Theattractiveforce
based on the substitutions as follows:
f (k,l) can be defined as
A
(cid:40)
B−x if x ≥0
P −P k l
f (k,l)=C att c (12) a k(x k)= (18)
A A∥P att−P c∥ D+x k if x l <0This article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
c kl =−w kl (19) Algorithm 1: Neurodynamics-based Self-adaptive
 mechanism
x if x ≥0
 l l
Input: positions of robot p =(x ,y ), desired
d (x )= β(x −σ) if x <σ (20) e e e
l l l l distance R and dynamic neural activity N
0
otherwise Output: ratios
ofd
α / α
A R
(cid:16) B[I ]+−D[I ]−−(A+[I ]++[I ]−)x (cid:17) 1 Initialize stride lengths of adjustment ∆
b (x )= k k k k k . 2 α A → 0.5
k k a k(x k) 3 α R → 0.5
(21)
4 while escape from the threat do
Since w =w , it follows that c =c , indicating symme-
kl lk kl lk 5 if 0≤α A ≤1 and 0≤α R ≤1 then
try.Sincex isboundedintheinterval[−D,B],itfollowsthat
a d′k (( xx k )) =≥ β0k , ≥in 0di ac tat xing <p σos ;it ai nv dity d. ′S (i xnc )e =d′ l 0( ,x ol) th= erw1 ia st ex ,l it> fo0 l-; 6 7 g ifet An ve ri (g ih )b +ou (cid:80)rin n l=g 1n [xe lu ]r −al >ac Rti dvit ty hex nl from N
lol wsl that d′(x ) ≥ 0l , indicating ml onl otonicity. Therefore, (6) 8 increase ratio α A / α R by ∆
satisfiesalll thel threestabilityconditions(symmetry,positivity, 9 else
and monotonicity) required by Grossberg’s general form [17]. 10 decrease ratio α A / α R by ∆
ThecandidateoftheLyapunovfunctionfor(17)canbechosen
as [20]
(cid:88)n (cid:90) xk
V =− b (ξ )d′ (ξ )dξ
k k k k k where U is a small constant. The function Avr(i) denotes
k=1 0 (22) the average neighboring distance of the robot i. Function
n
1 (cid:88) [a]− =max{−a,0} denotes the sum of neighboring negative
+ c d (x )d (x ).
2 lj l l j j neural activity. If no obstacles are in proximity to the robots,
l,j=1 thetermrepresentingneuralactivityeffect,(cid:80)n [x ]−,should
For the generated force, the time derivative of V can be given l=1 l
equate to 0. Therefore, robots adjust the ratio depending
by
n (cid:32) n (cid:33)2 on whether their average neighboring distance is less than
dV =−(cid:88) a d′ b −(cid:88) c d . (23) or exceeds Rd. If there are obstacles in proximity to the
dt k k k kl l robots,(cid:80)n [x ]−isalargepositivevalue.Thus,theattraction
k=1 l=1 l=1 l
effectcontinuouslyincreases,whichensuresthatrobotsremain
During the generation process of the virtual force, dV/dt≤0
connected with each other to bypass obstacles. A detailed
because of a ≥0 and d′ ≥0. The more detail and rigorous
k k discussion of neurodynamics-based self-adaptive motion can
proof can be found in [20]. As a result, the proposed model
be found in Section VI-B.
is stable. The dynamics of the neural network is guaranteed
The virtual forces are used to determine the collision-free
to converge to an equilibrium state of the system.
positionofthenextmovement.However,whentomovetothe
C. Self-adaptive Collective Mechanism next position is determined by the velocity of the robot. The
magnitude of F is used to determine the velocity of the
The proposed BINN-based virtual forces enable robots to RS
robot v . The possible magnitude of F ranges from 0 to
leave the threat with collision avoidance. During the escape k RS
+∞,whereasthev isalimitedrangefrom0tothemaximum
process, the swarm robots are required to be self-adaptive k
velocityV .Thus,themagnitudeofF isrequiredtomap
to adapt to dynamic environments, which means the swarm max RS
into a finite velocity. The velocity of the robot v is given by
robots should be able to dynamically adjust their movement k
parameters based on the environment. The resultant force of v
k
=arctan(cid:0)(cid:12) (cid:12)F RS(cid:12) (cid:12)(cid:1) ×(2/π)×V
max
(26)
each robot can be given as
where arctan() is the trigonometric function. The above non-
(cid:88) (cid:88)
F RS =α A f A(k,l)+α R f R(k,l) (24) linear mapping has been used for the collective motion [21].
l∈N(I),hl<hk l∈N(I) The velocity v
k
increases with the increase of the magnitude
where α and α , 0 ≤ α ,α ≤ 1 and α + α = 1, ofF untiltheforceF reachesalargermagnitude,which
A R A R A R RS RS
areself-adaptiveweightsoftheattractiveandrepulsiveforces, islesssensitivetothemappingfunction.FortheEscaperobot,
respectively.Theself-adaptivemotionistodynamicallyadjust the same method is employed to map F onto velocity v .
RT k
the proper ratio of α / α to adapt the environmental
A R
changes. In the proposed method, the dynamic neural activity IV. SIMULATIONRESULTS
is incorporated into the adjustment of the α / α ratio, as
A R In this section, the proposed approach is tested to a series
shown in lines 7 to 10 in Algorithm 1. The stride lengths of
of evaluations across various scenarios [22]. In addition,
adjustment ∆ can be defined as
simulation results are compared with other recent approaches
 (cid:88)n to illustrate the performance of the proposed approach. All
+U, if Avr(i)+ [x l]− >R
d simulationstudiesaretestedinMATLABR2021a.Theswarm
∆= l=1 (25) robots are randomly distributed in the environment. The pa-
n
−U,
if
Avr(i)+(cid:88)
[x l]− ≤R
d
Dram =et 1e ,rs µo =fa 1ll ,Esim =ul 7a 0ti ,o σns =ar −e 0s .e 5t ,a Lsfo =llo 1w ,s r:A == √1 25 ,, RB = =1 3,
,
n 0 d
l=1This article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
Alignrobot Align robot Align robot Align robot Align robot
Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot
Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
Fig. 4: Robots escape in a static environment. (a) the initial position of robots; (b) robots escape at time 8s; (c) robots escape
at 16s; (d) robots escape at 43s; (e) robots escape at 52s.
Align robot Align robot Align robot Align robot Align robot
Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot
Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot
moving obstacle
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
Fig. 5: Robots escape in a dynamic environment. (a) the initial position of robots and moving obstacles; (b) robots escape at
7s; (c) robots escape at 14s; (d) robots escape at 36s; (e) robots escape at 45s.
Align robot Align robot Align robot Align robot Align robot
Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot Escaperobot
Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot Follow robot
Escape Mode Follow Mode
3 3
detects a
new threat
2 Follow Mode Escape Mode 2 2 2
1 1 1 1 1
(a) (b) (c) (d) (e)
Fig.6:Robotsescapeinasuddenchangeenvironment.(a)robotsdetectthethreatandescapeat6s;(b)anewthreatisdetected
at 25s; (c) two robots transition their modes at time 26s; (d) a new threat is detected at 41s; (d)robots escape at 61s.
R = 8 and V = 1.4. The environment is represented by B. Escape with Moving Obstacles
s max
a neural network, which has 70×70 neurons. In the next simulation, the moving obstacles are considered
intheenvironment.Fig.5(a)showsthemovingobstacle,which
continuously moves to the left. The moving obstacle might
A. Escape with Static Obstacles
partition the swarm robots, which requires robots to maintain
aconnectionwitheachothertoavoidmemberloss.Figs.5(b)-
Thefirstsimulationaimstotesttheproposedapproachwith
(e) show the swarm robots are able to bypass the moving
the static obstacle. As shown in Fig. 4, there are 13 robots
obstacle without member loss. A different escape trajectory
randomly deployed in the environment, where the position of
is generated compared with the last simulation because the
the threat is (15,15). In the beginning, one robot detects the
moving obstacle blocks the escape direction of the swarm
threat and transmission to the Escape mode (red color), as
robot. Note that the generation of the new escape trajectory is
showninFig.4(a).AstheEscaperobotmoves,theindividual
only based on the dynamic change of neural activity without
robotsdetecttheEscaperobotandtransmissionfromtheAlign
any learning or decision-making process.
mode(yellowcolor)totheFollowmode(bluecolor),asshown
in Figs. 4(b)–(e). In this process, the individual robots can be
C. Escape with New Threats
dynamically added to the swarm without the need for explicit
reorganization,asshowninFigs.4(c)and4(d).Itisimportant In this simulation, some new threats might suddenly appear
to note that the swarm topology is not the same as in the in the environment. The mode transition is dynamic because
original, but it still keeps the desired distance R between every robot that detects the new threat can transition into the
d
neighbors. Escape mode. As shown in Figs. 6(a) and 6(b), robots startThis article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
to escape the threat until a new Threat 2 is detected at time
25s. The robot with Escape mode transitions into the Follow
22%
mode, whereas the robot with Follow mode transitions into 22%
the Escape mode, as shown in Fig. 6(c). The new collision-
28%
free escape trajectories are generated. Note that the influence 29% 30%
31%
of Threats 1 and 2 exists continuously in the neural network.
Thus,theswarmrobotswillnotreturntoThreats1or2when
another threat appears, as shown in Fig. 6(e).
(a) (b)
Fig.7:Comparisonsofescapetimeandenergyconsumptionin
D. Comparison Studies different scenarios. (a) escape time; (b) energy consumption.
In comparison studies, the proposed approach is compared
with three recent methods to evaluate the performance of
the proposed approach. To evaluate the performance of the Robot control Sensor
proposed approach, a total of 30 test cases are conducted in
each evaluation. In these tests, the positions of robots, threats,
ROS & C++ STM32F405 Raspberry Pi 4
and obstacles are randomly distributed in the environment.
1) Environmental Adaptation: The self-adaptive process Status & environment information Commands
has more benefits in environmental adaptation. The proposed
approach is compared to an ablative version that lacks the Interface Laptop
self-adaptive mechanism. The self-adaptive ratio, α /α , is
A R
set to a constant without changes during the escape process. Command position
Program Manager
The results, shown in Fig. 7, demonstrate that the proposed
Robot & environment information Ubuntu
approach is more effective in all scenarios, particularly in
the moving obstacle scenario, where it saves over 31% of
the escape time and 30% of the escape consumption. This Fig. 8: The architecture of the real robot test. Blue dotted
highlights the importance of the self-adaptive mechanism in box: ROS-based mobile robot platform. Yellow dotted box:
providing effective escape solutions. In addition, the state-of- program implemented in the Ubuntu system.
the-art methods are compared with the proposed approach in
the moving obstacles scenario, as shown in Table I.
shown in Table I, indicate that the proposed approach is more
In comparison to Berlinger et al.’s method, Berlinger et
efficient in terms of escape consumption and time. Note that
al.’s method is limited in its ability to provide efficient
there is a significant difference in escape time. The proposed
escape solutions because it only considers a collision-free
approach results in an escape time of 42.7s, while Zhao
environment. As shown in Table I, the success rate of this
et al.’s method results in an escape time of 62.5s. This
approach is low because many robots collide with obstacles.
differenceisduetothefactthatZhaoetal.’smethodinvolves
Additionally, the escape trajectory generated by Berlinger et
a decrease in moving speed when robots bypass obstacles,
al.’s method is inefficient as it requires the robots to maintain
as the support force from the obstacle cancels out the virtual
a constant angle to the threat, resulting in wasted energy and
force perpendicular to the obstacle. In contrast, the proposed
time.Thismethodmaybeabletomimicfishescapebehavior,
approach relies only on dynamic neural activity for obstacle
but it has limitations in its practical application.
avoidance, allowing for a constant moving speed during the
In comparison to Novák et al.’s method, Novák et al.’s
escape process.
method is limited in its ability to provide efficient escape
solutions because they treated both the threat and dynamic
TABLEI:Thecomparisonofescapeperformancetothestate-
obstaclesasasameinfluence.Incontrast,theproposedBINN
of-the-art methods in the moving obstacles scenario
considers the threat and multiple obstacles, including both
static and moving obstacles, by using two external inputs, Se, Method EscapeConsumption EscapeTime SuccessRate
k
and Si. This allows the proposed apporach to provide more Berlingeretal.[11] 216.71kJ 87.2s 31%
k
accurate and effective escape solutions. As shown in Table Nováketal.[13] 132.12kJ 50.1s 46%
Zhaoetal.[21] 125.62kJ 62.5s 77%
I, the success rate of the proposed approach is significantly Proposedapproach 116.45kJ 42.7s 100%
higher than that of Novák et al.’s method. This is because the
escape force generated by Novák et al.’s method may cancel
each other out in multiple obstacles environment, leading to
thedisorientationandlossofsomememberswithintheswarm V. EXPERIMENTS
during the evasion process. The proposed approach was tested using multiple mobile
2) Self-Adaptive Performance: The proposed self-adaptive robots in a real-world environment. The architecture of the
escape of swarm robots has been compared with Zhao et al.’s testplatformisshowninFig.8.ThreeROS(RobotOperating
method,whichisbasedontheaveragedistanceofneighboring System)-based robots were built for experimental purposes.
robots, in a scenario involving moving obstacles. The results, Each robot carried a 1080p camera implemented in UbuntuThis article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
（a） （b） （c）
R3 R2
R3
Threat R3 R2
R1 R1
R2
R1
R2
（d） （e） （f）
R3 R1
R2 R3 R3
R2
Moving Obstacle
Threat R1
R1
（g） （h） （i）
R3 R1
R3
R2 R2
R3
R1
R1 Threat New Threat R2
Fig. 9: Mobile robots experiments in different scenarios. (a) the initial positions of the static obstacle experiment; (b) static
environment at time 5.5s; (c) static environment at time 15.5s; (d) the initial positions of the moving obstacle experiment; (e)
dynamic environment at time 9s; (f) dynamic environment at time 21s; (g) the initial positions of the new threat experiment;
(h) new threat environment at time 9.5s; (i) new threat environment at time 20.5s.
usingtheOpenCVlibraryandoneRPLIDARA1laserscanner, robots, as shown in Figs. 9(d) and 9(e). Since mobile robots
which has 12m and 360◦ omnidirectional range scanning. In arenotabletopasstheobstaclethroughthetrajectoryinFigs.
addition, the mobile robot contains Raspberry Pi 4 Model B 9(c), new trajectories are generated as shown in Figs. 9(e)
and STM32F405 computing boards for robot control, envi- and 9(f). The dynamic response of mobile robots to changing
ronment detection, and localization. Mobile robots can send environments can be better understood by comparing the new
their status and environmental information to the computer threatinFigs.9(g)-(i).Sinceanewthreatsuddenlyaddstothe
usingaWIFInetwork.Theproposedapproachisimplemented environment, robot R3 transitions into the Escape mode, and
on the Ubuntu system, and the Rviz program was used to robot R1 transitions into the Follow mode. The new trajectory
interface with mobile robots. The experiment is within an of robot R3 is to escape the threat. In real-robot experiments,
area of 5m × 3.5m where robot movements were recorded each robot moves in a safe state trajectory due to the self-
through a 1080p camera, connected by the WIFI network to adaptivemechanismandthethresholdofinhibitoryconnection
mobile devices, and localized on the top of the area. Three σ. In summary, the results of the experiment show that the
polyhedral obstacles are considered, and the threat is chosen proposedapproachiscapableofguidingmobilerobotstokeep
asaboxwithbiohazardlabeling.Robotdynamicsisdescribed safe navigation and successful completion of escape tasks in
by means of differential drive models. The proposed velocity changing environments.
v canberegardedasthecooperativepathplanningforrobots.
k
When robots detect the threat using the sensor, the command VI. DISCUSSIONS
position x = (x ,y ,θ ) is sent to mobile robots based on
i R R R In this section, the characteristic of the neurodynamics
the changing environment and current position of the robots.
model is analyzed. In addition, the reason that the neuro-
dynamics model can improve self-adaptive motion is also
The experimental results are collected in Fig. 9. The green
discussed.
lines show the escape trajectories of three mobile robots.
Firstly, it is important to note that mobile robots are able to
A. Collective Escape via Neurodynamics
finish escape tasks in all scenarios. Moreover, mobile robots
are able to adjust the escape trajectory with the changing In order to investigate the escape performance with respect
environments, as shown in Figs. 9(d)-(f) and 9(g)-(h). In of the neurodynamics model, three important parameters are
particular, when robot R1 detects the threat, mobile robots analyzed. Parameter A is the passive decay rate, which solely
R1 andR2 move underthe obstacle toescape fromthe threat, determines the transient response of the external input signal.
as shown in Figs. 9(b) and 9(c). In the next experiment, a To analyze the influence of parameter A, several experiments
movingobstacle(anorangecolorrobot)movestotheposition are tested with the same parameter settings, except that A has
under the obstacle and blocks the escape directions of mobile different values. The energy consumption, escape time, andThis article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
success rate of swarm robots at A = 1,5,15,20, and 40 are
listed in Table II. The results in Table II show the standard σ -
σ -
deviation of the escape time (0.95s) and energy consumption σ -
(1.45kJ) at different parameters A are both very small in the
case that all robots can escape the threat.
TABLE II: Escape performances with different A values
ParameterA EnergyConsumption EscapeTime SuccessRate
A=1 118.51kJ 42.4s 100%
A=5 121.55kJ 44.6s 100%
A=10 120.20kJ 43.8s 100%
A=15 117.00kJ 41.7s 100%
A=20 119.26kJ 43.1s 100%
Fig. 10: Three typical examples of one robot by choosing
A=40 118.31kJ 43.7s 100%
different parameters σ values.
Parameter µ is the weight of the local connection. While
the local connection with each neuron is a small region, the x x x
11 12 13
propagation of the positive neural activity is able to arrive x 14 R1 x 15
at the whole neural network. To analyze the influence of x x x Bypass obstacles
16 17 18
parameter µ, several experiments are tested with the same
parameter settings, except that µ has a different value. The
x x x
escape time, energy consumption, and success rate of swarm 21 22 23
robots at µ = 0.1,0.5,1 and 5 are listed in Table III. The x 24 R2 x 25 Close to obstacles
x x x
results in Table III show that the standard deviation of escape 26 27 28
time (1.03s) and the energy consumption (2.04kJ) is very (a) (b)
small at different parameters when all robots can succeed in
escaping the threat. In addition, when parameter µ > 1, it is
very easy to lose some robots because the propagated activity robot loss
is amplified. Thus, the value of µ is normally selected in the
interval µ∈(0,1].
TABLE III: Escape performances with different µ values robot loss
Parameterµ EscapeConsumption EscapeTime SuccessRate
(c) (d)
µ=0.1 118.94kJ 45.3 100%
µ=0.5 117.18kJ 44.8 100% Fig. 11: The comparison of different self-adaptive motion
µ=1 114.02kJ 42.9 100% approaches. (a) the illustration of the neurodynamics-based
µ=5 120.59kJ 45.1 62%
approach; (b) the comparison of self-adaptive ratio changes.
(c)finalescapetrajectoriesbasedontheneurodynamics-based
Parameter σ is the threshold of the inhibitory connec-
approach; (d) final escape trajectories based on the distance-
tion, which solely denotes the clearance from obstacles. The
based approach.
obstacle has only local effects in a small region to avoid
possible collisions, which can be adjusted by selecting the
relativelateralconnectionstrengthβ andthethresholdσ.Fig.
B. Self-adaptive Motion via Neurodynamics
10 shows three typical examples of one robot by choosing
different parameters σ. The red and triangular line shows the In traditional approaches to self-adaptive adjustment, the
motion of the robot when choosing σ = −1.4. There is no self-adaptive ratio is typically based on the average straight-
clearance from the obstacles. It is obvious to see that the line distance between neighboring robots [21]. The ratio is
robotclipsthecornersofobstaclesandrunsdowntheedgesof increasedordecreasedwhentheaveragedistanceisgreateror
obstacles.Theblueandrhomboidlineshowsastrongobstacle lessthanthedesireddistance.However,thetraditionalmethod
clearance by choosing σ = −0.1. It shows a very strong might not be suitable for the moving-obstacle environments.
clearance from obstacles, which pushes the robot very far As illustrated in Fig.11(a), the average distance between two
fromtheobstacle.Whenconsideringalargernumberofrobots robots (shown in red and dotted line) is less than the desired
or the gap between obstacles is not able to accommodate distance, indicating that the self-adaptive ratio should be
robots, choosing a small σ value is a sub-optimal option. decreased. However, in the presence of obstacles that might
The green and circle line shows the robot motion with a partition the robots, a decrease in the attraction effect leads
moderate obstacle clearance by choosing σ =−0.5. It shows to disconnection from other robots. In the proposed approach,
a “comfortable” trajectory, which does not clip the corners of the ratio adjustment incorporates neural activity. As shown
obstacles and runs down the edges of obstacles. in Fig.11(a), the obstacle and its clearance have a very largeThis article has been accepted for the publication in a future issue of IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics. DOI:
10.1109/TIE.2024.3363723
negative neural activity. Neural activity x 16,x 17,x 18 are neg- [11] F.Berlinger,P.Wulkop,andR.Nagpal,“Self-organizedevasivefountain
ativeresultsby(6),whereasothersarepositiveinneighboring maneuverswithabioinspiredunderwaterrobotcollective,”inProceed-
neurons of robot R1. Thus, the term Avr(i)+(cid:80)n [x ]− in ings of IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation,
l=1 l 2021,pp.9204–9211.
(25)shouldbegreaterthanthedesireddistanceR d.Therefore, [12] F. Berlinger, M. Gauci, and R. Nagpal, “Implicit coordination for 3d
the ratio should increase, which increases the effect of the underwatercollectivebehaviorsinafish-inspiredrobotswarm,”Science
Robotics,vol.6,no.50,p.eabd8668,Jan.2021.
attractive force acting and avoiding the loss of robots. Same
[13] F. Novák, V. Walter, P. Petrácˇek, T. Bácˇa, and M. Saska, “Fast col-
with robot R2, neural activity x 21,x 22,x 23 are negative re- lective evasion in self-localized swarms of unmanned aerial vehicles,”
sulted by (6), whereas others are positive in the neighboring Bioinspiration&Biomimetics,vol.16,no.6,p.066025,Nov.2021.
[14] H. Min and Z. Wang, “Design and analysis of group escape behavior
neuronsofrobotR2.AsshowninFig.11(b),thecomparisonof
for distributed autonomous mobile robots,” in Proceedings of IEEE
ratio changes shows that the proposed approach increases the InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,2011,pp.6128–
attractive effect, while the distance-based method decreases 6135.
[15] M.Nagy,Z.Ákos,D.Biro,andT.Vicsek,“Hierarchicalgroupdynamics
the attractive effect when the robots are close to the obstacle.
inpigeonflocks,”Nature,vol.464,no.7290,pp.890–893,Apr.2010.
As shown in Figs.11(c) and 11(d), the neurodynamics-based [16] J. K. Parrish, S. V. Viscido, and D. Grunbaum, “Self-organized fish
self-adaptive escape is able to achieve collision-free escape schools: an examination of emergent properties,” The Biological Bul-
letin,vol.202,no.3,pp.296–305,Jun.2002.
without member loss in the moving obstacle environment.
[17] S.Grossberg,“Nonlinearneuralnetworks:Principles,mechanisms,and
architectures,”NeuralNetworks,vol.1,no.1,pp.17–61,1988.
VII. CONCLUSION [18] A. L. Hodgkin and A. F. Huxley, “A quantitative description of mem-
branecurrentanditsapplicationtoconductionandexcitationinnerve,”
In this paper, a fish-inspired self-adaptive collective escape
TheJournalofPhysiology,vol.117,no.4,pp.500–544,Aug.1952.
is developed for the swarm robots. The proposed method [19] J. Li et al., “Bio-inspired intelligence with applications to robotics: a
is motivated by the observation that a group of schooling survey,”Intelligence&Robotics,vol.1,no.1,pp.58–83,Oct.2021.
[20] M. A. Cohen and S. Grossberg, “Absolute stability of global pattern
fish can effectively complete escape tasks, despite limited
formationandparallelmemorystoragebycompetitiveneuralnetworks,”
communication with each other. A novel virtual forces ap- IEEETransactionsonSystems,Man,andCybernetics,no.5,pp.815–
proach is proposed to guide swarm robots to collision-free 826,Sep.1983.
[21] H. Zhao, H. Liu, Y. W. Leung, and X. Chu, “Self-adaptive collective
escape the threats through the dynamic landscape of neural
motion of swarm robots,” IEEE Transactions on Automation Science
activity.Moreover,anovelneurodynamics-basedself-adaptive andEngineering,vol.15,no.4,pp.1533–1545,Oct.2018.
mechanism is proposed to improve the escape performance of [22] J.Li,S.X.Yang,andZ.Xu,“Asurveyonrobotpathplanningusingbio-
inspiredalgorithms,”inProceedingsofIEEEInternationalConference
the swarm robots in changing environments. Simulation and
onRoboticsandBiomimetics,2019,pp.2111–2116.
experimental results demonstrate that the proposed approach
Junfei Li (Member, IEEE) received the
allows for safe navigation and efficient self-adaptive coop-
B.Eng. degree in communication engineering
eration among autonomous robots, enabling the successful from Chongqing University of Posts and
completion of escape tasks in changing environments. Telecommunications, Chongqing, China, in 2017,
and the Ph.D. degree in engineering systems and
computingfromtheUniversityofGuelph,Ontario,
REFERENCES
Canada, in 2023. He is currently a Postdoctoral
[1] C. C. Ioannou, “Swarm intelligence in fish? the difficulty in demon- Research Fellow at the School of Engineering,
strating distributed and self-organised collective intelligence in (some) University of Guelph, Ontario, Canada. His
animal groups,” Behavioural Processes, vol. 141, pp. 141–151, Aug. research interests include escape behaviors, search
2017. andrescue,andbio-inspiredalgorithms.
Simon X. Yang (Senior Member, IEEE) received
[2] Z.Zhang,X.Zhao,B.Tao,andH.Ding,“Distributedgossip-triggered
control for robot swarms with limited communication range,” IEEE theB.Sc.degreeinengineeringphysicsfromBeijing
Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 70, no. 12, pp. 12511 – University, Beijing, China, in 1987, the first of
two M.Sc. degrees in biophysics from the Chinese
12521,Dec.2023.
AcademyofSciences,Beijing,in1990,thesecond
[3] D.Yu,C.P.Chen,andH.Xu,“Intelligentdecisionmakingandbionic
movement control of self-organized swarm,” IEEE Transactions on M.Sc.degreeinelectricalengineeringfromtheUni-
IndustrialElectronics,vol.68,no.7,pp.6369–6378,Jul.2020. versity of Houston, Houston, TX, in 1996, and the
Ph.D.degreeinelectricalandcomputerengineering
[4] D. Roy, A. Chowdhury, M. Maitra, and S. Bhattacharya, “Geometric
from the University of Alberta, Edmonton, AB,
region-based swarm robotics path planning in an unknown occluded
environment,” IEEE Transactions on Industrial Electronics, vol. 68, Canada, in 1999. He is currently a Professor and
the Head of the Advanced Robotics and Intelligent
no.7,pp.6053–6063,Jul.2020.
Systems (ARIS) Laboratory at the University of Guelph, Guelph, ON,
[5] B. Tian, P. Li, H. Lu, Q. Zong, and L. He, “Distributed pursuit of an
evader with collision and obstacle avoidance,” IEEE Transactions on Canada. His research interests include robotics, intelligent systems, control
Cybernetics,vol.52,no.12,pp.13512–13520,Dec.2021. systems,sensorsandmulti-sensorfusion,wirelesssensornetworks,intelligent
communication, intelligent transportation, machine learning, fuzzy systems,
[6] J. Selvakumar and E. Bakolas, “Feedback strategies for a reach-avoid
game with a single evader and multiple pursuers,” IEEE Transactions andcomputationalneuroscience.
onCybernetics,vol.51,no.2,pp.696–707,Feb.2019. Prof. Yang he has been very active in professional activities. He serves
as the Editor-in-Chief of Intelligence & Robotics, and International Journal
[7] W. Zha, J. Chen, Z. Peng, and D. Gu, “Construction of barrier in a
fishing game with point capture,” IEEE Transactions on Cybernetics, of Robotics and Automation, and an Associate Editor of IEEE Transactions
on Cybernetics, IEEE Transactions of Artificial Intelligence, and several
vol.47,no.6,pp.1409–1422,Jun.2016.
[8] C.Doranetal.,“Fishwavesasemergentcollectiveantipredatorbehav- other journals. He has involved in the organization of many international
ior,”CurrentBiology,vol.32,no.3,pp.708–714,Feb.2022. conferences.
[9] Y. Ishiwaka et al., “Foids: bio-inspired fish simulation for generating
syntheticdatasets,”ACMTransactionsonGraphics,vol.40,no.6,pp.
1–15,Dec.2021.
[10] R.-D. Cioarga, M. V. Micea, V. Cretu, and V. Groza, “Evaluation of
fishshoalinspiredmovementincollaborativeroboticenvironments,”in
Proceedingsof2010IEEEInstrumentation&MeasurementTechnology
Conference,2010,pp.1539–1544.