International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology (IJEAT)
ISSN: 2249-8958 (Online), Volume-5 Issue-6, August 2016
Robot Voice A Voice Controlled Robot using
Arduino
Vineeth Teeda, K.Sujatha, Rakesh Mutukuru
Abstract—Robotic assistants reduces the manual efforts being
put by humans in their day-to-day tasks. In this paper, we develop
a voice-controlled personal assistant robot. The human voice
commands are taken by the robot by it’s own inbuilt microphone.
This robot not only takes the commands and execute them, but
also gives an acknowledgement through speech output. This
robot can perform different movements, turns, wakeup/shutdown
operations, relocate an object from one place to another and can
also develop a conversation with human. The voice commands
are processed in real-time, using an offline server. The speech
signal commands are directly communicated to the server using a
USB cable. The personal assistant robot is developed on a micro-
controller based platform. Performance evaluation is carried out
with encouraging results of the initial experiments. Possible
improvements are also discussed towards potential applications
in home, hospitals, car systems and industries.
Keywords: Robotic assistants, operations, wakeup/shutdown,
USB cable, personal assistant and industries, systems,
Performance
I. INTRODUCTION
S
peech signals are the most important means of
communication in human beings. Almost every conversation Fig. 1: Block Diagram of Robot
to interact is done by means of voice signals. Sounds and Robotvoice has a gripper which is used to pickup and
various speech signals can be converted into electrical form drop the objects. A PC-interfaced low cost robotic arm was
using a microphone. Voice recognition is a technology developed that could be integrated with a robotic arm, used
which is used to convert the speech signals into a computer for light weight lifting applications [2]. Another robotic arm
text format. This voice recognition technology can be used was developed which had special applications for the
to control and generate speech acknowledgement using physically challenged people [3]. A robotic arm was
some external server. designed in such a way that it could be controlled using
Robotvoice has the ability to understand thousands of human brain [4]. A robotic arm was designed which could
voice commands and perform required action. The voice drill boreholes and in congested urban areas with
recognition is a bit difficult task because each person has his effectiveness [5].
own accent. For that, Robot voice uses Bit Voicer Server The studies have shown that speech is the most rapid
which supports 17 languages from 26 countries and regions. form of communication with many fields of applications
These robotic assistants can be used for shaping,
• In-car systems.
manufacturing and tooling purposes in various sectors such
• Health Care.
as manufacturing, defence etc. In hospitals, these robotic
assistant can be used for the purpose of performing surgeries • Military.
and operations with high precision. In this paper, we • Education.
develop an assistant robot that can be operated using speech • Intelligent buildings.
commands [1]. Existing system is all about only commanding the robot
which understands the commands and perform actions. We
Manuscript published on 30 August 2016.
want to take this a step forward and add a speech synthesiser
* Correspondence Author (s)
which generates speech which is then amplified and given to
Mr. Vineeth Teeda, Department of Electronics and Communication
Engineering, NRI Institute of Technology, Visadala, Guntur (A.P). India. a speaker.
Mrs. K. Sujatha, Assoc. Professor, Department of Electronics and This paper is organised as follows. In Section II, the
Communication Engineering, NRI Institute of Technology, Visadala,
construction. A brief discussion on hardware that is used is
Guntur (A.P). India.
Mr. Rakesh Mutukuru, Asst. Professor, Department of Electronics made in Section III. Section IV discusses the different
and Communication Engineering, NRI Institute of Technology, Visadala, softwares that are used in Robotvoice. Section V discusses
Guntur (A.P). India.
the coding and algorithms.
© The Authors. Published by Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering and
Sciences Publication (BEIESP). This is an open access article under the
CC-BY-NC-ND license http://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
Retrieval Number F4684085616/16©BEIESP
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP)
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org 60
© Copyright: All rights reserved.Robot Voice A Voice Controlled Robot using Arduino
Section VI discusses about the applications of this robot and to an external offline server, where it is converted into
section VII discusses about the summary and conclusion of speech format and necessary commands and speech is
this project. synthesised. The schematic block diagram is shown in Fig.
1. The hardware platform mainly consists of a gripper which
II. CONSTRUCTION DETAILS OF ROBOT is used to pickup and drop objects, a chassis where micro-
VOICE controllers and DC motors, motor drivers are fixed. Robot
voice has to chassis lower chassis consists of Arduino Uno
The movement of the robots body is controlled using
micro-controller which is used for robot movement
voice commands i.e, (i) robot’s body, (ii) gripper depend on
operation, DC motors, motor drivers, a speaker, and DC
the voice command given. The voice signal is captured
batteries.
using inbuilt microphone and is transmitted over a usb cable
Fig. 2(a): Side view of Robot voice Fig. 2(b): Front view of Robot voice
The upper chassis has an Arduino Due, a microphone and
power supplies. Two DC motors are used to control the III. HARDWARE USED IN ROBOT VOICE
movement of the robot’s body. Another two DC motors are
Various hardware that are used in this project are,
used to control the movement of the robotic arm and the
• Arduino Due.
robotic hands. Motor driver IC is used to control the
movement of DC motor. A single motor driver (L293D) IC • Arduino Uno.
can control two DC motors. • Spark Fun Electret Microphone Breakout.
A general USB cable is connected to Arduino Due which • Audio Amplifier(HT6818).
interfaces with BitVoicer Server to transfer the speech
• DC motors.
signals. Depending upon the commands given the robot
• L293D motor drivers.
performs actions accordingly. Movement of the robot’s
bodyand gripper are independent of each other’s • Gripper.
movements. Side view of the robot with the robotic hands • IR Sensors.
open is shown in Fig. 2(a), front view of Robotvoice is • Speaker
shown in Fig. 2(b). As shown in the above figure the upper Now, let us learn about each of the hardware
deck of the robot has a Arduino Due which is used for modules used briefly.
taking the voice commands, synthesising speech, and also
A. Arduino Due:
forward the commands to the Arduino Uno. Forwarding
commands from one micro-controller to another is done by The Arduino Due is a micro-controller board based on the
using a pin to pin connection. If a particular pin is made Atmel SAM3X8E ARM Cortex-M3 CPU. It is the first
high then that value is forwarded to Arduino Uno. Then the Arduino board based on a 32-bit ARM core micro-
code in Uno checks for the active pin and executes the controller. It has 54 digital input/output pins (of which 12
particular function. For example, if pin 3 is high, the code in can be used as PWM outputs), 12 analog inputs, 4 UARTs
Uno is written in such a way that when pin3 is active the (hardware serial ports), a 84 MHz clock, an USB OTG
robot checks with the IR sensors and then moves forward. capable connection, 2 DAC (digital to analog), 2 TWI, a
Likewise for all the movement operations, each pin is power jack, an SPI header, a JTAG header, a reset button
assigned and the robot operation is properly maintained. and an erase button. It has an inbuilt digital to analog
Power supply to Robotvoice is given by three 9V batteries converter which is used in speech synthesis.
and the amplifier and speaker is powered by a 5V power
bank.
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
Retrieval Number F4684085616/16©BEIESP
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP)
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org 61
© Copyright: All rights reserved.International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology (IJEAT)
ISSN: 2249-8958 (Online), Volume-5 Issue-6, August 2016
The board contains everything needed to support the micro- usually MOSFETs) operate as electronic switches, instead
controller; simply connect it to a computer with a micro- of as linear gain devices as in other amplifiers. The signal to
USB cable or power it with a AC-to-DC adapter or battery be amplified is a train of constant amplitude pulses, so the
to get started. The Due is compatible with all Arduino active devices switch rapidly back and forth between a fully
shields that work at 3.3V and are compliant with the 1.0 conductive and nonconductive state. The analog signal to be
Arduino pinout. amplified is converted to a series of pulses by pulse width
The SAM3X has 512 KB (2 blocks of 256 KB) of flash modulation, pulse density modulation or other method
memory for storing code. The boot loader is pre burned in before being applied to the amplifier. It is a class D stereo
factory from Atmel and is stored in a dedicated ROM amplifier which can drive a speaker upto 8 ohms impedance
memory. The available SRAM is 96 KB in two contiguous and 5 Watts. A class-D amplifier or switching amplifier is
bank of 64 KB and 32 KB. All the available memory (Flash, an electronic amplifier in which the amplifying devices
RAM and ROM) can be accessed directly as a flat (transistors, usually MOSFETs) operate as electronic
addressing space.It is possible to erase the Flash memory of switches, instead of as linear gain devices as in other
the SAM3X with the onboard erase button. This will remove amplifiers.
the currently loaded sketch from the MCU. To erase, press
E. DC Motors:
and hold the Erase button for a few seconds while the board
A DC motor is an electric motor that runs on direct current
is powered.
(DC) electricity. DC motors were used to run machinery,
B. Arduino Uno: often eliminating the need for a local steam engine or
The Uno is a micro-controller board based on the internal combustion engine. DC motors can operate directly
ATmega328P. It has 14 digital input/output pins (of which 6 from rechargeable batteries, providing the motive power for
can be used as PWM outputs), 6 analog inputs, a 16 MHz the first electric vehicles. Today DC motors are still found in
quartz crystal, a USB connection, a power jack, an ICSP applications as small as toys and disk drives, or in large
header and a reset button. It contains everything needed to sizes to operate steel rolling mills and paper machines.
support the micro-controller; simply connect it to a Modern DC motors are nearly always operated in
computer with a USB cable or power it with a AC-to-DC conjunction with power electronic devices. 300 RPM Side
adapter or battery to get started.The ATmega328 has 32 KB Shaft Heavy Duty DC Gear Motor is suitable for large
(with 0.5 KB occupied by the boot loader). It also has 2 KB robots / automation systems. It has sturdy construction with
of SRAM and 1 KB of EEPROM. gear box built to handle stall torque produced by the motor.
The Uno has a number of facilities for communicating Drive shaft is supported from both sides with metal bushes.
with a computer, another Uno board, or other micro- Motor runs smoothly from 4V to 12V and gives 300 RPM at
controllers. The ATmega328 provides UART TTL (5V) 12V. Motor has 8mm diameter, 17.5mm length drive shaft
serial communication, which is available on digital pins 0 with D shape for excellent coupling.
(RX) and 1 (TX). An ATmega16U2 on the board channels
F. L293D motor drivers:
this serial communication over USB and appears as a virtual
Thisdevice is a monolithic integrated high voltage, high
com port to software on the computer. The 16U2 firmware
current four channel driver designed to accept standard DTL
uses the standard USB COM drivers, and no external driver
or TTL logic levels and drive inductive loads (such as relays
is needed. However, on Windows, a .inf file is required. The
solenoids, DC and stepping motors) and switching power
Arduino Software (IDE) includes a serial monitor which
transistors. Each pair of channels is equipped with an enable
allows simple textual data to be sent to and from the board.
input. A separate supply input is provided for the logic,
The RX and TX LEDs on the board will flash when data is
allowing operation at a lower voltage and internal clamp
being transmitted via the USB-to-serial chip and USB
diodes are included.
connection to the computer (but not for serial
This device is suitable for use in switching applications at
communication on pins 0 and 1).
frequencies up to 5 kHz. The Motor Shield is able to drive 2
C. SparkFun Electret Microphone Breakout: servo motors, and has 8 half-bridge outputs for 2 stepper
This small breakout board couples a small electret motors or 4 full H-bridge motor outputs or 8 half-bridge
microphone with a 100x opamp to amplify the sounds of drivers, or a combination.The servo motors use the +5V of
voice, door knocks, etc loud enough to be picked up by a the Arduino board. The voltage regulator on the Arduino
micro controller’s Analog to Digital converter. Unit comes board could get hot. To avoid this, the newer Motor Shields
fully assembled as shown. Works from 2.7V up to 5.5V. have connection points for a separate +5V for the servo
The main specification of opamp is it amplifies bot AC and motors.
DC signals. The OPA344 and OPA345 series rail-to-rail
G. Gripper:
CMOS operational amplifiers are designed for precision,
The Gripper module is state of robotic arm which can be
low-power, miniature applications. The OPA344 is unity
used in various ‘pick and place’ kind of robots. It works on
gain stable, while the OPA345 is optimised for gains greater
DC Motor (5 to 12V DC).
than or equal to five, and has a gain-bandwidth product of
3MHz.
D. Audio Amplifier (HT6818):
A class-D amplifier or switching amplifier is an electronic
amplifier in which the amplifying devices (transistors,
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
Retrieval Number F4684085616/16©BEIESP
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP)
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org 62
© Copyright: All rights reserved.Robot Voice A Voice Controlled Robot using Arduino
Change in rotation direction of the DC Motor, generates Jaw errors. The console displays text output by the Arduino
Open & Close Action. The DC motor can be easily be Software (IDE), including complete error messages and
controlled with the help of DPDT Switch (manual mode) or other information. The bottom righthand corner of the
with the help of any micro-controller along with L293D window displays the configured board and serial port. The
Motor Driver module.It can be used in various ‘pick and toolbar buttons allow you to verify and upload programs,
place’ kind of robots. It works on DC Motor (9 to 12V DC). create, open, and save sketches, and open the serial monitor.
Change in rotation direction of the DC Motor, generates Jaw
Open & Close Action. The DC motor can be easily be
controlled with the help of DPDT Switch (manual mode) or
with the help of any micro-controller along with L293D
Motor Driver module. Gives an extra functionality to your
robots by adding a fully functional Robot gripper to them.
H. IR Sensor:
An infrared sensor is an electronic device, that emits in
order to sense some aspects of the surroundings. An IR
sensor can measure the heat of an object as well as detects
the motion.These types of sensors measures only infrared
radiation, rather than emitting it that is called as a passive IR
sensor.This sensor is analogous to human’s visionary senses,
which can be used to detect obstacles and it is one of the
common applications in real time.This circuit comprises of
the following components. An object moving nearby
actually reflects the infrared rays emitted by the infrared
LED. The infrared receiver has sensitivity angle (lobe) of 0-
60 degrees, hence when the reflected IR ray is sensed, the
mono in the receiver part is triggered.
• LM358 IC 2 IR transmitter and receiver pair.
• Resistors of the range of kilo ohms.
Fig. 4(a): Arduino IDE main window
• Variable resistors.
• LED (Light Emitting Diode). The open-source Arduino Software (IDE) makes it easy to
write code and upload it to the board. It runs on Windows,
I. Speaker:
Mac OS X, and linux.The Arduino project provides the
Loudspeaker or speaker, device used to convert electrical
Arduino integrated development environment (IDE), which
energy into sound. It consists essentially of a thin flexible
is a cross-platform application written in Java. It originated
sheet called a diaphragm that is made to vibrate by an
from the IDE for the Processing programming language
electric signal from an amplifier. The vibrations create
project and the Wiring project. It is designed to introduce
sound waves in the air around the speaker. In a dynamic
programming to artists and other newcomers unfamiliar with
speaker, the most common kind, the diaphragm is cone-
software development. It includes a code editor with
shaped and is attached to a coil of wire suspended in a
features such as syntax highlighting, brace matching, and
magnetic field produced by a permanent magnet. A signal
automatic indentation, and provides simple one-click
current in the suspended coil, called a voice coil, creates a
mechanism for compiling and loading programs to an
magnetic field that interacts with the already-existing field,
causing the coil and the diaphragm attached to it to vibrate. Arduino board. A program written with the IDE for Arduino
To provide a faithful reproduction of music or speech, a is called a “sketch” [6]. The main window of Arduino IDE
loudspeaker must be able to reproduce a wide range of audio is shown in Fig. 4(a). The Arduino Software (IDE) uses the
frequencies (i.e., 20 Hz to 20 kHz). concept of a sketchbook: a standard place to store your
programs (or sketches). The sketches in your sketchbook
IV. SOFTWARE USED IN ROBOT VOICE can be opened from the File > Sketchbook menu or from the
Open button on the toolbar. The first time you run the
A. Arduino IDE:
Arduino software, it will automatically create a directory for
The Arduino Integrated Development Environment - or
your sketchbook.
Arduino Software (IDE) - contains a text editor for writing
You can view or change the location of the sketchbook
code, a message area, a text console, a toolbar with buttons
location from with the Preferences dialog.Libraries provide
for common functions and a series of menus. It connects to
extra functionality for use in sketches, e.g. working with
the Arduino and Genuino hardware to upload programs and
hardware or manipulating data. To use a library in a sketch,
communicate with them. Programs written using Arduino
select it from the Sketch > Import Librarymenu.
Software (IDE) are called sketches. These sketches are
written in the text editor and are saved with the file
extension .ino. The editor has features for cutting/pasting
and for searching/replacing text. The message area gives
feedback while saving and exporting and also displays
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
Retrieval Number F4684085616/16©BEIESP
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP)
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org 63
© Copyright: All rights reserved.International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology (IJEAT)
ISSN: 2249-8958 (Online), Volume-5 Issue-6, August 2016
This will insert one or more #include statements at the top of of the micro-controller that is connected to the BitVoicer
the sketch and compile the library with your sketch. Because Server. It also has the options of volume of the synthesised
libraries are uploaded to the board with your sketch, they speech, minimum audio level to be recognised from the
increase the amount of space it takes up. There is a list of microphone, type of the micro-controller which includes
libraries in the reference. Some libraries are included with input, output or mixed. In this case we are using a mixed
the Arduino software. Others can be downloaded from a type of micro-controller. Serial number column is used only
variety of sources or through the Library Manager. Starting when we are using multiple micro-controllers. This is
with version 1.0.5 of the IDE, you do can import a library shown in Fig. 4(d). Next is binary data where we add the
from a zip file and use it in an open sketch. data that should be sent to the micro-controller.
The BitVoicer Server supports the following languages,
B. Bit Voicer Server:
• Catalan (Catalonia).
BitVoicer Server is a speech recognition and synthesis
server for speech automation. It was developed to enable • Chinese (China, Honk Kong and Taiwan).
simple devices, with low processing power, to become • Danish (Denmark).
voice-operated. In general, micro-controllers do not have • Dutch (Netherlands).
enough memory and processing power to perform advanced
• English (Australia, Canada, India, UK and US).
speech recognition and synthesis. BitVoicer Server
• Finnish (Finland).
eliminates the effects of these limitations by performing the
• French (Canada and France).
hard work so the micro-controller can allocate most of its
resources to its core functionality. Fig. 4(b) shows the main • German (Germany).
window of the BotVoicer Server. • Italian (Italy).
Input Devices are those capable of capturing, digitising and
• Japanese (Japan).
sending audio streams to the server. When BitVoicer Server
• Korean (Korea).
identifies an Input Device, it assigns one exclusive Speech
• Norwegian, Bokmål (Norway).
Recognition Engine (SRE) to that device. SREs constantly
analyse all audio streams sent to the server and when a • Polish (Poland).
predefined sentence is identified, BitVoicer Server performs • Portuguese (Brazil and Portugal).
the actions specified by the user. These actions are called • Russian (Russia).
commands and can be used to start other applications,
• Spanish (Mexico and Spain).
synthesise speech, play audio files or send data (commands)
• Swedish (Sweden).
to Output and Mixed Devices. The user can define one or
more commands for each sentence.
Fig. 4(c): Voice Schemas window
Fig. 4(b): BitVoicer Server main window
The user can also define the order in which the commands
will be executed, the time interval between them, and which
Output or Mixed Devices are the targets of the commands.
That is, with one single Input Device license you can control
multiple Output Devices. Lastly, there are the Mixed
Devices that are capable of acting as Input and Output
Fig. 4(d): Devices Window
Devices [7]. The BitVoicer Server consists of Voice
Schemas where we add all the sentences that are received
from microphone and also the speech that should be
synthesised. This is shown in Fig. 4(c). Next we can see
Devices in the main window. This window shows the details
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
Retrieval Number F4684085616/16©BEIESP
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP)
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org 64
© Copyright: All rights reserved.Robot Voice A Voice Controlled Robot using Arduino
•It does not require pre-recording of sentences.
It has the following features- • Unlimited number of sentences, commands anddevices.
•Multi-device: BitVoicer Server has a new manager for
V. ALGORITHMS AND CODING
speech recognition and synthesis engines which is able
to serve multiple devices simultaneously. Each device As we are using two micro-controllers, one for
can function as a point of capture or reproduction and communication between the Robotvoice and server and
have its exclusive speech recognition or synthesis another for the movement of the robot. Arduino Due is used
engine. for communication and Arduino Uno for movement
•Enhanced protocol: The BitVoicer Server Protocol (BVSP) operation. The algorithm for Arduino Due i.e, to establish
brings significant improvements over the communication and communicate with server is given in Fig. 5(a). The basic
protocol used in the previous BitVoicer versions. Now operation here is nothing but if server is available or is free
client devices are able to retrieve server status then, robot starts collecting the speech signals through
information and exchange data with other applications microphone and sends it to the server. Whereas when the
running on the server through the same communication server is busy it waits for the server to send any data or
channel used to transmit audio. speech signals that are synthesised in the server. The
•Windows service: Besides consuming few hardware received data is generally in binary format which specifies
resources, BitVoicer Server is executed as a Windows which pin to be high or low. If the data is a speech signal
service. This enables BitVoicer Server to become a then Arduino Due converts the electrical signal into analog
transparent resource and cause little or no interference on form and forwards it to amplifier, which is later on
the user interface. amplified and sent to speaker. Here the connection between
•Integration: Application developers can retrieve the results the two micro-controllers is a port to port connection. Each
of recognition operations from the server and exchange pin of Arduino Due is connected to a specific pin of Arduino
data with client devices through Windows Uno. If a particular port is made high in Due, the same is
Communication Foundation (WCF) services. For .NET carried to Uno which performs a specific function which is
development, there is also a .NET integration library allocated to it.
available.
•It does not require speech recognition enginetraining.
Fig. 5(a): Algorithm of Arduino Due code
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
Retrieval Number F4684085616/16©BEIESP
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP)
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org 65
© Copyright: All rights reserved.International Journal of Engineering and Advanced Technology (IJEAT)
ISSN: 2249-8958 (Online), Volume-5 Issue-6, August 2016
Another micro-controller that is used in this project is VII. APPLICATIONS OF THE ROBOTVOICE
Arduino uno which takes care of all the movement
The assistant robot can be used for various purposes as
operations. We design the code in such a way that each
listed below:
movement operation is done when a specific pin is active
and that is provided by Arduino Due. A. In chemical industries:
In chemical industry, people cannot handle the chemicals
VI. RESULTS which might be having high temperature. Thus, industrial
robot is a vital development towards improving the safety
The following are the pictures taken while the robot is in
standards in industries [9]. In such hazardous situations, the
action. The robot has two sections for the voice recognition
assistant robot’s can be used to hold the chemicals and carry
and synthesis. The upper part as you can see consists of a
them from one place to another without human interference.
small microphone, Arduino Due and speaker. The lower
Also, there might be places in the industries where humans
deck consists of Arduino Uno, motor drivers, dc motors,
cannot go and work, in all such cases this robot can be
gripper, IR sensors and power supplies. Fig. 6(a) shows the
controlled by the voice commands and can be directed to go
top view of Robot Voice, when it is in action.
and work in that place. It can also be used to carry small
objects in the industry within a certain distance to reduce the
time and the manual labour. Robotic assistant can also be
used in manufacturing sector for different re-positioning
operations.
B. In homes and for daily needs:
People may need assistance to reduce their manual effort,
which may be mostly needed in the case of physically
handicapped people or the old-aged people. Robotic
assistant can be used by physically challenged people or the
old-aged people as it helps them to place an object from one
place to another which would be difficult for them in
general. These assistant robot’s can move around quickly
and also can be controlled easily by voice commands and
Fig. 6 (a): Top view of Robot Voice
can be used to obtain the desired result in a quicker span of
Here the robot is connected to an external server where all time and much easily.
the work is done. Here that connection is established using a
C. In hospitals:
USB cable. Fig. 6(b) shows the robot holding an object by
taking commands from the user. This assistant can be used extensively in the hospitals
where it can be used in surgical operations. Robotic arm has
been used in various surgeries across hospitals [8].
Furthermore, if it can be guided by the voice commands and
carry out the specified task, efficiency can be increased thus
also causing the human labour to reduce.
VIII. SUMMARY AND CONCLUSION
Voice control for a home assistant robot is developed in
this paper. The voice commands are processed in real-time,
using an offline server. The speech signal commands are
directly communicated to the server over a wired network.
The personal assistant robot is developed on a micro-
controller based platform and can be aware of its current
location. Performance evaluation is carried out with
encouraging results of the initial experiments. Possible
improvements are also discussed towards potential
applications in home, hospitals, car systems and industries.
The effect of the distance between the mouth and
microphone on the robot, the performance of the robot,
effect of noise on the speech to text conversion are some of
the areas that can be further explored. The accent of the
speaker does not affect the operation of the robot as the
voice commands are processed using a cloud server which
functions irrespective of the accent
Fig. 6(b): Robot Voice holding an object using gripper
of the speaker.
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
Retrieval Number F4684085616/16©BEIESP
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP)
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org 66
© Copyright: All rights reserved.Robot Voice A Voice Controlled Robot using Arduino
Using renewable source of energy for the functioning of the
robot would not only improve upon the cost of the robot but
would also prove to be eco-friendly. Solar cells can be a
possible source of energy that can be used. The robotic
assistant developed has potential applications ranging from
chemical industries to comfortable scenario inside homes.
This paper should be helpful in showcasing a server based
application in developing a voice-controlled robotic
assistant.
REFERENCES
1. A Voice-Controlled Personal Robot AssistantAnurag Mishra, Pooja
Makula, Akshay Kumar, Krit Karan and V.K. Mittal, IIIT, Chittoor,
A.P., India.
2. H.Uehara,H. HigaandT.Soken,“A Mobile Robotic Armfor people with
severe disabilities”, International Conference on Biomedical Robotics
and Biomechatronics (BioRob), 3rd IEEE RAS and EMBS , Tokyo,
pp. 126- 129, September 2010, ISSN:2155-1774.
3. David Orenstein, “People with paralysis control robotic arms using
brain", https://news.brown.edu/articles/2012/05/braingate2 (Last
viewed on October 23, 2014).
4. Lin. H. C, Lee. S. T, Wu. C. T, Lee. W. Y and Lin. C. C, “Robotic
Arm drilling surgical navigation system”, International conference on
Advanced Robotics and Intelligent Systems (ARIS), Taipei, pp. 144-
147, June 2014.
5. Rong-Jyue Wang, Jun-Wei Zhang, Jia-Ming Xu and Hsin-Yu Liu,
“The Multiple-function Intelligent Robotic Arms”, IEEE International
Confer- ence on Fuzzy Systems, FUZZ-IEEE, Jeju Island, pp. 1995 -
2000, August 2009, ISSN:1098-7584.
6. "Programming Arduino Getting Started with Sketches". McGraw-
Hill. Nov 8, 2011. Retrieved 2013-03-28.
7. http://www.bitsophia.com/en-US/BitVoicerServer/Overview.aspx.
8. The National Staff, “Robot arm performs heart surgeries at Sharjah
hospital", http://www.thenational.ae/uae/health/robot-arm-performs-
heart- surgeries-at-sharjah-hospital (Last viewed on November 13,
2014).
Mr. Vineeth Teeda, was completed his B.Tech
degree in 2016 at NRI Institute of Technology,
Department of Electronics and Communication
Engineering.
Mrs. K. Sujatha, working as Associate Professor
in Electronics and Communication Engineering, in
NRI Institute of Technology, Guntur, A.P, India.
Mr. Rakesh Mutukuru working as Assistant
Professor in Electronics and Communication
Engineering, in NRI Institute of Technology,
Guntur, A.P, India.
Published By:
Blue Eyes Intelligence Engineering
Retrieval Number F4684085616/16©BEIESP
and Sciences Publication (BEIESP)
Journal Website: www.ijeat.org 67
© Copyright: All rights reserved.