A Framework for Leveraging Human Computation
Gaming to Enhance Knowledge Graphs for
Accuracy Critical Generative AI Applications
Steph Buongiorno
Corey Clark
Guildhall
Computer Science and Guildhall
Southern Methodist University
Southern Methodist University
Dallas, United States
Dallas, United States
sbuongiorno@smu.edu
coreyc@smu.edu
Abstract—External knowledge graphs (KGs) can be used to
a person broke a law could be detrimental if they contain
augment large language models (LLMs), while simultaneously
providing an explainable knowledge base of facts that can be in- hallucinations, and the process for arriving at this claim has
spected by a human. This approach may be particularly valuable not been validated. Explainability is crucial for trusting LLM
in domains where explainability is critical, like human generated results and validating them when needed [6], [7].
trafficking data analysis. However, creating KGs can pose
Providing LLMs with external, structured representations of
challenges. KGs parsed from documents may comprise explicit
connections (those directly stated by a document) but miss facts in the form of knowledge graphs (KGs) has proven
implicit connections (those obvious to a human although not useful for addressing this limitation [8]. KGs are graphs of
directly stated). To address these challenges, this preliminary data that collect and convey knowledge. They represent
research introduces the GAME-KG framework, standing for
information as structured relations between entities, which
”Gaming for Augmenting Metadata and Enhancing Knowledge
Graphs.” GAME-KG is a federated approach to modifying make a ”domain model,” along with schematic information,
explicit as well as implicit connections in KGs by using which make up an ”ontology” [15]. Information can be
crowdsourced feedback collected through video games. GAME- retrieved from KGs to augment LLM generated responses in
KG is shown through two demon- strations: a Unity test scenario
an explainable way [11], [18]. Human analysts can visually
from Dark Shadows, a video game that collects feedback on KGs
interpret the connections between nodes of the graph and view
parsed from US Department of Justice (DOJ) Press Releases on
human trafficking, and a following experiment where OpenAI’s the structured path of facts from which information was
GPT-4 is prompted to answer questions based on a modified and derived [3].
unmodified KG. Initial results suggest that GAME-KG can be an
While using KGs to augment LLM responses has proven
effective framework for enhancing KGs, while simultaneously
beneficial, obtaining KGs that represent domain information
providing an explainable set of structured facts verified by
humans. poses challenges. KGs can be parsed from documents, but
Index Terms—Human Computation Gaming, Crowdsourcing, capturing the many entity relationship from within text may
Knowledge Graphs, Generative AI not be feasible with computational approaches alone [21]. For
instance, a KG parsed from text may include explicit relations
I. INTRODUCTION
between entities (e.g. semantic relations as directly expressed
Large language models (LLMs) have demonstrated remark- in words), but may not include implicit relations (e.g. relations
able capabilities in performing various natural language pro- that may be clear to a human, but not to the computer). In
cessing (NLP) tasks, including extracting semantic informa- other cases it may be desirable to modify the explicit
tion and inferring cohesive text responses based on human relationships of a KG, given that the connections might be
input [10]. However, their application within accuracy critical incorrect.
domains–such as human trafficking data analysis–is limited
For these reasons, this research introduces the GAME-KG
due to a lack of explainability in results. An LLM’s mecha-
framework (standing for ”Gaming for Augmenting Metadata
nism for generating a response is opaque and may contain
and Enhancing Knowledge Graphs”). GAME-KG is a feder-
unwanted biases or ”hallucinations” (generated text that is
ated approach to modifying KGs that facilitates the collection
semantically possible but factually incorrect) [12]. In accuracy
of explicit as well as implicit knowledge. It leverages Human
critical domains, it may be too high-stakes to trust an LLM
Computation Gaming (HCG)–a method of collecting feedback
generated response without the ability to validate the process
from crowds through video games–to modify and validate
for generating it. For example, LLM generated claims that
KGs [4]. GAME-KG guides the process of parsing a KG to
This work has been funded by National Institute of Justice (NIJ). presenting the data to the player and collecting feedback.
Invaluable insight was provided by the anti-human trafficking agency,
This research explores GAME-KG’s potential across two
Deliverfund. Thanks to BALANCED Media | Technology for developing
the Unity demo. demonstrations. The first demonstration presents a video game
test scenario from a HCG, Dark Shadows, designed usingthe GAME-KG framework.1 Dark Shadows is a film noir-
crowd to provide feedback poses challenges. One effective
style mystery game that collects player feedback for mod-
method for engaging and motivating crowds is through gam-
ifying and validating KGs parsed from the US Department
ification, a proven mechanism for engaging individual users
of Justice (DOJ) Press Releases on human trafficking. This
and collecting large amounts of heterogeneous knowledge to
demonstration presents a drag-and-drop mechanic,
achieve a common goal [14]. Gamification has been widely
showcasing how a video game can be used to collect
used across diverse subjects–including education, healthcare,
feedback and modify KGs. For the second demonstration,
and marketing–to drive participation and motivate players,
OpenAI’s GPT- 4 is asked questions related to the human
which may result in a higher feedback yield [5], [22].
trafficking press releases and is prompted to provide answers
HCG–a method that gamifies crowdsourcing using video
based on the original KG parsed from text, and then a
games–leverages video game mechanics that are designed to
human modified KG in which connections were added that
engage players while simultaneously collecting the feedback
encode implicit relationships between entities. The initial
desired for a given task. In addition, HCG can be a desirable
results from these demonstrations suggest that a HCG
approach because it provides the opportunity to tap into a
designed via GAME- KG can be an effective way to collect
large player base. Globally, there are over three billion
human feedback, and that information retrieved from KGs can
”gamers,” with a predicted annual +3.7% player growth [13].
be used to augment LLM responses in an explainable way,
which is important for accuracy critical domains like human
C. Crowdsourcing Implicit Knowledge
trafficking data analysis.
Crowdsourcing has been used to collect knowledge that
II. BACKGROUND may be obvious to a human but not a machine [1]. Such
This section provides a brief background on KGs and insight may be especially useful for processing documents, as
explainability before describing the utility of crowdsourcing text often conveys not only explicit information (information
feedback for modifying and validating KGs. directly expressed in words) but also implicit information
(information that can be inferred, but is not directly stated)
A. Knowledge Graphs as Explainable Domain Models
[17].
A KG is a graph composed of nodes and edges, where Implicit information is derived between a claim and back-
nodes represent entities, and the edges between nodes ground knowledge, as exemplified by Table I. It is common
convey the semantic relationship between entities. KGs for documents to omit information that is assumed to be
model domains in the sense that their relations encode evident to the recipient, such that only parts of a message
information on a subject. For example, a KG representing may be explicitly stated in words [1]. In result, a KG parsed
the domain of data science might include relationships from a document may not capture the many implied entity
between scientific software packages, problem solving relationships expressed in a document. While LLMs have
strategies, and metrics. Whereas, a KG for GIS might demonstrated the ability to perform inference and emulate
include relations between geographical entities, documents common-sense reasoning responses, this ability is not ex-
describing terrain, and coordinate systems. Structured graphs haustive as a LLM may not possess the domain knowledge
have the added benefit of explainability. LLMs are complex, needed for certain implied information, indicating a need for
”black-box” systems and responses are generated without crowdsourcing human feedback [1].
insight into the model’s inner workings. Their high
complexity makes model interpretation challenging [20]. Yet, Claim:
explainability is important because it can make evident John Doe trafficked humans.
unintended biases, or it can reveal the information on which a Background Knowledge:
It is illegal to traffick humans.
response was based. Presented with a KG, human analysts
Implicit Knowledge:
can visually interpret the connections between nodes and read
John Doe broke the law.
the structured path of facts from which information was
TABLE I
derived [3]. This approach gives insight into the individual A CLAIM, BACKGROUND KNOWLEDGE, AND THE RESULTING IMPLICIT
entity relationships that encode knowledge, and it supports KNOWLEDGE.
the development of more reliable and trustworthy models for
critical applications.
B. Gamification and Human Computation Gaming (HCG)
III. THE GAME-KG FRAMEWORK
Obtaining KGs that represent both explicit and implicit GAME-KG, shown by Figure 1, is a six-step federated ap-
knowledge is not a trivial task, and a KG parsed from a proach to knowledge acquisition that leverages HCG to
document using computational methods alone may benefit modify and validate KGs with the goal of enhancing them for
from human feedback to connect or validate the relationships critical, domain tasks and downstream generative AI
between nodes. Crowdsourcing has been used to construct applications. A HCG developed using the GAME-KG
KGs manually, as in Wikidata [19]. However, motivating a framework enables the collection of human feedback to
modifying explicit as well as implicit entity relationships in a
1A Dark Shadows Unity demo, code, prompts, knowledge graphs, and KG.
examples can be found on our GitHub repository.
The six-steps of GAME-KG are as follows:instruction to generate a fictional and anonymized narrative
that retains the original entity relations. The resulting narrative
contains key information meant for human inspection, but
fictionalizes it for player engagement. As an example, the
generated narrative might feature fictional events, but contain
real relationships between entities.
In Dark Shadows, the generated narrative is presented to the
player as a fictional case briefing, as shown by Figure 2.
Fig. 1. The steps of the GAME-KG Framework. Using a drag-and-drop mechanic resembling an inter-
connected web, or ”evidence board”, players can select
entities from the case file and specify connections between
• (Step 1: Discover Data) The document(s) that will be
them by dropping them into the web. Weight can be added to
used to develop a domain-model are identified and
the human-made connections as desired for validation,
collected.
supporting the ability to collect graphs and also filter out
• (Step 2: Parse Text) Entities and their relationships are
responses with a low weight. As a HCG, Dark Shadows’s
parsed from the document(s).
design is based on the premise that gamification–in this case,
• (Step 3a: Build KG) The parsed text is used to construct
progressing through a fictional narrative–can motivate players
a KG. Entities are nodes and their relations are edges.
into providing feedback [22]. To foster this engagement,
• (Step 3b: Generate Narrative) The parsed text is provided
Dark Shadows also uses a gen- erative, text-to-image
to an LLM instructed to generate a new, fictionalized
model, Stable Diffusion, to generate in- game images
narrative for the HCG. Research has shown that LLMs
matching the entities selected by the player [16].
can generate stories for video games [2], [9]. For GAME-
KG, this step is used to generate narrative that is more
palatable for gameplay while using the original entity
relationships. For human inspection, the content can be
anonymized and fictionalized within the game narrative.
• (Step 4: Identify Graph) The entities and relations
making up the KG can be presented to the player for
inspection. If desired, these can be identified based on a
scoring method, such as cosine similarity. This approach
suggests certain subsections of the graph may benefit
more from human feedback than others. If the cosine
similarity between nodes is low, this could indicate that
the connec- tions are possibly wrong. If the cosine
Fig. 2. Players are presented a fictional narrative that retains entity relations
similarity between nodes is high but the edges are not
and can modify a KG using a web-like mechanic. The image of a ”suspect”
connected, this could indicate that a connection should be is generated with Stable Diffusion.
made. Humans can judge whether a connection between
entities should be modified. This method for identifying
V. DEMONSTRATION II: PRELIMINARY RESULTS
entities and nodes can change based on need.
EVALUATION THROUGH Q&A
• (Step 5: Inject Graph and Narrative) The entities and
relations as well as the fictional narrative are injected The web-like mechanic can be used to modify explicit or
into the game. implicit entity relations in a KG. This preliminary research fo-
• (Step 6: Collect Player Feedback (Modifications and cuses on modifying implicit entity relations. It then compares
Validation)) Each time a player suggests changes–based GPT-4’s responses as augmented by information retrieved from
on explicit or implicit knowledge–these changes are a human modified graph and an unmodified KG.
saved as a weighted value. Connections between nodes Table II shows an example human modification that is
with a low weight can be filtered out. This represents a based on implicit knowledge.2 In this example, Kizer, an
federated approach, where based on consensus, the identified trafficker, is explicitly described as breaking the
changes are retained or omitted. Mann Act for transporting a trafficked victim across state
boarders. Villaman is an accomplice to Kizer, but his relation
IV. DEMONSTRATION I: GAME-KG TEST SCENARIO to the Mann Act is not explicitly stated. To enhance the KG, a
human connected Villaman and the Mann Act, as shown by
This section presents a test scenario from the HCG, Dark
Figure 3.
Shadows. Dark Shadows is a film noir-style mystery game
The modified KG was provided to GPT-4 for question-
that leverages GAME-KG to collect player feedback that
answering (Q&A). As shown by Table III, information re-
modifies and validates KGs parsed from US DOJ Press
trieved from the modified KG can augment the generated
Releases on human trafficking. In preparation of presenting
response. This approach is beneficial for accuracy critical
narrative to the player, a subsection of the KGs are provided
to GPT-4 with 2For additional examples, see our GitLab.Claim: REFERENCES
Kizer transported victims across state boarders. Villaman was an ac-
complice to Kizer.
[1] Maria Becker, Katharina Korfhage, and Anette Frank. Implicit knowl-
Background Knowledge: The press release states Kizer broke the edge in argumentative texts: An annotated corpus. In Proceedings
Mann Act when he transported a victim across state boarders. of the Twelfth Language Resources and Evaluation Conference, pages
Implicit Knowledge: 2316–2324, Marseille, France, 2020. European Language Resources
Villaman also violated the Mann Act. Association.
[2] Steph Buongiorno, Lawrence (Jake) Klinkert, Zixin Zhuang, Tanishq
Modified Connection:
Chawla, and Corey Clark. Pangea: Procedural artificial narrative using
Villaman, violated, Mann Act
generative ai for turn-based video games. Under Review.
TABLE II
[3] Xu Chen, Hanxiong Chen, Hongteng Xu, Yongfeng Zhang, Yixin Cao,
HUMAN MODIFIED CONNECTIONS BASED ON CLAIMS AND BACKGROUND
Zheng Qin, and Hongyuan Zha. Personalized fashion recommendation
KNOWLEDGE.
with visual explanations based on multimodal attention network: To-
wards visually explainable recommendation. In Proceedings of the 42nd
International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Development in
Information Retrieval, pages 765–774. ACM, 2019.
[4] Corey Clark, Ira Greenberg, and Myque Ouellette. A model for
integrating human computing into commercial video games. In 2018
IEEE 6th International Conference on Serious Games and Applications
for Health (SeGAH), pages 1–8, 2018.
[5] Hua Jonathan Ye Congcong Yang and Yuanyue Feng. Using gamifica-
tion elements for competitive crowdsourcing: exploring the underlying
mechanism. Behaviour & Information Technology, 40(9):837–854,
2021.
[6] Mathew P. Daggett and Frederick R. Waugh. The Human Trafficking
Technology Roadmap: A Targeted Development Strategy for the De-
partment of Homeland Security. Technical report, MIT Lincoln Lab,
2019.
[7] Amy Farrell and Rebecca Pfeffer. Policing human trafficking: Cultural
blinders and organizational barriers. The ANNALS of the American
Fig. 3. An abstracted KG based on press release data. Solid lines represent Academy of Political and Social Science, 653(1):46–64, 2014.
explicit relationships, and dashed lines represent human modified connections. [8] Yingqiang Ge, Wenyue Hua, Kai Mei, jianchao ji, Juntao Tan, Shuyuan
Xu, Zelong Li, and Yongfeng Zhang. Openagi: When llm meets domain
experts. In A. Oh, T. Neumann, A. Globerson, K. Saenko, M. Hardt, and
S. Levine, editors, Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems,
domains because structured representations of facts, like KGs,
volume 36, pages 5539–5568. Curran Associates, Inc., 2023.
are explainable and can contain human validation.
[9] Vikram Kumaran, Dan Carpenter, Jonathan Rowe, Bradford Mott, and
This approach can also guard against hallucinations or James Lester. End-to-end procedural level generation in educational
unexplainable responses. When prompted to answer the same games with natural language instruction. In 2023 IEEE Conference on
Games (CoG). IEEE, 2023.
question based on the unmodified graph–in which Villaman is
[10] Xiang Lorraine Li, Adhiguna Kuncoro, Jordan Hoffmann, Cyprien
not connected to Mann Act–the LLM was instructed to inform de Masson d’Autume, Phil Blunsom, and Aida Nematzadeh. A sys-
the user that the KG does not contain the knowledge to answer tematic investigation of commonsense knowledge in large language
models. In Proceedings of the 2022 Conference on Empirical Methods
the question, as shown by Table III
in Natural Language Processing, pages 11838–11855. Association for
Computational Linguistics, December 2022.
Question: What act did Villaman break? [11] Robert Logan, Nelson F. Liu, Matthew E. Peters, Matt Gardner, and
Sameer Singh. Barack’s wife hillary: Using knowledge graphs for fact-
Answer (modified KG): The Mann Act
aware language modeling. In Proceedings of the 57th Annual Meeting
Answer (original KG): The knowledge to generate an answer is not of the Association for Computational Linguistics, pages 5962–5971.
found. Association for Computational Linguistics, July 2019.
TABLE III [12] Marc Najork. Generative information retrieval. In Proceedings of the
Q&A USING OPENAI’S GPT-4. 46th International ACM SIGIR Conference on Research and Develop-
ment in Information Retrieval, SIGIR ’23, page 1, New York, NY,
USA, 2023. Association for Computing Machinery.
[13] Newzoo. Global games market report. Market report, Newzoo, Jan
VI. DISCUSSION AND FUTURE WORK 2024.
[14] Allard Oelen, Markus Stocker, and So¨ren Auer. Creating and validating
The GAME-KG framework serves as one step towards a scholarly knowledge graph using natural language processing and
leveraging Human Computation Gaming (HCG) to modify microtask crowdsourcing. International Journal on Digital Libraries,
2023.
KGs for accuracy critical generative AI applications, such
[15] Ciyuan Peng, Feng Xia, Mehdi Naseriparsa, and Francesco Osborne.
as human trafficking data analysis. Obtaining KGs that have
Knowledge graphs: Opportunities and challenges. Artificial Intelligence
undergone human modification and validation may be espe- Review, 56:13071–13102, 2023.
cially desirable for such applications, as there is need for [16] Robin Rombach, Andreas Blattmann, Dominik Lorenz, Patrick Esser,
and Bjo¨rn Ommer. High-resolution image synthesis with latent
explainablility. In the future, research will need to be con-
diffusion models, 2022.
ducted to explore the additional benefits and risks of [17] Keshav Singh, Farjana Sultana Mim, Naoya Inoue, Shoichi Naito, and
leveraging human feedback for modifying KGs to better Kentaro Inui. Exploring methodologies for collecting high-quality
implicit reasoning in arguments. In Proceedings of the 8th Workshop
understand situations where humans may contribute desirable
on Argument Mining, pages 57–66. Association for Computational
biases, as well as undesirable biases, thus creating a greater Linguistics, 2021.
foundational understanding of HCG leveraged for KG [18] Fabian Suchanek and Anh Tuan Luu. Knowledge bases and language
models: Complementing forces. In Rules and Reasoning: 7th Interna-
modification.tional Joint Conference, RuleML+RR 2023, Oslo, Norway, September
18–20, 2023, Proceedings, pages 3–15. Springer, 2023.
[19] Denny Vrandecˇic´ and Markus Kro¨tzsch. Wikidata. Communications
of the ACM, 57(10):78–85, 2014.
[20] Haiyan Zhao, Hanjie Chen, Fan Yang, Ninghao Liu, Huiqi Deng,
Hengyi Cai, Shuaiqiang Wang, Dawei Yin, and Mengnan Du.
Explainability for large language models: A survey. ACM Transactions
on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 15(2):1–38, 2024.
[21] Lingfeng Zhong, Jia Wu, Qian Li, Hao Peng, and Xindong Wu. A
comprehensive survey on automatic knowledge graph construction.
ACM Computing Surveys, 56(4):1–62, 2023.
[22] Robert Zubek. Elements of Game Design. The MIT Press, Aug 2020.