Act Natural! Projecting Autonomous System
⋆
Trajectories Into Naturalistic Behavior Sets
Hamzah I. Khan Adam J. Thorpe David Fridovich-Keil
University of Texas at Austin, Austin, TX 78712 USA
Abstract: Autonomous agents operating around human actors must consider how their
behaviorsmightaffectthosehumans,evenwhennotdirectlyinteractingwiththem.Tothisend,
itisoftenbeneficialtobepredictableandappearnaturalistic.Existingmethodstoaddressthis
problemusehumanactorintentmodelingorimitationlearningtechniques,buttheseapproaches
rarelycaptureallpossiblemotivationsforhumanbehaviororrequiresignificantamountsofdata.
In contrast, we propose a technique for modeling naturalistic behavior as a set of convex
hulls computed over a relatively small dataset of human behavior. Given this set, we design
an optimization-based filter which projects arbitrary trajectories into it to make them more
naturalistic for autonomous agents to execute while also satisfying dynamics constraints. We
demonstrate our methods on real-world human driving data from the inD intersection dataset
(Bock et al., 2020).
Keywords: Advanced Control Design, Intelligent Road Transportation, Cognitive Control,
Human Behavior Modeling, Optimization, Dynamical Systems
1. INTRODUCTION
In interactive settings, human actors require a degree of
predictability from autonomous agents to ensure the safe
andcomfortableoperationofallinteractingactors.Failing
todosocancauseproblems:forexample,autonomouscars
can often behave more cautiously than humans expect,
leadingnearbyhumandriverstoreactinunexpectedways
and, potentially, cause collisions (Teoh and Kidd, 2017).
Therequirementofactinglikeotheractorsisevenencoded
in some traffic laws1 in which drivers must follow the
“flow of traffic” regarding their speeds on highways. As
acting in ways that stand out unnecessarily can lead to
safetyandcomfortconcerns,autonomousvehiclesmustbe
able to understand how humans naturalistically behave.
However, naturalistic behavior tends to be opaque and
thus difficult to model mathematically, and there is a
need for methods that can highlight what naturalistic
behavior looks like from observations of human behavior.
Existing solutions (Bajcsy et al., 2021; Sadigh et al.,
2016a) tend to either model a limited subset of possible
influences in human decision-making or do not produce
naturalistic behaviors without significant data (Kuefler
etal.,2017).Thesedeficienciespresentaneedforimproved
naturalisticbehaviorgenerationinautonomousprediction
Fig. 1. (top). Given a single-task dataset D, our method
and downstream planning tasks.
first generates a naturalistic behavior set by com-
We present a data-driven method for identifying the set puting time-indexed convex hulls. Then, we project
ofnaturalistichumanbehaviorsusingconvexhullsandan arbitrary trajectories into this set to make the be-
optimization-based method for projecting autonomously haviors more naturalistic. (bottom). We compute the
planned trajectories into it. Specifically, given a set of ob- naturalistic behavior set N using trajectories in the
servedhumandrivingtrajectories,wecomputeasequence second lane of the upper road beginning in the green
circle and ending in the red square. We then project
⋆ This work was supported by the National Science Foundation a trajectory into N.
under Grant No. 2211548. (e-mail: { hamzah, adam.thorpe, dfk
}@utexas.edu). of convex hulls around the states at each time instant.
1 TexasTransportationCode§545.363 With this representation in hand, we project trajectories
4202
yaM
92
]AM.sc[
1v29291.5042:viXra(i.e. from autonomous planners) into the naturalistic be- contributions: 1) constructing a convex hull around natu-
havior set to enforce naturalistic driving constraints. ralisticdrivingdata,and2)anoptimization-basedmethod
forprojectingautonomoussolutionsontothelearnedsets.
Existing work establishes that autonomous planners must
Through numerical results on the inD real-world scenario
consider the effect of their behavior on human actors
driving dataset (Bock et al., 2020), we demonstrate the
(Sadigh et al., 2016b). Dragan et al. (2013) propose
ability of our naturalistic behavior set generation method
the concept of legible motion from which an observer
tocapturepatterns,whichmaynotbeexplicitlymodeled,
can easily infer intent or strategy through actor motion.
in human behavior data. We additionally adjust trajecto-
This concept differs from predictability, which involves
riesgeneratedfromothersourcestocapturesuchpatterns
easily inferred motion without necessarily understanding
through projection.
intent. Sadigh et al. (2016b) notes that the actions of an
autonomous vehicle influence human drivers on the road,
2. PROBLEM STATEMENT
potentially unintentionally. Such a conclusion implies a
needforautonomousvehiclestomodelhumanbehaviorin
Consider a discrete-time dynamical system,
predictionandplanning,asotherwisesafebutunexpected
actions might cause unsafe reactions by human actors. x t+1 =f(x t,u t), (1)
wherex ∈X ⊆Rn isthestateattimetandu ∈U ⊆Rr
Existing methods tend to approach the problem of ac- t t
is the control input. The system evolves from an initial
counting for human behavior from one of two directions:
conditionx overafinitetimehorizont=0,...,T,where
inferring intent from human behavior models and imitat- 0
T ∈N.
ing behavior based on observed data. Human behavior
models use approaches ranging from explicitly modeling We assume that the dynamics f in (1) are known. We
and inferring specific aspects of human internal states like additionally presume access to historical human behavior
rationality (Bobu et al., 2018) and target states (Sadigh data consisting of state trajectories of the form
et al., 2016a) to data-driven predictive human behavior ξi =[xi⊺ xi⊺ ··· xi⊺ ]⊺ ∈Ξ⊆Rn(T+1). (2)
modelingthatinfershumanactors’beliefsofotheragents’ 0 1 T
Wefurtherexpectthisdatatodescribe“well-behaved”hu-
goals (Bajcsy et al., 2021; Fridovich-Keil et al., 2020), or
manbehavior.Forexample,well-behavedhumanbehavior
influencing human actors’ (potentially incorrect) internal
shouldgenerallybesafe,ashumansnaturallyavoidunsafe
models of autonomous agents’ motion (Tian et al., 2023).
behavior.
However, these approaches tend to fall short because
human preference and behavior is naturally opaque and
difficult to model mathematically, resulting in multiple 2.1 Estimating the Naturalistic Behavior Set
unmodeled aspects of the world which may be significant,
likehowroadconditionsmayinfluencesafetyandcomfort Our goal is to compute a set-based representation of the
tolerances.Ourapproachdiffersbyseekingtoframenatu- state trajectories that captures the naturalistic behavior
ralistic behavior planning as a projection into naturalistic of the human operator performing a given task, e.g. a
constraints from human behavior data, without otherwise driver making a left turn at an intersection or navigating
inferring the internal state of human actors. aparticularpathfrompointAtopointB.Inotherwords,
given a dataset D which consists of m state trajectories
The second set of approaches to this problem is imita- (as in (2)) that perform a particular task,
tion learning, and these involve motion planning by mim-
D ={ξi}m , (3)
icking provided human behavior data through behavior i=1
cloningorinversereinforcementlearningmethods.Behav- we seek to estimate the naturalistic behavior set N. We
ior cloning methods train supervised models on human formulate N as a collection of sets
data but tend to suffer from compounding errors and N ={N ,N ,...,N } (4)
0 1 T
distribution shift (Bagnell, 2015; Kuefler et al., 2017).
indexedbytime,suchthateachN isasubsetofthestate
Inverse reinforcement learning, which attempts to infer a t
space X and N forms a tube over the full time horizon T.
cost function describing agent objectives, generalizes bet-
terthanbehaviorcloningandproducesnaturalistichuman The problem of representing sets of feasible trajecto-
behavior in microscopic settings (i.e., using the local con- ries is fundamentally one of forward reachability (Bansal
text) but requires significantly more data (Kuefler et al., et al., 2017). Robust approaches that seek a strict over-
2017). Additionally, most inverse reinforcement learning approximation, while safe, tend to be overly conservative,
approaches assume very specific reward structures (Song and rapidly lose value for long-term prediction or esti-
etal.,2018;Huangetal.,2021).Forabnormalscenariosin mation (Rober et al., 2023). Bounded interval techniques
whichwehavelimiteddataduetodynamicconditions(i.e., suffer from the same issues (Ramdani and Nedialkov,
bad weather, rare road scenarios), even imitation learning 2011). Our approach can be viewed as a purely data-
techniquesareinfeasibleformodelinghumanbehaviordue driven approximation of the naturalistic set, in line with
to insufficient data. somesample-basedforwardreachabilitymethods(e.g.Lew
et al., 2022; Thorpe et al., 2022).
Our main innovation is a simple and efficient method for
identifying convex constraints that capture naturalistic
2.2 Projection Into the Naturalistic Behavior Set
human driving behaviors. We then use our representation
to formulate and solve a trajectory projection problem
Because autonomous system trajectories do not demon-
that enforces naturalistic behavior, similarity to an origi-
strate naturalistic behavior, the resulting behaviors may
nal trajectory, and dynamic feasibility. We make two key
be unpredictable, and therefore unsafe, when operatingaround humans (Teoh and Kidd, 2017). Thus, we seek to In general, having few hull states (i.e., small n ) results
c
augmentanautonomouslygeneratedtrajectory(i.e.,from in a computationally efficient algorithm. However, if more
an arbitrary autonomous planner) to make the trajectory hull states are needed, polynomial-time approximation
behave more naturally. Specifically, given a trajectory ξ algorithms for computing convex hulls exist (Sartipizadeh
a
computedfromanautonomousplanner,weseektoproject and Vincent, 2016; Balestriero et al., 2022).
ξ into the learned naturalistic behavior set N. Further,
a We represent N via the convex hull of hull states yi,
weseekaprojectionthatsatisfiesdynamicfeasibilitywith t t
respect to (1) while remaining as similar to the original N t =H(D t)=ConvexHull({y ti}m i=1). (7)
trajectory as possible. The naturalistic behavior set N can then be constructed
as a collection of convex hulls indexed in time, as in (4).
3. METHOD
Forming Convex Constraints. Convex sets can be well-
Weproposeanaturalisticprojectiontechniquethatidenti- approximated as convex polytopes, which can be equiva-
fies a naturalistic behavior set from human behavior data lently represented via half-space intersections. Thus, the
and then projects trajectories into the representation in a condition y ∈ N can be equivalently written as the
t t
dynamically consistent manner. (linear) half-space intersection inequality constraint
G y ≤h . (8)
3.1 Naturalistic Behavior Set Identification t t t
Expressingthenaturalisticbehaviorsetinthisformallows
us to utilize (8) as a constraint within an optimization
WepresumeaccesstoanaturalisticdatasetD ={ξi}m as
i=1 problem.
in(3)consistingofmtrajectoriesoflengthT.UsingD,we
define time-indexed datasets {D } at times t=0,1,...,T
t 3.2 Projection Into the Naturalistic Behavior Set
by gathering all states at time t across trajectories in D.
Foreachtimet=0,1,...,T,wethenseektolearnN ∈N
t Next, we seek to make a given autonomous system tra-
using data
jectory ξ behave more naturally while retaining dynamic
D ={x0,x1,...,xm}. (5) a
t t t t feasibility. This can be interpreted as projecting the tra-
jectory into the naturalistic behavior set. We thus seek
Representing the Naturalistic Behavior Set. We repre-
to identify a set of controls u ,...,u that generates
sent a naturalistic behavior set as a tube of convex hulls. 0 T−1
a naturalistic trajectory ξ similar to ξ subject to the
This choice provides a number of practical benefits, in- a
dynamic constraints f. Let x be the initial condition
cluding simplicity, flexibility, and data efficiency. First, init
at time t=0 of ξ . We define the projection
taking a convex hull produces an equivalent set of linear a
min d(ξ ,ξ) (9a)
inequality constraints and ensures that every data point a
u0,...,uT−1
is represented in it. Second, convex hulls do not assume ⊺ ⊺ ⊺ ⊺
s.t. ξ =[x x ··· x ] (9b)
a particular distribution of the underlying data, which is 0 1 T
x =f(x ,u ), t=0,1,...,T (9c)
critical to capturing the wide variety of human behavior. t+1 t t
Third, using convex hulls avoids requiring a large amount x 0 =x init (9d)
ofdata.Thus,ourmethodprovidesthebenefitofworking y(x )∈N , t=0,1,...,T, (9e)
t t
on smaller datasets, as compared to more data-intensive whered:Ξ×Ξ→Rin(9a)isadistancemetricfortrajec-
learningmethods.Wediscussadditionalconsiderationsre- tories,e.g.theEuclideandistanceoratrajectorysimilarity
garding our choice of convex hulls, including those related metric like the one proposed by Chen et al. (2011). The
to non-convexity, in Section 5. constraintsin(9c)and(9e)enforcedynamicfeasibilityand
thelearnednaturalisticbehaviorconstraints,whichcanbe
Efficiently Computing Complex Hulls. In general, the
modeled as linear inequalities as in (8). In addition, we
worst-case computational complexity of producing a con-
note that we can easily augment (9) to enforce additional
vex hull from m points in Rn is O(m⌊n/2⌋) (Barber et al.,
constraints such as control limits or safety restrictions.
1996). Our method computes a convex hull at each time
step, which requires T computations. Thus, the overall The projection in (9) may be non-convex if the dynamics
computationalcomplexityofnaturalisticbehaviorsetgen- f are nonlinear. Nevertheless, a variety of well-studied
eration is O(Tm⌊n/2⌋). techniquesexisttoidentifylocalminimizersofnon-convex
problems like (9). We refer the reader to Nocedal and
Wenotethenumberoffacetsontheboundaryofaconvex
Wright (1999) for further details.
hull can rise exponentially with n. Each facet corresponds
to a half-space, so introducing additional facets similarly 4. EXPERIMENTS
increases the number of constraints required to represent
a convex polytope as a half-space intersection (i.e., linear We demonstrate our naturalistic projection technique on
inequality constraints). real-worldhumandrivingdatafromtheinDdataset(Bock
et al., 2020).
Toaddressthisproblem,weconsideratransformation(e.g.
usingaselectormatrixorprincipalcomponentanalysis)of
4.1 The inD Dataset
the state x . We call the transformed state a “hull state”
t
in Rnc, where n c < n, produced via y t = y(x t). In other The inD datset (Bock et al., 2020) records and labels
words, for all t = 0,1,...,T, we seek to learn N t ∈ N naturalistic traffic data for vehicles, bicyclists, and pedes-
using data trians at four German intersections using a drone camera
D ={y(x0),y(x1),...,y(xm)}. (6) positioned above each intersection.
t t t tEach actor i’s trajectory is annotated at time t with state computing the convex hull with the Quickhull algorithm
xGT,i =[pi⊺ vi⊺ ai⊺ θ ]⊺ , (10) (Barberetal.,1996)asdescribedby (7).Finally,webuild
t t t t t the full naturalistic behavior set N as in (4).
containing planar position pi tracking the center of the
t
actor, planar velocity vi, planar acceleration ai, and
t t
heading θ ti. Trajectory ξi for actor i is constructed as in 4.4 Framing the Projection Problem
(2) and states are sampled at 25 frames per second, with
actor i being visible and recorded from the first frame in
For the subsequent experiments, we frame the projection
which actor i is visible, at t = 0, until the last frame in
of ξ into N as an alteration of (9),
which it is visible, at t=Hi. a
min ∥ξ −ξ∥2 (14a)
a 2
4.2 Identifying a Single-Task Dataset D
u0,...,uHa−1
⊺ ⊺ ⊺ ⊺
s.t. ξ =[x x ··· x ] (14b)
0 1 H
a
TheinDdatasetcontainsnaturalistictrajectoriesofactors x =Ax +Bu ∀ t∈{0,1,...,H } (14c)
t+1 t t a
performing a variety of tasks. We generate a single-task G y ≤h ∀ t∈{0,1,...,T}, (14d)
t t t
datasetD bydefiningaheuristicindicatorfunction.LetV
whereξ hashorizonH andT =|N|.Equation(14a)de-
contain the indices of all moving vehicles. We formalize a a a
finesthesimilarityobjectived(·,·)asaEuclideandistance.
filtering heuristic
Equation (14c) enforces (linear) planar double-integrator
h(ξi;S,E)=i∈V ∧ xi ∈S ∧ xi ∈E. (11)
0 Hi dynamics over the entire trajectory horizon H as de-
a
To ensure nontrivial behavior, the first term of (11) scribed by (12). Note that we adjust the projection to ac-
considers only moving vehicles. The second and third countforthecasewhereT ̸=H .Equation(14d)describes
a
terms further filter the naturalistic trajectories under the naturalistic behavior constraints as linear inequalities, as
assumption that every actor moving from a start polygon described by (8).
S toanendpolygonE performsthesametask.Wespecify
We note that the Euclidean distance d(·,·) is convex.
different polygons S,E for each subsequent experiment.
Moreover, both constraints (14c) and (14d) are linear,
indicating that (14) is a convex optimization problem.
4.3 Generating the Naturalistic Behavior Set
For this reason, we solve (14) with an efficient convex
optimizationlibrary,CVXPY(DiamondandBoyd,2016).
Our method requires naturalistic data over which we can If ξi ∈ D is dynamically feasible, then projection is
computeconvexhulls,sowedefinethehullstateusingthe
guaranteed to find a dynamic feasibile trajectory ξ ∈N.
information available in (10). We first select dynamics f
by modeling each moving vehicle actor as a point with
mass M evolving according to planar double-integrator
4.5 Curved Road
dynamics
p   p +∆tv 
x,t+1 x,t x,t Fig.1depictstwocurvedroadsseparatedbyamedianrun-
v v +∆tF /M
x = x,t+1= x,t x,t , (12) ningthroughaT-intersection.WedefineDasincludingall
t+1 p   p +∆tv 
y,t+1 y,t y,t movingvehiclesbeginningandendinginthesecondlaneof
v v +∆tF /M
y,t+1 y,t y,t theupperroad,whereS isgivenbythegreencircleandE
where u = [F F ]⊺ are forces applied to the point by the red square. Filtering based on these criteria results
t x,t y,t
mass. As (12) constitutes a linear equation in x and u , in 39 trajectories. We expect the naturalistic behavior set
t t
we denote the dynamics as x =Ax +Bu for brevity. tobeinfluencedbythecurveoftheroad.Thesetgenerated
t+1 t t
In practice, many systems of interest are differentially flat from D is shown in Fig. 1.
and admit a representation of state and control in which
dynamics are linear (Sastry, 2013, Ch. 9). Analysis. The naturalistic sets {N } begin compact but
t
lengthen along the lane over time, indicating that vehicles
Next, we define the hull state
drive at different speeds along this lane. At the most
(cid:20) (cid:21)
1 0 0 0 curved point in the lane, the naturalistic behavior set
y =y(x )= x (13)
t t 0 0 1 0 t covers the outside portion of the lane but not the inside.
by extracting the two-dimensional position from state x This observation suggests that drivers naturally hug the
t
of the dynamics in (12). As the full naturalistic behavior outside of a curved lane.
set N captures sets of positions over time, we neglect
higher order kinematics, although they can be included Projection. Fig. 1 also depicts ξ , a constant-velocity
a
in principle at the expense of additional computation. We trajectory moving straight through the second lane. We
notethatincludinghigherorderkinematicsisonlypossible callthistrajectorynon-naturalisticbecauseitisnotwithin
given appropriate naturalistic data. Since (10) includes the naturalistic behavior set. In particular, we note that
velocity and acceleration, we could use planar quadruple- it gets abnormally close to the median, which could neg-
integrator dynamics with jerk controls for experiments on atively impact safety or comfort. As expected, applying a
this dataset. Using (13), we generate datasets {D }T as naturalistic projection to ξ results in a trajectory that
t t=1 a
described by (6). As a convex hull can only be generated curves along the outside of the road, replicating the be-
from a dataset with at least n + 1 points, we specify haviorweseefromhumandrivers.Ourmethodreproduces
c
T to be the maximum time satisfying |D | ≥ n + 1. naturalisticbehaviorwithinthistrajectorywithoutexplic-
t c
Next,wegeneratethenaturalisticsetateachtime,N ,by itly modeling factors like comfort.
tat each time. In this experiment, actors have two distinct
types of behavior: either they stop and yield or they can
proceedalongthelane,whichresultsinanespeciallylarge
over-approximation due to the branching nature of the
task. This over-approximation motivates further work to
represent these situations with unions of polygons at each
time and propose a means of projecting onto that union.
5. CURRENT LIMITATIONS & FUTURE WORK
We present our approach as a practical first step towards
identifying and using naturalistic behavior sets. Convex
hulls enable capturing naturalistic data in a computation-
Fig.2.Wecomputethenaturalisticbehaviorsetovertwo-
ally efficient and data efficient representation, especially
dimensional position using all trajectories of moving
when compared to learned models. While convex hulls
vehiclesthatbegininthegreensquareandendinthe
sometimes fail to be resilient to outliers, we note that the
red. We generate the naturalistic behavior set based
simplicity of the convex hull representation is extremely
onthesetrajectoriesandplotit.Parkedcarsalongthe
powerfulduetothelackofassumptionsontheunderlying
drivinglaneareboxedinlightgreen.Weadditionally
data and that techniques exist to reject outliers when
circle (in light blue) the area of the lane in which
necessary (Fischler and Bolles, 1981).
vehicles tend to yield to crossing road users.
4.6 Busy Intersection with Parked Cars Non-Convexity. While our representation does not cur-
rently handle non-convexity of the naturalistic set, we
note that many on-road maneuvers are not affected by
Fig. 2 captures a main road running through a four-way
this restriction (i.e. adjusting angular velocity thresholds
intersectionandapedestriancrossing,andtheroadislined
for differently curved roads). To describe one example
with parked cars. We define D as including all moving
where assumptions of convexity are insufficient, consider
vehiclesbeginningandendingintheeastboundlane,where
a maneuver in which vehicles drive straight along a road
S is given by the green square and E by the red square.
which has a pothole. Naturalistic behavior may dictate
Filtering based on these criteria results in 49 trajectories.
that vehicles drive to either side of the pothole, mean-
Weexpectthenaturalisticbehaviorsettobeinfluencedby
ing that no convex polygon can capture such a scenario
the delays caused by naturally maintaining distance from
without including behaviors that drive over the pothole.
parked cars (highlighted in light green) and by waiting
An over-approximated set would thus be inadequate for
for crossing pedestrians. The naturalistic behavior set
modeling this situation. Instead, we would need to iden-
generated from D is shown in Fig. 2.
tify two variants of naturalistic behavior within this non-
convex maneuver: driving to the right of the pothole and
Analysis. The naturalistic sets {N } begin compact but
t driving to the left. Introducing multiple naturalistic be-
lengthen along the lane over time, indicating a variety of
havior subsets requires adjustments to ensure our method
speeds driving along this lane. We make two observations
works effectively. First, we would need to ensure that our
about the vehicles driving along the specified path. First,
method could represent each variant appropriately, and
the naturalistic behavior set reflects a larger distance
one possible method of doing so is using multiple convex
from parked vehicles. Near the beginning of the task,
hulls, though further work is needed to explore this open
the naturalistic behavior set polygons are in the left
problem. Second, we would need to adjust the optimiza-
portion of the lane, not centered. More dramatically, as
tion problem (9) to include discrete variables for selecting
shown in the inset of Fig. 2 near the end of the task,
between naturalistic subsets at a given time, and provide
the naturalistic behavior set is longer along the center
an efficient solver to the now mixed-integer problem.
of the lane than along the right side. This observation
indicates that vehicles move faster towards the center
Interaction. We note, as in Section 4.6, that our tech-
to avoid the parked red car. These behaviors indicate a
nique does not currently model interaction. We anticipate
naturalistic preference to maintain a larger distance from
that for most cases, this case falls under the broader case
parked vehicles, without explicitly modeling it.
ofnon-convexity.ForamaneuverlikethatinFig.2,which
Second,wenotethatasvehiclesapproachtheintersection, involves cars which either proceed straight unimpeded or
the naturalistic polygons lengthen until they consistently slowdownforapedestriancrossing,weanticipatethatan
stretchfrombeforetheintersection(withinthebluecircle) autonomously generated trajectory would need to select
until the end of the lane. This shape indicates that some a choice closer to one of these two subsets of naturalistic
vehicles pass through the intersection quickly, but that behavior. This example would lead to two possible convex
others wait to pass the intersection for longer. This effect hulls after a branching point in the maneuver. In Fig.
can also be observed by noting that the polygons become 2, this branching point might in the blue circle, after
more opaque in this region of the lane, indicating that whichwewouldmodeltwotypesofnonconvexnaturalistic
a vehicle can be anywhere in the lane at that time. We behavior as described previously.
attribute this observation to vehicles needing to wait for
otheractorstocrossaheadofthem.Thus,theconvexhulls Undesirable Road Behaviors. While we note that our
provide an over-approximation of the naturalistic set N methodisabletocapturenaturalisticbehavioreffectively,
tthereremainsanopenquestionastowhetherallnaturalis- Fridovich-Keil, D., Bajcsy, A., Fisac, J.F., Herbert, S.L.,
tic behavior should be reproduced. For example, consider Wang, S., Dragan, A.D., and Tomlin, C.J. (2020).
thecaseofanintersectioninwhichactorsregularlyviolate Confidence-aware motion prediction for real-time colli-
the law by ignoring stop signs. In such a case, we would sion avoidance1. The International Journal of Robotics
likely prefer that an autonomous planner prefer the legal Research, 39(2-3), 250–265.
requirements over enforcing the naturalistic constraints. Huang, Z., Wu, J., and Lv, C. (2021). Driving behavior
As previously noted, we can encode further preferences of modeling using naturalistic human driving data with
thissort,suchasenforcingasafetyset,byintroducingnew inverse reinforcement learning. IEEE transactions on
constraints as in (9) and (14). intelligent transportation systems, 23(8), 10239–10251.
Kuefler, A., Morton, J., Wheeler, T., and Kochenderfer,
6. CONCLUSION M. (2017). Imitating driver behavior with generative
adversarial networks. In 2017 IEEE intelligent vehicles
In this work, we propose a method for computing a
symposium (IV), 204–211. IEEE.
naturalistic behavior set over observations of human be-
Lew, T., Janson, L., Bonalli, R., and Pavone, M. (2022).
havior with a set of time-indexed convex hulls. We sub-
A simple and efficient sampling-based algorithm for
sequently describe an optimization problem that, when
general reachability analysis. In Learning for Dynamics
solved, projects trajectories into the naturalistic behav-
and Control Conference, 1086–1099. PMLR.
ior set to produce dynamically feasible trajectories which
Nocedal, J. and Wright, S.J. (1999). Numerical optimiza-
resemble recorded human behavior. We demonstrate our
tion. Springer.
method on real-world naturalistic driving data, and we
Ramdani, N. and Nedialkov, N.S. (2011). Computing
show that it can capture and reproduce patterns in be-
reachable sets for uncertain nonlinear hybrid systems
haviors without explicitly modeling those patterns.
using interval constraint-propagation techniques. Non-
linear Analysis: Hybrid Systems, 5(2), 149–162. Special
REFERENCES
Issue related to IFAC Conference on Analysis and De-
Bagnell, J.A. (2015). An invitation to imitation. Robotics sign of Hybrid Systems (ADHS’09).
Inst., Carnegie-Mellon Univ., Pittsburgh, PA, USA. Rober, N., Katz, S.M., Sidrane, C., Yel, E., Everett, M.,
Bajcsy, A., Siththaranjan, A., Tomlin, C.J., and Dragan, Kochenderfer, M.J., and How, J.P. (2023). Backward
A.D. (2021). Analyzing human models that adapt reachability analysis of neural feedback loops: Tech-
online. In 2021 IEEE International Conference on niques for linear and nonlinear systems. IEEE Open
Robotics and Automation (ICRA), 2754–2760. IEEE. Journal of Control Systems, 2, 108–124.
Balestriero, R., Wang, Z., and Baraniuk, R.G. (2022). Sadigh, D., Sastry, S.S., Seshia, S.A., and Dragan, A.
Deephull:Fastconvexhullapproximationinhighdimen- (2016a). Information gathering actions over human
sions. In IEEE International Conference on Acoustics, internalstate. In2016IEEE/RSJInternationalConfer-
Speech and Signal Processing (ICASSP), 3888–3892. ence on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), 66–73.
Bansal,S.,Chen,M.,Herbert,S.,andTomlin,C.J.(2017). Sadigh, D., Sastry, S., Seshia, S.A., and Dragan, A.D.
Hamilton-jacobi reachability: A brief overview and re- (2016b). Planning for autonomous cars that leverage
cent advances. In 2017 56th Annual Conference on effects on human actions. In Robotics: Science and
Decision and Control (CDC), 2242–2253. IEEE Press. systems, volume 2, 1–9. Ann Arbor, MI, USA.
Barber, C.B., Dobkin, D.P., and Huhdanpaa, H. (1996). Sartipizadeh, H. and Vincent, T.L. (2016). Computing
The quickhull algorithm for convex hulls. ACM Trans. theapproximateconvexhullinhighdimensions. ArXiv,
Math. Softw., 22(4), 469–483. abs/1603.04422.
Bobu, A., Bajcsy, A., Fisac, J.F., and Dragan, A.D. Sastry, S. (2013). Nonlinear systems: analysis, stability,
(2018). Learning under misspecified objective spaces. and control, volume 10. Springer.
In Conference on Robot Learning, 796–805. PMLR. Song, J., Ren, H., Sadigh, D., and Ermon, S. (2018).
Bock, J., Krajewski, R., Moers, T., Runde, S., Vater, Multi-agent generative adversarial imitation learning.
L., and Eckstein, L. (2020). The inD dataset: A In S. Bengio, H. Wallach, H. Larochelle, K. Grau-
drone dataset of naturalistic road user trajectories at man, N. Cesa-Bianchi, and R. Garnett (eds.), Advances
germanintersections. In2020 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles in Neural Information Processing Systems, volume 31.
Symposium (IV), 1929–1934. Curran Associates, Inc.
Chen, J., Wang, R., Liu, L., and Song, J. (2011). Clus- Teoh, E.R. and Kidd, D.G. (2017). Rage against the ma-
tering of trajectories based on hausdorff distance. In chine? google’s self-driving cars versus human drivers.
2011 International Conference on Electronics, Commu- Journal of Safety Research, 63, 57–60.
nications and Control (ICECC), 1940–1944. IEEE. Thorpe, A., Lew, T., Oishi, M., and Pavone, M. (2022).
Diamond, S. and Boyd, S. (2016). Cvxpy: A python- Data-driven chance constrained control using kernel
embedded modeling language for convex optimization. distributionembeddings. InLearning for Dynamics and
Journal of Machine Learning Research, 17(83), 1–5. Control Conference, 790–802. PMLR.
Dragan, A.D., Lee, K.C., and Srinivasa, S.S. (2013). Leg- Tian, R., Tomizuka, M., Dragan, A.D., and Bajcsy, A.
ibility and predictability of robot motion. In 2013 8th (2023). Towards modeling and influencing the dynam-
ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot ics of human learning. In Proceedings of the 2023
Interaction (HRI), 301–308. IEEE. ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Fischler, M.A. and Bolles, R.C. (1981). Random sample Interaction, HRI ’23, 350–358. Association for Comput-
consensus: a paradigm for model fitting with applica- ing Machinery, New York, NY, USA.
tions to image analysis and automated cartography.
Commun. ACM, 24(6), 381–395.