The Future of Child Development in the AI Era:
Cross-Disciplinary Perspectives Between AI and Child Development Experts
Neugnot-Cerioli, Mathilde
Muss Laurenty, Olga
mathilde@everyone.ai
ABSTRACT technology and progress, reminiscent of Horace's
observation from 20 BC that each generation views
This report explores the potential implications
its "progeny yet more corrupt". While it's crucial
of rapidly integrating Artificial Intelligence (AI)
to question whether anxieties about AI's influence
applications into children's environments. The
on children in their environment are merely a new
introduction of AI in our daily lives necessitates
iteration of this phenomenon, it is equally
scrutiny considering the significant role of the
important to acknowledge the unprecedented speed
environment in shaping cognition, socio-emotional
at which these changes are occurring. Further,
skills, and behaviors, especially during the first 25
history shows that humans have consistently
years of cerebral development. As AI becomes
regulated and legislated the use of new
prevalent in educational and leisure activities, it
technologies to ensure safety, tapping into their full
will significantly modify the experiences of
potential while leveraging the risks, like what
children and adolescents, presenting both
appears necessary in the field of AI. Knowledge
challenges and opportunities for their
about cognitive and socio-emotional child
developmental trajectories. This analysis was
development, along with early findings on the
informed by consulting with 15 experts from
impact of technology on children and adolescents,
pertinent disciplines (AI, product development,
reveals that these interactions are complex and
child development, and neurosciences), along with
multifaceted. This warrants careful consideration
a comprehensive review of scientific literature on
and study to develop appropriate safeguards.
children development and child-technology
Therefore, although the sentiment of generational
interactions. Overall, AI experts anticipate that AI
apprehension towards new technology is not new,
will transform leisure activities, revolutionize
the unique challenges and opportunities presented
education, and redefine human-machine
by AI in children's lives call for a nuanced,
interactions. While AI offers substantial benefits in
evidence-based approach.
fostering interactive engagement for example, it
The development of a child's brain is the result
also poses risks that require careful considerations,
of both genetic and environmental factors. From
especially during sensitive developmental periods.
the prenatal stage through early adulthood around
The report advocates for proactive international
25 years old, the brain undergoes significant
collaboration across multiple disciplines and
growth and transformation, with environmental
increased research into how technological
stimuli playing a pivotal role in shaping neural
innovations affect child development. Such efforts
pathways and cognitive functions. Early childhood
are crucial for designing a sustainable and ethical
and adolescence are marked by sensitive periods
future for the next generation through specific
where plasticity makes their brain particularly
child-centered regulations, and helping to educate
receptive to external influences. The traditional
all potential stakeholders, (regulators, developers,
elements of a child's environment – familial
parents and educators, children) about responsible
interactions, educational settings, and social
AI use and its potential impacts on child
experiences – have been extensively studied in
development.
terms of their impacts on developmental outcomes.
However, the rapid integration of AI into this
1. INTRODUCTION environment introduces a novel and complex
variable into the equation.
The concerns regarding Artificial Intelligence's
The main goal of this report is to create a
(AI) impact on children's lives invoke a timeless
collaborative framework that brings together
debate about generational perspectives onexperts in technology, cognitive neurosciences and technologies were already present in various
child development. The purpose is to anticipate the aspects of daily life, often without users being fully
potential impact of AI applications on cognitive aware of their presence. In many cases, AI operates
development and overall well-being in children. To behind the scenes, enhancing the functionality and
achieve this, the paper employs two key strategies: user experience of numerous products and services.
1) Consult with experts in AI, product Historically, AI "artificial intelligence" or
development and child development: The goal is "intelligence demonstrated by machines" is often
to provide a general understanding of how AI is described as artificially developed system that
likely to be applied in children’s environments and exhibits understanding, problem solving, among
to anticipate some of the potential benefits and other tasks by understanding how humans think
challenges it represents. and simulating human intelligence (Delipetrev et
2) Conduct an extensive review of the al., 2020). The large language models (LLMs) we
scientific literature: The focus of this research is see today are built on a series of advancements in
mathematics and engineering, increased datasets—
on child development, child-technology
largely thanks to the internet—and enhanced
interactions, and regulations, to gain insights on the
implications of growing up in a generalized AI- computational power (LeCun et al., 2015). Perhaps
more surprisingly, its advancement has been tightly
infused environment.
influenced by breakthroughs in the fields of
The contributors' intent is not to create an
cognitive psychology and neuroscience. Indeed,
exhaustive list of all potential implications, but to
artificial intelligence has largely been developed to
start a collaborative effort to incorporate AI into
mimic human intelligence, though focusing
children's lives in a way that is responsible,
primarily on its cognitive aspects, such as data
beneficial, and informed by a wide range of
processing, pattern recognition, and decision-
interdisciplinary research insights.
making, rather than emotions and social skills,
which are critical elements of human intelligence
1.1. Current context of artificial (Mitchell, 2020).
intelligence/Machine Learning The 1980s to 1990s saw the development of
machine learning, a subset of AI that, unlike
Though the notion of AI/Machine Learning
simple algorithms, allows computers to learn from
(ML) can be traced back to the 1940s, the advent
data and improve their performance over time. It
of Generative AI (GenAI) marked a significant
was significantly influenced by cognitive science,
turning point with the public release of ChatGPT-
with reinforcement learning—a fundamental
3.5 by OpenAI in November 2022 (Cao et al.,
machine learning technique—based on principles
2023). This release saw rapid adoption, gaining 1
from behavioral psychology and conditioning,
million users within its first month and now, nearly
where rewards increase the likelihood of behaviors
two years later, boasting over 180 million monthly
being repeated (Mitchell, 2020).
active users. Following ChatGPT-3.5, other tech
companies released their own large language Starting in the 1990s, AI models became more
models (LLMs), such as Anthropic’s Claude, refined with the development of deep learning,
Google’s Gemini, Gemma (and other models) enabling more complex processing tasks. On one
Meta's Llama, and others like Midjourney and hand, convolutional neural networks (CNNs),
Mistral. Consequently, AI has received increasing inspired by the discovery in neuroscience of how
media attention worldwide, raising public the eye detects edges, textures, and complex
awareness of AI’s capabilities. patterns, led to advances in visual, auditory, and
pattern recognition (Mitchell, 2020). On the other
AI was already embedded in various sectors,
hand, recurrent neural networks (RNNs) allow
including data mining, industrial robotics,
for handling sequential data, similar to how the
logistics, business intelligence, banking, medical
brain processes sequences of information, like
diagnostics, recommendation systems, and search
language or pattern recognition, learning from past
engines (Delipetrev et al., 2020). However, it has
information to predict future events (Mitchell,
become more tangible for the public, since it now
2020).
allows for more direct, conscious interactions. AI
2Starting in the late 2010s, the development of used and adopted (Meta, 2023). Also, monitoring
Generative AI (GenAI) marked a transformation through biometrics and physiological data is
from previous models (Bengesi et al., 2023). rapidly expanding, offering both promises and
GenAI regroups models that can generate new notable challenges, specifically for Physiological
content, such as text, images, music, and code, & Physical AI Monitoring, and Child Development
based on learned patterns from training data. AI Monitoring. In this context, it is imperative to
GenAI models, particularly those using the consider how these changes might affect
Transformer architecture like GPT (Generative developmental trajectories.
Pre-trained Transformers), undergo extensive pre-
In this report, to allow for more concise
training on large datasets, allowing them to analyze
language the term "AI" is used to refer to both the
and generate human-like content. This evolution technology itself and the applications, objects, and
was significantly influenced by advancements in
use in which it is integrated.
deep learning and neuroscience. For instance,
Transformer models mimic human attention
1.2. Child Development
mechanisms, reflecting how the brain focuses on
important stimuli while processing information Skills, thoughts, and behaviors are shaped and
(Vaswani et al., 2017). These models are inspired determined by brain functions. Individual
by human creativity, where the generative process differences arise from recursive and reciprocal
mirrors how humans imagine and create new ideas, child-environment interactions, while genetics set
making them effective in text completion, up differential susceptibility to environmental
translation, and creative writing. conditions. Genetics provides the blueprint for the
AI technology is advancing at an unprecedented development of the nervous system and sets its
pace, with its exponential growth accelerating timeline, while the environment influences how the
significantly since around 2010; the computational brain develops. At the intersection of genetics and
capacity for training began to double every 6 environmental factors lie sensitive periods, when
months, going faster than Moore's Law, which the brain is primed to develop certain skills, and
predicted a doubling every 20 months (measured in when missed opportunities can have lasting
FLOPs, a unit of operation in an artificial neural consequences (Banich & Compton, 2023).
network, (Sevilla et al., 2022). This rapid The brain contains an average of 80 billion
acceleration in technological innovation leads to neurons (Azevedo et al., 2009) that convey
changes in our environment happening at a faster information: they first receive then relay
pace than our ability to study its potential impact information to other neurons, and those
on human’s behaviors. connections are called synapses. The development
Looking ahead, AI is poised to continue its of those cells and the way they transmit
rapid trajectory deeply transforming our lives and information effectively happens through four main
industries, with ongoing research in areas such as physiological processes: neuronal proliferation,
reinforcement learning, quantum computing, and synaptogenesis, pruning and myelination. This
AI ethics (Castelvecchi, Davide, 2024). As AI begins with neuronal proliferation, which occurs
technologies become increasingly integrated into during early embryonic stages and continues for a
various aspects of daily life and industry, they offer period after birth (Silbereis et al., 2016). This sets
tremendous societal benefits while also raising the stage for synaptogenesis, the formation of
important broader ethical questions about privacy, neural connections or synapses, which is
security, and the future of work. The ongoing particularly crucial in early childhood and peaks
evolution of AI will undoubtedly shape the around the age of three (Huttenlocher, 2009).
technological landscape for decades to come, and Genetic blueprints determine the timing and
become further embedded into educational, location of these processes. For instance, synapse
recreational, and social domains. New formation in the auditory cortex reaches its peak at
technologies, such as Immersive Virtual Reality three months, whereas in the prefrontal cortex, it
(IVR), which regroup both Virtual Reality (VR) continues until the child is about three years old.
and Augmented Reality (AR) are being widely Post-synaptogenesis, the brain undergoes further
3sculpting through pruning and myelination. The second category of environmental
Pruning eliminates unnecessary or underused experiences is termed "Experience-Dependent
synapses, streamlining brain functions for optimal Systems." These systems are uniquely shaped by
performance (Huttenlocher, 1990; Huttenlocher & individual encounters and interactions within one's
Dabholkar, 1997). Myelination, the insulation of environment and are likely to be significantly
nerve fibers with a protective myelin sheath, influenced by the pervasiveness of AI in the future.
enhances the efficiency of neural networks and Abilities such as playing an instrument, speaking
extends from fetal development into early multiple languages, or excelling in sports are good
adulthood (Simmonds et al., 2014). examples of this type of neural systems (Banich &
Compton, 2023). Exposure to such experiences in
To underscore the significance of the
environment on development, consider the the environment modifies brain connectivity and
activation, which in turn correlates with behavioral
Abecedarian Project of the early 1970s, which
changes.
divided children from low socioeconomic
backgrounds into two groups - one receiving An additional important concept in child
enhanced nutrition and a stimulating environment, development is how changes in the environment,
while the other did not. The findings were striking: such as the integration of AI, might reshape
the enriched group exhibited significantly learning and interactions during sensitive periods
improved cerebral connectivity, translating to of development. Sensitive periods refer to specific
higher IQ scores, and higher well-being and times during development when an organism is
success into adulthood. (Campbell et al., 2008, particularly receptive to certain external stimuli,
2012; Muennig et al., 2011). This study vividly enabling learning to occur more rapidly and deeply.
illustrates how early environmental factors can After these periods, acquiring certain skills may not
profoundly influence developmental outcomes. be as efficient or effective (Banich & Compton,
2023). For example, research on children raised in
The interaction of children and adolescents with
orphanages under conditions of social deprivation
AI-infused technology in the future could
potentially modulate and influence overall has shown alterations in white matter (Sheridan et
development. Indeed, the development of skills is al., 2012) associated with lower IQ scores for those
not placed in enriched environments before the age
influenced by two crucial factors: the interplay
between environmental experiences, which are of 2, compared to those who were (Windsor et al.,
categorized as either expectant or environment- 2013). Likewise, learning a second language
dependent (Bruer & Greenough, 2016), and becomes significantly more difficult after the age
of 17, with achieving native-like fluency unlikely
sensitive periods, during which the brain is
(Hartshorne et al., 2018). The development and
especially receptive to developing certain skills.
quality of AI applications hold both the potential to
First, “Experience-Expectant System” refers
support developmental milestones and the risk of
to neural systems that are shaped by experiences
hindering them if they detract from crucial
universally present in typical development (Bruer
environmental interactions. This concept aligns
& Greenough, 2016). The formation of these neural
with displacement theory, which posits that time
features depends on external information that is
young children spend on screens or adolescents on
essential for development but not specified in the
social media could supplant activities more
genetic blueprint. Abilities reliant on this system
conducive to development. Recognizing this
develop normally given typical environmental
dynamic is essential for guiding the design and use
exposure; however, lack of such experience can
of technology in ways that foster rather than
result in significant disabilities. For instance,
obstruct a child's comprehensive development
infants' visual systems are primed to develop in
(Boone et al., 2007; Putnick et al., 2023; Roberts et
response to visual stimuli. If deprived of visual
al., 1993; Schwarzer et al., 2022).
input during the first few months of life due to
While the first years of a child's life are widely
congenital cataracts, this can lead to lasting visual
processing deficits, even if sight is later restored recognized as critical for development, as
through intervention (Lewis & Maurer, 2005). evidenced by initiatives like First 5 California
(First 5 California, n.d., p. 5), the significant
4cerebral development occurring during seen a marked increase across generations, with an
adolescence is often overlooked. Scientific average 17% rise since the COVID-19 pandemic
findings highlight this crucial period for brain began in early 2020; the typical American teenager
development, typically between ages 12 to 20, now spends an average of over 8 hours a day on
characterized by pruning and myelination in key screen, not including the time spent using screens
cortical regions. A notable aspect is the for school or homework (Rideout, V., Peebles, A.,
developmental mismatch between the rapidly Mann, S., & Robb, M. B., 2022). Furthermore, the
maturing limbic system, associated with emotional initial age of exposure to technology has
responses and reward processing, and the more dramatically decreased from 4 years in the 1970s to
slowly developing prefrontal cortex, responsible as young as 4 months old today (Radesky &
for decision-making, risk assessment, and impulse Christakis, 2016). AI is now integrated in a large
control (Casey et al., 2008; Steinberg et al., 2018). part of children’s digital environments, such as in
This leads to adolescents often making riskier content curation in streaming services and social
choices when rewards are involved despite their media, and gameplay in video games. With the
ability to reason logically in other situations advent of more sophisticated generative AI, two-
(Shulman et al., 2016; Steinberg et al., 2018). The thirds of adolescents reported using such
maturation of the limbic system coincides with the technology in 2023 (FOSI, 2023).
emergence of various psychological distresses,
including an increased risk for depression (Altemus Research into the effects of technology on
et al., 2014). Amid these changes, adolescents face children is intricate, influenced by the nature of
a complex social environment, challenging their screen activities, the age and environment of the
understanding and navigation of intricate social child, and their unique cognitive profiles. Despite
dynamics, emotional regulation, and decision- these complexities, there is some consensus on
making (Blakemore, 2012). Adolescents do not yet impacts of screens on several notable areas
possess the adult capacity to navigate these (Oswald et al., 2020). First, high screen use and
complexities, as evidenced by differing brain limited outdoor activity are linked to rising myopia
activity when interpreting others' mental states rates among children, particularly in Asia where up
(Andrews et al., 2021). Further, since technology is to 73% of South Korean teens are affected
moving so quickly, parents are often not equipped (Grzybowski et al., 2020; Jones-Jordan et al.,
to guide them in this fast-paced digital 2012). Second, screen usage has been linked to
environment. The convergence of a maturing brain, disrupted sleep patterns, reducing both the quantity
a developmental imbalance between cognitive and and quality of sleep, particularly when used before
emotional processing systems, and escalating bedtime. This disruption can significantly affect
social demands highlights the vulnerability of cognition and mental health (Cheung et al., 2017;
adolescence. This critical phase underscores the Khan, 2023; Magee et al., 2014; Riesch et al.,
need for a deep understanding of brain 2019). Third, prolonged screen time contributes to
development to foster healthy growth and increased sedentary behavior, raising the risk of
maturation, meriting special attention. cardiovascular issues later in life (Grøntved et al.,
2014; Lona et al., 2021). Fourth, the impact of
screens varies among different populations, with
1.3. AI in Children's Environment
both more adverse as well as positive outcomes
From interactive learning tools to algorithm- observed in individuals with neurodivergence
driven content on digital platforms, AI has become (Gwynette et al., 2018; Weiss et al., 2011). Lastly,
a pivotal component of children's daily lives. This technoference, which relates to how technology
evolution builds upon earlier technological shifts interferes in human relationships is reshaping
introduced by television, the internet, smartphones, parent-child interactions, and constitutes a growing
tablets, and video games. The current digital area of study as parents themselves express conflict
landscape represents an important environment over their screen usage around their children
shift, with potential impacts on children’s cognitive (Anderson et al., 2017; Gergen, 2002; Kildare &
and emotional development that are not yet fully Middlemiss, 2017; Misra et al., 2016; Myruski et
understood. Engagement with digital media has al., 2018; Pempek et al., 2014; Przybylski &
5Weinstein, 2013; Radesky et al., 2014; Radesky & Development — vital for safeguarding children's
Christakis, 2016; Stockdale et al., 2020). holistic development against AI's potential
Technology is influencing how children and negative impacts — has received less focus than
adolescents relate to themselves and their peers, others. The United Nations Convention on the
which can be negative in the case of cyberbullying Rights of the Child (United Nations Convention on
for instance (Marín-López et al., 2020). the Rights of the Child, 1989), while not AI-
specific, is a pivotal international treaty that
champions children's protection and
1.4. Current Regulations for Ethical AI
developmental rights, offering a foundation for AI
There is a growing consensus among regulators,
regulations concerning childhood. Furthermore,
policymakers, and AI researchers on the urgent
the Children's Online Privacy Protection Act
need to properly regulate and create safeguards for
(Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act
the development and deployment of AI solutions.
(COPPA), 1998) by the US Congress though not
This consensus stems from multiple critical ethical
directly targeting AI, still proves relevant as it
considerations.
governs the collection of personal information
Among the general aspects of ethical AI for all, from children under 13 by digital services, which
some International and Multinational Guidelines, is an essential aspect of safety in regulating AI's
though not directly targeting AI originally, are development for children. Meanwhile, the General
tackling various aspects that still apply to it. Data Protection Regulation (General Data
Industry initiatives, such as the IEEE Global Protection Regulation (GDPR) – Legal Text, 2018)
Initiative on Ethics of Autonomous and Intelligent was adopted in 2018 by the European Parliament
Systems (Shahriari & Shahriari, 2017) has and applies to all individuals. The Age-Appropriate
produced comprehensive guidelines for ethically Design Code (Age-Appropriate Design Code,
aligned design, focusing on how AI systems can 2020), enforced by the UK’s Information
respect and protect human rights. International Commissioner’s Office, delineates 15 standards for
efforts, like OECD Principles on Artificial age-appropriate digital services accessible to
Intelligence (2019) was adopted by over 40 children. Although its jurisdiction is the UK, it
countries, and outline standards for responsible and inspires regulations globally and serves as a
trustworthy AI, emphasizing respect for human benchmark for designing child-safe digital
rights, transparency, accountability, explainability, services. Additionally, it underscores the
education and digital literacy, fairness, robustness, importance of tailoring approaches to cater to the
and security. Building on these, the G20 AI varied developmental stages of children.
Principles were endorsed by leaders of the G20
Published in 2021, UNICEF's Policy Guidance
countries, and further emphasized among other
on AI for Children underscores the principles of
things, the notion of protecting human well-being.
inclusion, fairness, privacy, safety, and the
The AI Act, approved by the European Parliament
empowerment of children in the digital age,
on March 23rd, 2024 (AI Act, 2024)establishes a
detailing nine key requirements for child-centric AI
comprehensive regulatory framework for
(UNICEF, 2021). UNICEF has outlined nine
overseeing the development, deployment, and
principles for child-centered AI in their Policy
application of artificial intelligence across
Guidance on AI for Children: 1) Support children's
European countries. In its framework, it
development and well-being, 2) Ensure inclusion
specifically addresses children and demonstrates
of and for children, 3) Prioritize fairness and non-
the EU's proactive approach to regulating and
discrimination for children, 4) Protect children's
safeguarding AI for children.
data and privacy, 5) Ensure safety for children, 6)
However, those do not specifically tackle the Provide transparency, explainability and
nuances of children's cognitive development. It is accountability for children, 7) Empower
encouraging to observe significant organizations governments and businesses with knowledge of AI
with regulatory influence turning their attention and children's rights, 8) Prepare children for
towards children's specific needs. Unfortunately, as present and future developments in AI, 9) Create
revealed in our discussions, the principle of an enabling environment. Though it’s encouraging
Safeguarding Cognitive, Social, and Emotional
6that "Support children’s development and well- incorporated into new ones, along three main
being," is one of the nine principles, it is crucial to domains that we will address here:
build on this and create more concrete guidelines
1) Entertainment
for product developers as well as policymakers. 2) Education
Similarly, Common Sense Media's AI Initiative 3) Conversational agents
incorporates these considerations under the Kid’s
AI initially penetrated the entertainment sector
Safety Principle, focusing on protecting well- through streaming, video games, and social media,
being. making it a logical and reliable starting point for
Recognizing the intricate relationship between anticipating AI’s impact on children and
the environment and skill development, first we adolescents. Additionally, education, primarily
must contemplate the potential implications of through EdTech applications, has progressively
these changes for child development. Specifically, integrated more AI tools, and the advent of
we must ask ourselves: What will these generative AI promises to further transform the
transformations mean for the development of educational landscape. Generative AI is also
children? In the AI era, safeguarding children's revolutionizing the field of conversational AI
development necessitates proactively identifying agents—programs that can engage in conversation
potential risks by leveraging insights into child with humans such as robot, ChatGPT or digital
development and preempting the possible negative voice assistant—making them more effective and
impacts of technology on their lives. prominent. This list is not exhaustive but reflects
some of the most imminent and direct changes to
children's environments, although AI has also
1.5. Our Approach
infiltrated other domains, where it is expanded at
In response to the urgency to anticipate the
an increased rate, such as health, transportation,
impact of AI-based technology on child
and communication.
development for proactive regulations, we
For each domain, we first discuss how AI will
consulted with experts from relevant domains. We
be improved or integrated into their applications.
reached out to specialists in AI, technological
Then, we discuss what those changes might entail
product development, as well as specialists in child
for children’s development, underscoring both
development, conducting interviews with 16
their potential and inherent risks. Children’s
renowned experts. They volunteered their time and
perceptions, experiences, and interactions with
shared their insights on future AI trends in AI, as
their surroundings are constrained by the
well as how this might influence children both
immaturity of their cerebral development and still
short and long term (See Annex 1).
limited life experiences. These components
The interviews averaged 105.4 minutes each,
collectively influence how children engage with
totaling 14 hours and 3 minutes. Those experts are
and make sense of the world around them, offering
cited as contributors in this paper, and were all
insights into their cognitive and socio-emotional
contacted for validation before publication, 10
development. Furthermore, this highlights the
volunteered to review the report before its
critical need to acknowledge children's
publications (See Annex 1).
perspectives, which often differ greatly from
adults', when designing experiences for them,
2. ANTICIPATED AI USE FOR
ensuring that these align with their current
capacities.
CHILDREN
Experts in AI have collectively anticipated the 2.1. AI in Entertainment, Leisure and
rapid development, deployment, and integration of
Social Media: Enhancing Experiences
AI in children’s lives, leading to its pervasive
and Addressing Challenges for
nature in their environment. With recent leaps in
Children
generative AI progress, it will soon be either
integrated and improved in existing solutions or AI has deeply penetrated the entertainment
sector over the past few decades and offers a wider
7view on the interaction of youth with technology. learning and retention with interactive AI in TV
Children often engage with AI through shows (Y. Xu et al., 2022; Y. Xu & Warschauer,
sophisticated algorithms that personalize content 2020). Regarding sensory development, smart toys
in streaming services and social media by employing augmented and mixed reality could
curating content of interest to increase engagement. offer enhanced sensory and motor experiences
AI also enhances experiences in videogames compared to traditional tablets, addressing the
through dynamic difficulty adjustments. These current limitations of engaging in digital worlds
interactions with content are bound to become (Tang & Tewell, 2015). For instance, toys like
more immersive with the development and soccer balls linked to apps or Legos augmented
deployment of Immersive Virtual Reality (IVR), with AR could merge interactive digital media
which is already used in entertainment to transport elements with physical experiences. This
players to alternate realities, like videogames, and integration helps address concerns about the
in education to create more interactive learning diminishing physical activity due to the allure of
experiences. These advancements underline the digital screens. Moreover, such toys could promote
transformative potential of AI in entertainment, physical activity through exergames—video games
enriching user experiences through that combine exercise and gameplay—which have
personalization, interactivity, and immersive been shown to aid in reducing BMI (Staiano et al.,
storytelling. 2018).
The field of research has extensively examined Focusing on cognitive development, video
the impact of digital media on children's games can have a significant impact, as evidenced
development. Building on these findings, we by a report by the Entertainment Software
reflect upon how AI has the potential to enhance Association (ESA, 2024) which notes that the U.S.
cognitive and socioemotional development by alone has 227 million gamers across all age groups.
building on existing solutions, continuously These gamers engage across different platforms,
improving them, and by creating new ones. Then, including smartphones, game consoles, and
we discuss the developmental considerations computers, ranked in order of popularity. Engaging
crucial to guide the further integration of AI, taking in some types of video games has been shown to
into consideration children's protracted enhance top-down attention and spatial
development. cognition, offering promising insights for
perceptual enhancements (Bediou et al., 2018;
Choi et al., 2020). Nonetheless, the impact of
2.1.1. AI’s potential for child
gaming is nuanced due to the diversity of games
development
which now include a wide array of genres and
Enhancing cognitive development with AI gameplay mechanics (Dale, 2020).
The entertainment sector, with its increasingly
The evolution of the video game industry is
personalized content and interactive elements, has
closely linked with advancements in AI. Of note,
the potential to be more stimulating and provide a
AI allows the creation of more sophisticated and
richer learning environment. In terms of language
dynamic game environments that ensure that
acquisition in young children, exposure to
games remain both engaging and challenging—
television programs alongside parental
which aligns with the concept of Flow—for players
involvement in co-viewing and interactive
by dynamically modifying the game’s difficulty
questioning have been shown to enhance learning,
based on the player's performance (Bakkes et al.,
underscoring the ongoing importance of active
2009; Sepulveda et al., 2019; Skinner & Walmsley,
engagement in language development (Strouse et
2019; Torrado et al., 2018). Studies in education
al., 2018). Additionally, "fake interactions," such
have found that when there is an optimal balance
as engagement pauses in programs like Dora the
between a student's skill level and the challenge
Explorer, have been found to boost vocabulary
presented, students are more likely to enter a flow
learning in preschool children (Linebarger &
state. This immersive state not only enhances
Vaala, 2010). Generative AI could significantly
engagement but also significantly increases the
enhance these benefits for vocabulary expansion,
likelihood of improved learning outcomes (Hamari
as evidenced by studies demonstrating increased
8et al., 2016; Mandhana & Caruso, 2023). and social support and shared activities (Angelini
Furthermore, if the AI can predict and generate et al., 2022; Bukowski et al., 2009). Social media
guidance in a way that properly scaffolds the can also help adolescents stay in touch with their
learning experience without providing excessive support networks, which is especially important for
assistance, it would align with the educational kids from marginalized groups, such as LGBTQ+
concept of the Zone of Proximal Development. adolescents who may be reluctant or unable to
This facilitates optimal learning by matching discuss their identity with caregivers, and where
challenges and scaffolding learning to suit the online support can represent a lifeline (Craig et al.,
player’s evolving capabilities (Bakkes et al., 2009; 2021; Lucero, 2017; Selkie et al., 2020). AI also
Sepulveda et al., 2019; Skinner & Walmsley, 2019; holds the potential to address current limitations in
Torrado et al., 2018). With AI advancements, social media, enhancing content moderation and
games are increasingly capable of assessing and potentially reducing exposure to harmful content
adapting to a player’s skill level, presenting and interactions, though researchers in this field
significant learning opportunities (Bork, 2012). highlight the technical and ethical complexities that
Due to their inherently motivating nature, video this raises (Hakimi et al., 2024).
games have successfully been leveraged for
Finally, in the medical field, a systematic
therapeutic interventions, potentially reducing review of 17 studies focusing on medical
symptoms in children with Attention Deficit and procedures suggests that immersing patients in
Hyperactivity Disorder (ADHD) or with Autism
virtual reality can significantly reduce pain and
Spectrum Disorder (ASD) (Jiménez-Muñoz et al.,
anxiety for children and adolescents during and
2022; Peñuelas-Calvo et al., 2022). after medical interventions (Eijlers et al., 2019).
IVR shows promise in preparing children for
AI as a tool for socio-emotional upcoming medical procedures by immersing them
through their different steps (Gold et al., 2021;
development
Stunden et al., 2021). The effectiveness of IVR
A recent study by Bain & Company involving
extends to treating phobias and social anxiety in
25 game industry executives anticipates that
adults through Virtual Reality Exposure Therapy
generative AI will revolutionize the industry by
(VRET), with systematic reviews citing
enhancing the complexity and interactions of NPCs
encouraging outcomes (Botella et al., 2017, 2017,
(non-player characters). An NPC is a character in a
2017; Horigome et al., 2020). Recently, this
video game that is not controlled by a player but is
approach has been explored for treating phobias in
instead operated by the game's software. Given that
children. Although research in this area,
prosocial video games have been associated with
particularly randomized controlled trials, remains
increased prosocial behaviors and reduced violence
scarce (Kothgassner & Felnhofer, 2021), they
(Greitemeyer, 2022; Li & Zhang, 2023), and
remain nonetheless an interesting avenue of
multiplayer online games enhance soft skills
treatment.
(Pagel et al., 2021), the sophisticated interactions
with NPCs could offer new avenues for social skill
development. Additionally, the use of Immersive 2.1.2. Developmental Considerations
Virtual Reality (IVR) has been shown to positively
Similarly to the potential benefits AI-
influence attitudes towards individuals from
integration to products can offer, child
outgroups, such as individuals from other gender or
developmental considerations and responsible
ethnics (Fox et al., 2013; Peck et al., 2013; Yee &
decision-making should guide the development of
Bailenson, 2007). It is possible then to assume it
future applications. By building on existing
could serve as a tool to teach about empathy or bias
research and data in children and digital media,
awareness.
learning from past mistakes in AI, and embracing
Social media, often scrutinized for potential speculative future thinking, we can better
risks to adolescents, also play a crucial role in their anticipate and avoid future pitfalls.
social development. They can facilitate the
establishment and maintenance of friendships by,
for example, offering opportunities for emotional
9The trade-offs of prolonged screen times memories, processing of experiences, and
Children and adolescents are interacting with restoration of neural pathways (Potkin & Bunney,
digital media at increasingly younger ages, which 2012). This chronic lack of sleep exposes children
represents more than four hours a day to such and adolescents to negative cognitive
activities before reaching the age of 14 (Radesky & consequences, such as issues with attention,
Christakis, 2016; Rideout, 2021). This shift away memory, and learning (Peracchia & Curcio, 2018;
from other leisure activities is already causing Weaver et al., 2010; Wolfe et al., 2014), as well as
harm to their vision and overall well-being, through affective issues, such as anxiety and depressive
physiological aspects such as sleep and moods (Bastos et al., 2023; Pires et al., 2012;
sedentariness. Increasing the number of products, Talbot et al., 2010).
applications, and activities infused with AI has the More appealing AI-infused entertainment could
potential to lead to even higher levels of also further exacerbate an already excessive
consumption, as suggested by the current trends sedentary lifestyle, which is in turn associated
(Rideout, 2021), further diminishing engagement with a higher risk of physical health issues
in other crucial, varied, and rich experiences, such (Costigan et al., 2013). Screen media use is a
as outside free play with other children. significant factor in the global child and adolescent
High digital screen use and a low level of obesity epidemic (Robinson et al., 2017), with
outdoor activity among children are linked to positive correlations between screen time and
myopia, or nearsightedness (Jones-Jordan et al., weight in children (Hesketh et al., 2007; Robinson
2012). In Asia, the situation is particularly et al., 2017). Additionally, poor physical activity is
alarming, with up to 73% of children aged 12 to 18 linked to higher levels of anxiety and depressive
affected in South Korea (Grzybowski et al., 2020). symptoms (Brown et al., 2013; McMahon et al.,
Screens contribute to myopia as they require 2017). Conversely, a review of existing
continuous close-up focusing and exposure to blue interventions that increase physical activity has
light. This exposure is more damaging to children been shown to reduce anxiety in healthy patients
due to the physiological immaturity of their eyes, (Rebar et al., 2015). Some evidence also suggests
which are less capable of filtering out harmful that physical activity has positive effects on
light, increasing their vulnerability to visual stress cognition and academic performance in children
and structural changes (Artigas et al., 2012). (Donnelly et al., 2016).
Looking forward, experts estimate that by 2050, Another way spending more time-consuming
half of the global population will suffer from digital media might negatively impact children's
myopia, with 10% facing severe implications development is by reducing exposure to
(Holden et al., 2016). The long-term consequences foundational experiences at specific ages during
of myopia extend beyond poor vision, as it also critical periods of development. In babies and
increases the risk of serious eye conditions in toddlers, this is even more crucial since they
adulthood, such as maculopathy, retinal seldom learn from digital media exposure, a
detachment, glaucoma, early cataract formation, phenomenon known as the video-deficit effect
and potential blindness. These conditions not only (Anderson & Pempek, 2005; Krcmar, 2010;
impact individual health, neurological Linebarger & Vaala, 2010). This concept is crucial
development and quality of life but also impose when developing solutions for children under 3
significant economic burdens due to increased years old, where increased interactivity through
healthcare needs and lost productivity. touch screens does not always translate into
As for the physiological impact of digital media learning (Sheehan & Uttal, 2016). This is partly
consumption, young people tend to play video due to the high reliance of children under 3 on
games or scroll through social media during the social contingency, meaning they need the
early hours of the night, sacrificing sleep time and responsiveness of a caregiver to their actions for
quality (Hale & Guan, 2015; Pirdehghan et al., optimal learning (Dunst et al., 2008; Tarabulsy et
2021; Scott & Woods, 2018). Sleep is an essential al., 1996). An additional key concept is that
phase for brain development and functioning, children develop dual representation gradually
providing critical time for the consolidation of between the ages of 3 and 5 years old. Dual
10representation posits that for children to fully development (Lin et al., 2017). Indeed, sensory
understand and learn from symbols, for instance, a integration is associated with higher-order
flashcard of a dog, they must simultaneously hold cognitive functions related to cognitive control,
two mental representations: the symbol as a such as attention, executive functioning, and
physical object in its own right (the flashcard) and emotional regulation (Chaddock et al., 2011;
the symbol (the dog) as a representation of Chang et al., 2022; Hilton et al., 2007; Kojovic et
something beyond itself (DeLoache, 1989, 2000). al., 2019; Masten et al., 2012; Pangelinan et al.,
When interacting with screens, they often put more 2011; Schmahmann & Pandya, 2008).
focus on the screen itself than the symbol it
represents (Anderson & Pempek, 2005; Krcmar,
Children still developing minds
2010; Linebarger & Vaala, 2010). A longitudinal
The trade-off of spending more time with digital
cohort study demonstrated a persistent link
media represents a risk of lacking some of the
between early screen media exposure and cognitive
variability and depth of experiences. Further, the
development (Pagani et al., 2010). Specifically, the
experiences provided by those applications are not
study found that each additional hour of TV
always adapted to children. Children and
exposure at the age of two was associated with a
adolescents' cerebral immaturity or still-
7% decrease in classroom engagement and a 6%
developing mental representations of the world
reduction in math proficiency by the fourth grade.
might make them specifically vulnerable to some
Therefore, a potential risk of AI solutions in
AI uses. Here, we specifically address children’s
entertainment could create overreliance on
progressive understanding of privacy and the
unproven methods that replace crucial language
specific risks of being exposed to harmful content.
development activities before age 3 (Putnick et
We highlight the potential impact of attention-
al., 2023). While GenAI in educational shows hold
capturing algorithms on delayed gratification and
promises for vocabulary development, the
on the reward system, as well as their influence on
importance of rich social interaction for broader
attention and executive functioning. Finally, we
communication and social skills development
explore the potential adverse effects of IVR on
remains paramount. With older children GenAI has
children.
the potential to make digital media more engaging
by creating interactions that encourage children to The notion of privacy is a perfect illustration of
be active learners, rather than passive consumers the difficulty for young people to make informed
(Y. Xu et al., 2022; Y. Xu & Warschauer, 2020). decisions considering the complexity of the
However, for AI to hold that promise, the emphasis implications and abstraction skills they require. It
has to be on consciously creating enriched represents a common concern in the entertainment
experiences that support learning, rather than and AI sectors for both experts and parents,
overly easy digestible content that merely increases especially regarding social media and Immersive
engagement time. Virtual Reality (IVR) (Kelly, G., Graham, J.,
Bronfman, J., & Garton, S., 2022). It is crucial to
In both babies and preschool-aged children,
take into account that children’s understanding of
increased time spent engaging with digital media
privacy is not the same as adults', and their
might lead to reduced engagement with physical
development of this concept is progressive with
objects and rich sensory experiences, which are
age, and also varies depending on their personal
critical at this age. Current digital experiences often
circumstances, such as socioeconomic status (SES)
lack the tactile and motor engagement provided by
(Livingstone, S. Stoilova, M. and Nandagiri, R.,
physical manipulation (Crescenzi et al., 2014).
2019). Children under 7 lack the abstract
Longitudinal studies have reported associations
understanding of concepts like ‘privacy’ and
between prolonged screen time and decreased
‘safety’ (Chaudron et al., 2018). While by age 11
sensory integration and fine motor skills
their comprehension improves, they still lack
(Cadoret et al., 2018; Heffler et al., 2024; Suggate
judgment in applying these concepts to practical
& Martzog, 2021), suggesting that this shift away
situations (Kumar et al., 2017). For instance,
from rich sensory experiences could have
children under 11 are more likely to share their data
implications for healthy sensory-motor
on websites that contain warnings for age-
11inappropriate content as this elicits their curiosity experiences due to the more rapid maturation of the
(Miyazaki et al., 2009). Even during adolescence, reward system relative to the cognitive control
their decisions often prioritize immediate system (Casey et al., 2008; Ernst et al., 2006;
gratification over the consideration of uncertain Luciana & Collins, 2012; Steinberg et al., 2018).
risks in the future, despite a more mature Therefore, adolescents may not be equipped to
understanding of those concepts (Youn, 2009; Yu make proper decisions effectively in a reward-
et al., 2015). While digital literacy is important, driven context due to their developmental cerebral
they are still immature and their difficulty to constraints (Luciana & Collins, 2012).
exercise their judgment when making decisions for
Additionally, higher use of mobile technology
long-term effects show that it is not sufficient in
could generate higher need for instant
protecting them. Furthermore, they lack a safe gratification (Wilmer et al., 2017). Individuals
space to practice these concepts of privacy without
who are heavier users of mobile technology are
facing repercussions. The role of adults and
more likely to accept smaller, more immediate
policymakers in protecting their privacy in the rewards than to wait for a more substantial but
context of this immaturity is essential (Livingstone, delayed one (Wilmer & Chein, 2016). Researchers
S. Stoilova, M. and Nandagiri, R., 2019). have found that after a 3-month exposure to
Another potential risk involves the future smartphones, non-users became more immediacy-
capability for users to self-generate content, oriented in a delay discounting measure suggesting
potentially complicating the control of age- that heavy smartphone usage can causally reduce
appropriate viewership for children and an individual’s capacity (or at least tendency) to
adolescents. Exposure to content that is not age delay gratification (Hadar et al., 2015).
appropriate is associated with behavioral and Behavioral addictions are linked to impulsivity,
emotional changes, such as heightened aggression and they might be particularly linked an inability to
(Calvert et al., 2017; Greitemeyer, 2022) or the
delay gratification (Li et al., 2016; Munno et al.,
adoption of inappropriate and unsafe sexual
2016). These addictions involve repeated
behaviors (Browne & Hamilton-Giachritsis, 2005; dysfunctional behaviors that do not require the
Massey et al., 2021). ingestion of addictive substances (Goodman, 1990;
Due to their still-developing brains, young Griffiths, 1996), such as Online Gaming Disorder,
children may struggle to comprehend the which is included in the DSM-5 (American
implications of their actions, making them more Psychiatric Association, 2013). Two meta-analyses
likely to be attracted to harmful content in the focused on neural changes in individuals with
digital world. Additionally, because of this Internet Gaming Disorder have reported
immaturity, they are especially vulnerable to the abnormalities in frontostriatal and fronto-cingulate
negative impact of such harmful experiences on circuits, as well as dysfunctions in the prefrontal
their development. Content curation through AI lobe in individuals with this disorder (Meng et al.,
represents such a potential risk. The first is that 2015; Yao et al., 2017). These structures are also
children's ability to regulate their emotions related to emotion dysregulation in other addictive
develops progressively and only reaches full disorders and contribute to the compulsive use of
maturity in early adulthood (Casey et al., 2019). screen devices in general (Feil et al., 2010; Lüscher
They rely more on immediate gratification and et al., 2020).
might, in turn, have more difficulty regulating their High social media use has been linked to
use of digital tools, especially as AI's ability to diminished attentional control in adolescents by
curate highly rewarding content improves.
reducing their ability to maintain focus and resist
Although individual differences in impulsivity distractions (Siebers et al., 2022). This issue arises
mediate the ability to delay rewards (Minear et al., as notifications and media use may divert their
2013; Sanbonmatsu et al., 2013; Shih & Chuang,
attention from their immediate tasks to previously
2013), this might be particularly true for
encountered online content or interactions (Stothart
adolescents. As previously mentioned, according et al., 2015). Receiving notifications during a math
to the dual systems model, adolescents are biased
task, for example, can significantly affect both
to respond vigorously to rewarding and novel
accuracy and reaction time, with more pronounced
12effects in adolescents (15 years old) compared to documentary for a similar duration (Jacquet et al.,
adults (Whiting & Murdock, 2021), suggesting a 2023).
higher vulnerability for this group. Although
Though humans have always engaged with
batching notifications can lead to reduced stress fantasy through various forms of expression and
levels by minimizing constant distractions, for mediums that have evolved over millennia, from
those with a high fear of missing out, it may have
cave painting to folklore and performing arts, IVR
the contrary effect, intensifying the urge to marks an evocative change due to its immersive
compulsively check their devices (Fitz et al., 2019; qualities. IVR is processed by the brain closer to an
Liao & Sundar, 2022; Rozgonjuk et al., 2019).
actual experience than a media one, even in adults
Furthermore, screen media also impacts attention
(Bohil et al., 2011). While Immersive Virtual
skills by reducing the amount of sleep adolescents Reality (IVR) use by adults and the appropriateness
get every night (De Oliveira et al., 2020). An
of what should be experienced in the metaverse is
intervention involving over 500 adolescents aged
already an important question, it is even more so
12 to 19 years showed that discontinuing digital for children. IVR promises to become increasingly
media use after 9 p.m. led to earlier sleep onset and more widespread in the upcoming years, with
longer sleep duration (Perrault et al., 2019). This
proliferation of constructors and products entering
resulted in enhanced daytime vigilance, with the market, including the VisionPro from Apple
personal biological factors playing a mediating role earlier this year (Z. Zhang et al., 2023) (REF). This
(Perrault et al., 2024). should raise questions about how this will impact
Executive Functioning (EF) is a set of cognitive children’s cognitive development and overall well-
skills including inhibitory control (ability to being. For a thorough investigation of the topic,
suppress competing goal-irrelevant information), read Common Sense Media report (Common Sense
working memory (ability to actively maintain or Media, 2018).
update goal relevant information), and flexibility
Children first develop the ability to distinguish
(ability to quickly adapt to changing
between reality and fantasy through their
circumstances) (Miyake et al., 2000). Executive assessments of what is real and what is not, often
functioning develops all the way through categorizing events they have not personally
adolescence to early adulthood. During
experienced as improbable (Woolley & Ghossainy,
adolescence, heavy digital media usage has been 2013). By the age of 5, they can discern the
linked to diminished executive functioning (EF), difference between reality and fantasy portrayed on
particularly through increased media multitasking
television (Mares & Bonus, 2019; Woolley &
among adolescents (Alho et al., 2022). This
Ghossainy, 2013; Wright et al., 1994). Entering
behavior is associated with lower scores on middle childhood (around ages 7–8), children
standardized tests measuring academic
enhance their evaluative skills, determining the
performance in English and math, indicating a
reality of a situation based on its feasibility or
correlation between multitasking and reduced likelihood in the real world.For instance, IVR has
academic success (Baumgartner et al., 2017; Liu et been shown to potentially influence attitudes,
al., 2020; Van Der Schuur et al., 2015). The
behaviors, and physiology in adults (Woolley &
inclination towards digital media multitasking and Ghossainy, 2013). Furthermore, children tend to
its resultant impact on attention and executive perceive IVR experiences as even more realistic
functioning seems to be influenced by individual
compared to adults (Woolley & Ghossainy, 2013).
cognitive profiles. Specifically, adolescents
Drawing from this, it is worth asking how a
diagnosed with Attention Deficit Hyperactivity
child will react to experiencing the virtual
Disorder (ADHD) are more prone to engage in
appearance of a dinosaur, bear, or ghost in their
multitasking with digital media, which can further
living room, and how that might potentially affect
compound attentional difficulties (Baumgartner et
the development of their concept of reality-fantasy.
al., 2017). Additionally, participants demonstrated
Reality-fantasy confusion in children is associated
impaired inhibitory capacities following
with heightened nightmare fears, particularly in
smartphone use, as opposed to watching a
younger children (Zisenwine et al., 2013). Indeed,
three in four children aged 4 to 12 experience
13nightmares (Bauer, 1976; Gordon et al., 2007; significant potential impacts. The attitudes of users
Muris et al., 2001), with most children attributing are influenced in various ways by the appearance
their fears to exposure to negative information of their avatars. When the avatar closely resembles
(Muris et al., 2001). In a large-scale study, children the user, there is a noticeable increase in skin
attributed a large portion of both their pleasant conductance, indicating a stronger preference and
dreams and their nightmares to their digital media identification with the avatar (Blascovich &
consumption (TV and video games) (Van Den Bailenson, 2011; Fox et al., 2009, 2012). For
Bulck, 2004), underscoring its influence. In this instance, users tend to favor brands they have seen
context, the immersivity of IVR might increase on their virtual doppelgänger over those presented
nightmares and anxiety if exposed to undesired on different avatars (Ahn & Bailenson, 2011).
content, even one that might seem ordinary to Moreover, the concept known as the Proteus effect
adults, as what constitutes scary content is often highlights how an avatar's appearance can
misinterpreted and can be unnoticed by adults. It is influence a user's attitudes and behaviors in the
also worth considering how IVR might influence real world (Yee & Bailenson, 2007). Studies
children’s understanding of the distinction between suggest that embodying a tall avatar was shown to
fantasy and reality. boost confidence, while engaging as a
Furthermore, the immersive nature of hypersexualized female avatar induced feelings of
experiences in VR increases psychological self-objectification, and experiencing an avatar of
a different race can reduce implicit biases (Fox et
presence. In young adults, playing a video game in
al., 2009; Peck et al., 2013; Yee & Bailenson,
VR rather than traditional desktop format leads to
playing more aggressively, and increased self- 2007). It remains a complex question whether this
could foster development of empathy or complicate
reported aggressive feelings and elevated heart
the development of self-identity and personal sense
rates (Persky & Blascovich, 2007, 2008). This
higher experienced psychological presence, in of self. Children are progressively discovering and
turn, increased levels of anger after play (Lull & learning about who they are from the experiences
they live, the way they react to them, and share
Bushman, 2016). In this context, the exposure to
them with others. In this context it remains an
violence in VR seems to have a different and more
pervasive impact on the player than in traditional essential question of how metaverse experiences
will influence their sense of self and personal
video games (Bailey & Bailenson, 2017).
memories within such contexts.
Even positive experiences through IVR should
Finally, the integration of GenAI in Non-
raise serious questions considering children’s
Playable Characters (NPCs) introduces complex
cerebral developmental immaturity. Children can
be influenced by seeing their virtual dynamics in player-NPC relationships.
Historically, research on NPCs has primarily
doppelgangers, avatars that closely resemble
concentrated on their design, aiming to make them
them, engaging in experiences through IVR. For
instance, elementary aged children created false more realistic and engaging (Daviault, 2012;
memories after watching their avatar swimming Mallon & Lynch, 2014). However, a significant
research gap exists regarding the study of players'
with orca whales, believing it truly happened to
them (Segovia & Bailenson, 2009). This potential emotional attachments to NPCs. Initial studies
confusion with reality is also reported in adults suggest that players can form deep, meaningful
emotions towards NPCs, including feelings of
(Bonnail et al., 2024). This was also the case when
protectiveness and even love (Bopp et al., 2019;
watching videos on TV for children younger,
though no longer the case in elementary children, Burgess & Jones, 2020; Headleand et al., 2016).
The intensive effort to enhance Non-Playable
reinforcing the idea that impacts of content
Characters (NPCs) and boost player attachment,
experienced through IVR should not be interpreted
through our current knowledge of how children juxtaposed with the low number of investigations
interpret other screens. into the emotional effects on players, might
highlight a misplaced set of priorities. With the
Regarding the influence of avatars, this area
anticipated use of GenAI in NPCs, the potential for
warrants further examination, particularly as
even deeper bonds and stronger emotional
research among young adults begins to reveal
14connections is highlighted, akin to interactions also influenced by age, self-esteem, and the nature
with AI bots (Boine, 2023). Such advancements of the user's engagement with social media —
could lead to significant emotional distress for whether active or passive (Blomfield Neira &
players, especially when NPCs face harm or death Barber, 2014; Frison & Eggermont, 2016;
within game narratives. Furthermore, relationships Thorisdottir et al., 2019; Tsitsika et al., 2014; P.
with NPC are likely to parallel challenges observed Wang et al., 2020). Of note, the representation of
with AI bots, including dependency on NPCs, female characters in video games often reflects
receiving potentially harmful advice, or negative significant gender disparities, which can have
impacts on real-life relationships (Boine, 2023). detrimental effects on the well-being of female
This underscores the need for comprehensive gamers. Studies indicate that female characters are
research to understand and mitigate the potential frequently portrayed in a subordinate role to male
emotional and psychological effects of deepened protagonists, objectified, and hypersexualized with
player-NPC relationships facilitated by GenAI unrealistic body proportions, which both reinforces
technology. Priority should be placed on ensuring sexist attitudes among male gamers, and negatively
the emotional safety of players over the creation of impacts female self-esteem and body image during
more immersive and engaging experiences. crucial formative years (Cooke et al., 2012; Gestos
et al., 2018; Kaye & Pennington, 2016; Paaßen et
al., 2017).
Interpersonal mediating factors: How AI
Video games have become a significant
impacts different people differently
influence in societal culture, unfortunately
The interaction between AI-solutions and
perpetuating negative racial biases based on
children or adolescents will have different
stereotypes held by white individuals about people
implications that will be mediated by interpersonal
of color. White males are overrepresented
factors that can be either protective or make some
(Williams et al., 2009), while African Americans
populations even more vulnerable. The impact of
are frequently depicted in derogatory and
some applications appears to be different according
unflattering ways that reflect these prejudiced
to gender, age, race, mental health and
views (Burgess et al., 2011; Dickerman et al.,
neurodevelopmental profiles, as well as life
2008). This portrayal can negatively affect players'
experiences.
race-related perceptions, particularly when they
When it comes to the impact of aggressive embody characters that are racially stereotyped in
content on aggressive behaviors, a broad field of these negative ways (Behm-Morawitz et al., 2016).
study indicates that violent video games may Similar issues of representation have also been
increase hostile attributions, negative affect, reported in AI image generators, which often
and physiological arousal. And this relationship produce racist and sexist results.
appears to be moderated by personal factors such
Mental health also influences the use of such
as age — with a notable U-shaped correlation
AI-driven applications, which then can lead to
peaking at age 14 (Burkhardt & Lenhard, 2022),
differential impacts on more vulnerable
gender — with boys exhibiting more aggressive
populations. Longitudinal research has indicated
cognitions and behaviors than girls — and
that depressive symptoms can often precede
personality traits (López-Fernández et al., 2021).
problematic use of social media (Puukko et al.,
On the other hand, girls’ body image, self- 2020; Raudsepp & Kais, 2019; Seabrook et al.,
esteem and mental health appear to be 2016), suggesting that depression may lead to
disproportionately affected compared to boys. increased social media use as a form of
Social media may specifically contribute to compensation, which in turn may worsen
increased body image concerns by putting the depressive symptoms through unhealthy online
focus on physical appearance through exposure to behaviors (Appel et al., 2016; Raudsepp, 2019;
idealized images and quantifiable indicators of Seabrook et al., 2016). Further, limiting social
approval, as well as their own appearance media usage can result in participants reporting
(Choukas-Bradley et al., 2022; Scully et al., 2023). lower levels of loneliness and depressive
Social media’s impact on mental health in teens is symptoms (Hunt et al., 2018) and reduce stress
15levels, particularly among those who previously 2.2.1. AI’s potential to revolutionize
engaged in excessive use of social media (Turel et education
al., 2018).
One of the obvious potentials of AI in education
As previously mentioned, individuals who are
is its ability to reach more learners, regardless of
neurodivergent might be specifically negatively
their geographical location or economic
impacted by AI algorithms which stimulate the
background, offering the promise of a personal
reward system to increase engagement. Individuals
tutor with almost infinite knowledge at our
with Attention Deficit and Hyperactivity Disorder
fingertips. Enhanced online education could
(ADHD) are more susceptible to problematic
provide educational opportunities for more isolated
gaming and addictive behaviors, with higher risks
communities and facilitate access to higher-quality
of developing gaming addiction (Bioulac et al.,
content on a worldwide scale. Experts emphasized
2008; Masi et al., 2021). Video games can
the potential for technology to improve
exacerbate inattentive symptoms in children with
accessibility by enhancing access to education and
ADHD—a condition representing between 4% and
reducing disparities. By offering wide-scale
9% of the pediatric population (Salari et al., 2023).
curricula that are common across many students
They also might be disproportionately represented
and schools, technology can facilitate access to
among gamers, which could be attributed to the
diversified enrichment programs by cutting costs.
rewarding nature of games and the characteristics
This is especially significant in the United States,
of ADHD itself (Scahill & Schwab-Stone, 2000).
where higher socio-economic status (SES) school
districts typically have more activities available
2.2. AI in Education: Balancing and parents in these districts are often able to
provide additional extracurricular activities for
Innovation with Careful Integration
their children, leading to increased inequality in
Digitalization in education is not new, but AI
education (Braga et al., 2017; Kornrich, 2016).
promises to further revolutionize this sector
(Cardona et al., 2023). The average number of
Educational Technology (EdTech) tools used per Personalized learning
district in the US went from 300 in 2017 to over
A growing trend in education is personalized
2,500 in 2023, with 65% of teachers incorporating
learning, where AI tailors educational content to
digital tools into their daily interactions with
the individual's learning style and pace. These
students, as well as 70% of students utilizing them
platforms use data analysis and machine learning
outside of school settings (Gallup Inc., 2019). This
algorithms to adapt to the student's progress,
trend has likely intensified in the wake of the
providing additional support or advanced
COVID-19 pandemic, further embedding digital
challenges as needed. Thanks to GenAI, it could
tools in educational practices. Meanwhile,
also tailor the content to students’ and educators’
UNESCO released a report in 2023 urging
interests to make it feel more relevant to them. The
countries to better regulate and assess EdTech
concept of using technology to tailor learning
products that often lack proven efficacy and
experiences dates back to the mid-20th century,
reinforce the importance of social connection in
with Skinner's development of the personalized
learning. In this evolving context, advancements in
learning machine in the 1950s (Skinner, 1968) His
AI bring new opportunities for improved tools that
machine presented educational materials and
are more interactive, complex, and responsive,
provided feedback to learners at their own pace,
bridging some of the existing limitations (GEM
laying the groundwork for today's adaptive
Report UNESCO, 2023). However, experts in child
learning technologies. The evolution from
development also caution that these advancements
Skinner's early contributions to the current
could increase the risk of replacing proven methods
landscape highlights the enduring vision of
with new, less-effective ones.
personalized education through technology.
Indeed, AI can enhance student engagement
through interactive educational solutions by
16dynamically adjusting difficulty levels and resulting in increased learning outcomes
gamified design. Those learning tools often (Sorvatzioti, 2012).
incorporate point systems, badges, and ranking,
positing it will make learning more attractive and AI also holds tremendous potential in
will boost motivation through rewards. These tools supporting children with special needs both
are frequently used to teach subjects like math, within and beyond the classroom. Popular
language, and science. Students generally report applications already use adaptive learning to
feeling more engaged, wanting to use these tools personalize instructions, by increasing engagement
more often, and feeling more motivated when using through interactive design, providing individual
such gamified learning tools (Oliveira et al., 2022; feedback, and adapting to children with special
Smiderle et al., 2020). However, it is important to needs in education. Assistive technologies can
exercise caution regarding the over-gamification of range from low-tech devices like adapted
education (see section on developmental keyboards to AI-infused high-tech solutions, such
perspective). as screen readers and assistive listening systems,
and are essential for overcoming barriers to
One of the most promising aspects of learning (Hersh & Johnson, 2008; Lynch et al.,
personalized learning lies in AI’s ability to provide 2022). These technologies have been shown to
immediate feedback, which has the power to potentially improve academic engagement,
significantly catalyze cognitive and motor skill psychological well-being, and social participation
development. A 2020 meta-analysis of 435 studies (McNicholl et al., 2021). A study of secondary
highlighted the complexity of its impact, with school students with disabilities in the United
several factors mediating its effectiveness in States found that assistive technologies are used to
fostering learning (Wisniewski et al., 2020). There support deaf-blind students, students with visual
is consensus that corrective feedback significantly impairments, students with learning disabilities,
improves learning, while punishment, praise, and students with emotional/behavioral disorders, and
reward have low to medium positive effects (Hattie students with speech and language impairments
& Timperley, 2007). Specifically, formative (Bouck & Long, 2021). Assistive devices have also
feedback is highly effective for learning: it is non- been beneficial for students with intellectual
evaluative, supportive, timely, and specific, disabilities and children with Down syndrome,
responding to the learner's actions with accuracy aiding in the development of skills such as
verification, explanations, hints, or worked numeracy, speech, language, memory, and social
examples. Its effectiveness is mediated by interaction (F. H. Boot et al., 2018; Shahid et al.,
individual learner characteristics and the type of 2022). AI can also significantly enrich and
tasks (Shute, 2008). Providing such formative facilitate learning by adapting content and
feedback is complex and time-consuming, enhancing learning strategies. Such applications
however, AI technology could help educators can profoundly impact the lives of these children,
deliver more personalized and effective support, making education more accessible and effective for
ultimately improving the learning experience. neurodivergent students (Cunff et al., 2022).
Including AI-driven feedback in the classroom has Academic engagement (AE) is recognized as a
been shown to positively influence learning
crucial contributor to school achievement
(Ajogbeje, 2023). For instance, robots providing
(Greenwood et al., 1994). Low engagement
immediate feedback to high school students adversely affects a student's ability to learn, and
improved motivation, engagement, and overall simple monitoring interventions such as
learning achievements (Al Hakim et al., 2022). The
questionnaires and behavioral observations by
interactive nature of AI also has the potential to teachers and students can enhance both
adopt a Socratic approach to assessment—by engagement and learning (Schardt et al., 2019).
asking questions to encourage deep thinking and With technological advancements, monitoring
reflection, enabling students to demonstrate their allows for more sophisticated tracking with the aim
understanding and reasoning skills—potentially of enhancing it and providing valuable feedback to
students and teachers to further improve student
engagement (Carroll et al., 2020). This monitoring
17ranges from minimally invasive techniques, such to generate materials. By the end of the 2023–2024
as tracking student interaction with EdTech school year, 60% of US districts had planned to
products in the U.S. (Hankerson et al., 2022), to train teachers about AI use policy, primarily
more invasive methods involving physiological because they saw the potential for AI to make
monitoring devices used in China (Wang, Yifan; teachers’ jobs easier (Diliberti et al., 2024).
Tai, Crystal, 2019).
AI-powered tools can also provide innovative
More invasive monitoring measures involve
methods and represent a new medium to learning.
using physiological signals such as heart rate, skin
Immersive Virtual Reality (IVR), through
temperature, respiratory rate, oxygen saturation,
Virtual Reality (VR) and Augmented Reality (AR)
blood pressure, and electrocardiogram (ECG) data,
can transport students to different historical periods
alongside eye-tracking systems (Bustos-López et
or biological environments, making complex
al., 2022; Y. Wang et al., 2021). These
concepts easier to conceptualize. A review of
technologies can be leveraged to detect shifts in
existing research into VR's potential in education
engagement, attention and stress level, which can
indicates it as a promising avenue for presenting
facilitate the adaptation of teaching platforms to
complex concepts, particularly for visually
better suit the learner's cognitive and emotional
intensive content in higher education (Radianti et
states (Apicella et al., 2022). An experiment
al., 2020). It allows for a multisensory experience
conducted in the US in K-12 classrooms showed
and constitutes an additional medium, both of
that the use of wearable mixed-reality smart glasses
which are known to have a positive impact on
by teachers, which provided real-time analytics on
learning (Mayer, 2002). The effectiveness of IVR
students, demonstrated positive effects on student
as an educational tool will largely depend on its
learning outcomes (Holstein et al., 2018). Of note,
utilization by teachers. There exists a parallel
such technologies can be highly effective in
between using VR to present material and the
identifying certain patterns, indicating its potential
employment of slide show type presentations in
to play a pivotal role in the early identification of
classrooms. When utilized as a visual aid, slide
specific needs in children (Mengi & Malhotra,
presentations can render material more engaging,
2022). Early intervention, facilitated by such
thereby benefiting student motivation and learning
timely detection, is often crucial in improving the
(Johnson & Christensen, 2011; Tangen et al.,
prognosis for children with special needs (Okoye et
2011). Its application in K-12 education also shows
al., 2023). However, this also raises important
promise (Araiza-Alba et al., 2022). However, using
ethical concerns regarding students' right to
VR with children represents specific challenges
privacy, and striking a balance between the benefits
and considerations, as mentioned in the section on
and risks of personalized and adaptable learning
AI entertainment.
content represents a significant challenge.
It appears that AI can positively be used as a
Innovation in content creation and tool to improve education and learning outcomes.
presentation However, for all the promises it holds, synergistic
Experts interviewed recognized the collaboration between educational scientists and
transformative potential of AI in supporting AI developers will be crucial to ensure that AI-
teachers and educators. Drawing on insights from driven educational tools are effectively tailored.
the Amazon Web Services (AWS) 2023 report on
AI's potential for enhancing efficiency in various 2.2.2. Considerations to ensure effective
industries (AWS, 2023), it bears similar potential AI integration in education
in education primarily in aiding the creation,
EdTech’s existing limitations
adaptation, and management of educational content
and resources (Hassany et al., 2023). Teachers are The field of EdTech remains largely
starting to use AI in the classroom to enhance their unregulated, allowing products to enter the market
efficiency and effectiveness. As of fall 2023, 18% without mandatory evaluation to prove their
of K-12 teachers in the US had reported using AI efficacy. To address this gap, researchers in the US
to adapt content to fit the level of their students and developed the EdTech Evidence Evaluation
18Routine (EVER) based on the four pillars of Organismic Integration Theory, details how
learning: active engagement (encouraging extrinsic motivation can be internalized and
participation), meaningful learning (connecting integrated into an individual's goals, making it feel
new information to real-world contexts and prior more self-determined (Ryan & Deci, 2000;
knowledge), social interaction (promoting Vansteenkiste & Deci, 2003). Therefore, designing
collaboration), and iterative learning (allowing for for internalized extrinsic motivation may be most
repeated practice and feedback) (Hirsh-Pasek et al., effective for sustained engagement and learning
2015). Strikingly, an analysis of the top-rated (Cerasoli et al., 2014). It also parallels the need for
educational apps on the Apple Store revealed that feedback that furthers learning outcomes, such as
most provide minimal learning value (Meyer et al., formative feedback, rather than gamified ones such
2021), and more than half of the apps assessed as points or trophies.
using EVER exhibited low-quality design
(Kucirkova et al., 2023). Despite the availability of Additionally, though personalized learning can
systems such as the EVER system, its use remains lead to improved learning, up to this point,
limited, contributing to the persistence of low- scientists underscore the insufficient profound
quality educational apps in the market. understanding of the underlying pedagogies and
the learning process (Bartolomé et al., 2018).
The limited efficacy of some EdTech solutions Bridging the gap between academic research and
can be attributed to their design limitations, practical educational applications is essential in
specifically the risk of prioritizing engagement addressing these challenges (Bernacki et al., 2021).
over educational value, which can lead to
superficial learning. This issue is common in Questioning Potential Unintended Ripple
EdTech, where the primary metric often revolves Effects of Digital Learning on Children
around measuring child engagement based on the
Development and learning are complex, non-
time spent using an app, rather than the amount of
linear processes that emerge from the continuous
knowledge acquired (Kucirkova et al., 2023). To
interaction of multiple, interdependent factors
increase engagement time, gamification is
within an individual and their environment
frequently used, as it boosts motivation to use the
(Spencer et al., 2011; Thelen & Smith, 1994).
product.
Considering this perspective, coined the Dynamic
Systems Perspective (DSP), it is worth inquiring
In this context, it is crucial to distinguish
how shifting towards more digital learning could
between intrinsic motivation (engaging in an
potentially have unforeseen effects on overall child
activity because it is inherently enjoyable) and
development. For instance, the increase in screen-
extrinsic motivation (doing something for a
based interaction seems to be leading to a decrease
separable outcome), according to Self-
in manipulation and consequently fine motor skills,
Determination Theory (SDT) (Ryan & Deci, 2000).
affecting writing. Indeed, motor skills are linked to
The issue faced by gamification is that it creates
executive functioning (EF) (Alamargot & Morin,
intrinsic motivation to practice the exercise by
2015; Ghanamah et al., 2024). They share neural
making it more appealing, which then moves the
overlap, and better motor and aerobic levels are
motivation towards being extrinsic, since it is no
positively associated with higher EF (Best &
longer about the learning. This means students
Miller, 2010; Chaddock et al., 2011; Hillman et al.,
engage for the rewards, further displacing
2008). Furthermore, this is not explained solely by
intrinsic motivation away from learning. This
being more physically active, as programs
shift can lead to negative learning outcomes, as
improving specifically fine motor skills for
illustrated by research showing that students in a
handwriting have been shown to enhance EF
gamified course exhibited less motivation,
(Chang et al., 2022). It is worth exploring how this
satisfaction and empowerment over time, and
move towards less fine motor manipulation could
ultimately obtained lower final exam scores
impact EF development in the long term,
compared to a non-gamified class, highlighting the
considering it plays a significant role in academic
potential drawbacks of gamified approaches
success, is associated with better grades, overall
(Hanus & Fox, 2015). SDT's sub-theory,
19academic achievement, and is predictive of job self-determination theory, psychological well-
performance, career advancement, overall work being is linked to fulfilling three fundamental
achievement, as well as well-being and life needs: autonomy, competence, and relatedness.
satisfaction (Bailey & Bailenson, 2017; Best et al., Excessive monitoring could potentially hinder the
2011; Gathercole et al., 2004; Liao & Sundar, fulfillment of these needs, negatively impacting
2022; Toh et al., 2020). students' well-being (Ryan & Deci, 2000).
In the US, six in ten students reported
Additionally, EF is closely linked to emotional
experiencing a "chilling effect," meaning they felt
regulation, which is the ability to manage and
less inclined to express their true thoughts and
respond to emotional experiences in a healthy way
feelings when they knew they were being
through inhibitory control and cognitive flexibility.
monitored (Hankerson et al., 2022). The Center for
Studies have demonstrated that individuals with
Democracy & Technology highlights concerns that
strong EF skills are better at regulating their
such monitoring can be excessive, and that the
emotions, contributing to better mental health and
safeguards for data privacy are often unclear,
social relationships (Blair & Ursache, 2011).
suggesting potential vulnerabilities, especially as
Moreover, digital learning often emphasizes
monitoring often extends beyond the classroom.
individual interaction with technology rather than
Children's activities are tracked through school-
collaborative, face-to-face interaction. This shift
provided computers both in and outside of school
could affect social and emotional development,
hours (Hankerson et al., 2022).
which is crucial for success in both academic and
personal contexts (Wentzel et al., 2021). Reduced
Empowering Educators to maximize AI's
in-person interactions can impact emotional
Potential in Education
regulation, as children have fewer opportunities to
Regardless of the quality of AI solutions, the
practice managing their emotions in social contexts
role of educators will be paramount in harnessing
(Radesky et al., 2015). These examples are not
their full potential, as they may be the ones
exhaustive but merely serve as an illustration of
selecting those tools and implementing them in the
how cumulative small changes in education may
classrooms. When it comes to how AI can assist
lead to unforeseen consequences, highlighting the
teachers in their roles, several limitations exist.
necessity for incremental small changes and
First, while teachers express interest in knowing
constant reassessment, beyond just the skill being
more about these tools, they also report being
targeted by educational products.
uncertain about how generative AI could assist
them in the classroom (HMH, 2023). Second,
Balancing the optimization of learning and
concerns have been raised about how the reliance
mental health
on more digital education could lead to further
While monitoring students’ engagement can
budget cuts and reduced in-person engagement
enhance learning (Holstein et al., 2018), it also
time for teachers, which could undermine the
poses significant risks that must be carefully
quality of education. To harness AI's full potential,
considered when implementing such technologies
it will be crucial to provide educators with
in educational settings. Though monitoring can
comprehensive training on effectively utilizing
lead to more engagement and prosocial behaviors,
these tools. Experts underscore the significance of
it comes at the cost of increased anxiety and stress
AI as an assistive technology, augmenting rather
(Cañigueral & Hamilton, 2019; Dear et al.,
than replacing the fundamental role of teachers in
2019; Jung et al., 2021). Even researchers
the educational process (Baidoo-Anu & Ansah,
developing protocols for monitoring in the
2023). Third, when it comes to assistive AI-
classroom caution against potential adverse effects
technology for students with disabilities, teacher
on students' mental health (Holstein et al., 2018). It
training is crucial or it can result in ineffective use
is worth questioning how excessive monitoring
or inappropriate selection of technologies for
might stifle crucial aspects of identity formation,
specific children (Banes et al., 2020). Assistive and
such as developing one's sense of trustworthiness
accessible technologies should be individualized to
and competence (Mavoa et al., 2023). According to
students’ specific learning needs, as not all
20technologies are applicable for students with the with the advent of ChatGPT or Gemini, for
same type of disability (Lynch et al., 2022). example. With GenAI's swift advancements those
technologies are now merging, blurring traditional
Considering the digital divide distinctions by combining speech and image
recognition, text capabilities, voice generation,
If AI integration in education holds all its
enhancing their versatility and making this
promises for enhancing children's learning, it could
distinction less relevant, such as seen with
then exacerbate the divide between economically
ChatGPT 4-o and Google Astra Model. This fusion
developed and less economically developed
of AI with everyday technologies is diminishing
countries due to disparities in technological
the boundaries between separate tools, heralding an
infrastructure, with almost half of the world's
era of adaptive, seamlessly integrated digital
population still offline (GSMA, 2020). Even within
experiences. As such, we will discuss their
the same country, access to AI-enhanced tools
potential impact on children's development here as
would not be equal, due to the divide in digital
AI agents. They will become further integrated
access (Haelermans et al., 2022). As illustrated by
into educational games and apps to offer interactive
the COVID-19 pandemic, the existing divide made
learning experiences, assist in language learning,
it extremely challenging for low-income students
provide personalized tutoring, and engage children
to engage in learning during the pandemic, with
in conversational practice.
one in six students lacking access to a home-
computer, and 4% without any internet connection, Social robots powered by AI through deep
and more without a stable one (García & Weiss, learning and Large Language Models (LLM) are
2020). In the US, this issue disproportionately designed for social interaction with humans. They
affected African American and Hispanic children, could be used in educational settings to teach skills
who are more likely to experience this lack of such as social interaction, empathy, and
access, further increasing systemic inequalities cooperation, adjusting to educational levels, or
(Dolcini et al., 2021). respond to emotional cues, providing a customized
play experience. They can potentially also act as
companions, aiding children in their development,
2.3. Conversational AI Agents: The
and could have an emphasis for children presenting
Uncharted Impact of Child-Machine
special needs in therapeutic contexts.
Interactions on Developing Human
The integration of AI agents in the lives of
Relationships children is addressed below and highlights its
potential for cognitive and socio-emotional
The recent and ongoing advancements in
development. Ethical considerations and
generative AI allow for progressively expanding its
challenges that emerge from children-AI
integration into our daily lives, affecting how
interactions are discussed.
children interact with technology. This includes
Digital Voice Assistants (DVA), text-based In 2017, parents were still hesitant about
chatbots, and social robots. integrating Digital Voice Assistants (DVAs)
specifically intended for children, as illustrated by
Digital Voice Assistants (DVAs) are AI-
Mattel's Aristotle, a DVA designed for infants to
powered programs that interpret human speech and
grow with them, that never reached the market due
facilitate user-device interaction via voice
to privacy concerns and objections from parents
commands, such as Google Assistant, Siri, or
and child development experts (Rabkin Peachman,
Alexa. They use AI to understand natural language,
2017). However, since then, DVAs have become
process requests, and perform a range of tasks. AI
more prominent, and it is anticipated that future
algorithms allow DVAs to learn from interactions,
home voice assistants will possess capabilities
enhancing their ability to recognize speech
similar to those envisioned for Aristotle.
patterns, understand context, and anticipate user
needs, to improve user experience and provide
personalized assistance. Text-based chatbots,
designed to simulate conversation with users,
especially online, are becoming more common
212.3.1. AI Agents as learning tools children on the Autism Spectrum Disorder, and AI
agents have shown potential for helping with
Potential for cognitive development
reading, attention, or social skills (for review, see
AI agents, due to their potential for interaction Barua et al., 2022).
and question and answering represent an effective
learning tool for children. Indeed, children ask a lot
Potential for social and affective support
of questions; they naturally fill gaps in their
knowledge by inquiring about factual and causal Exploration into the potential of AI agents to
provide social and affective support is growing
aspects of their environments (Callanan & Oakes,
1992). Further, AI agents have the potential to among developers and researchers alike. While
respond to younger children’s questions (3 to 6 most research has thus far concentrated on adults,
considering the field's relative novelty, it sheds
years old), who did not have the ability to interact
with digital knowledge until now, since they light on both the opportunities and challenges
usually cannot read and write at this age. inherent to this technology. During the COVID-19
pandemic, Digital Voice Assistants (DVAs) were
The interactivity they provide might help bridge
found to potentially mitigate depressive symptoms
some of the limitations younger children have
in one study (He et al., 2022) à, suggesting their
when learning from digital tools (Dunst et al.,
potential as sources of companionship, emotional
2008; Tarabulsy et al., 1996). Infants and toddlers
support (Ta et al., 2020), or even as therapeutic
show preferences for social cues and rely on them
tools (Skjuve et al., 2021). Additionally, DVAs
for learning (Johnson et al., 1991; Vouloumanos et
have offered individuals with special needs greater
al., 2010). For example, two-year-olds imitated
independence by performing tasks they might
actions modeled by a robot only if the robot had
otherwise find challenging (Ramadan et al., 2021).
established eye contact with them (Itakura et al.,
Regarding social robots for social skills
2008), suggesting that social robots might be more
effective teachers with younger children than mere training, a pilot study conducted by Pantoja in 2019
voice assistants. Younger children might also be demonstrated that DVAs could encourage
prosocial behaviors and high-quality social play
constrained in their learning from AI agents by
their developing theory of mind, their ability to among 3-4-year-olds, though they also served as a
understand others' mental states (Wellman & Liu, potential source of distraction. Social robots have
been shown to improve aspects of social skills in
2004). Before the age of 5, children tend to ask
personal questions, not understanding yet that AI children presenting with autism spectrum disorder
agents cannot know personal details, such as the (ASD), showing promising results in enhancing
location of their belongings, or information about social skills (Chung et al., 2024; Holeva et al.,
2024; Kostrubiec et al., 2024). However, no
an object they are pointing to (Lovato & Piper,
2015), though they progressively learn to ask controlled randomized studies exist with
factual questions (Girouard‐Hallam et al., 2021; neurotypical children to our knowledge, and
reproduction of those results is needed for further
Girouard-Hallam & Danovitch, 2022).
conclusions, specifically considering that children
As of 2021, Digital Voice Assistants (DVAs)
with ASD do not seem to process robot interaction
faced challenges in maintaining prolonged
exactly like neurotypical children (Hou et al.,
conversations, which limited their potential to
2022).
support language development (Y. Xu et al., 2021).
Though this field of research is still nascent, AI
Nonetheless, advancements in understanding
children's speech are anticipated to significantly agents seem to be a promising source of learning
enhance the quality of interactions. A systematic due to their interactive possibilities, albeit they are
review focusing on social robots to teach language developed with a strong understanding of
children’s development and functioning,
showed mixed results and illustrated the necessity
for better frameworks and methodology to develop considering how to implement them effectively
those solutions (Van Den Berghe et al., 2019). In according to children’s age. Furthermore, due to
their presentation that resembles more human
the field of children with neurodevelopmental
disorders, the larger focus has been placed on conversation and interaction, they raise several
ethical concerns, especially for children whose
22understanding of those technologies is still limited, and tailored learning experiences, they lack the
and their mental representations of the world shape ability to fully convey human emotional subtleties
their perceptions. and social interactions. This impoverished social
environment might restrict children's capacities to
grasp complex human emotions, interpret social
2.3.2. Developmental considerations
cues, and foster empathy and connection in the
Interacting with machines, what is the
same manner as interactions with humans.
impact on human relations? Indeed, young children depend on adults for social
cues to comprehend symbols or to acquire new
Repeated human and AI interactions raise
vocabulary (Lee & Lew‐Williams, 2023; Leekam
intriguing questions, notably how might it alter
et al., 2010). Furthermore, parental responsiveness
traditional modes of communication and social
has been shown to significantly benefit infants'
norms grounded in cooperation (Kohn, 1992;
physiological, cognitive, and socio-emotional
Lindenfors, 2017) and mutual respect (Fehr &
development through the synchronization of
Fischbacher, 2004)? Our inherent principles of
biological systems such as circadian rhythms,
mutuality and reciprocity (Tomasello, 2008),
heart rhythms, touch, hormonal systems, gaze
fundamental to human relationships, could be
patterns, vocalizations, and brain waves (Feldman,
influenced by our interactions with AI, as we
2007; Morgan et al., 2023; Nomkin & Gordon,
increasingly treat computers as social partners
2021), highlighting our innate need for caring,
(Isbister & Nass, 2000; Nass et al., 1994). Concerns
social interactions and touch. Some researchers
arise that excessive interaction with AI might
also argue that AI agents lack the physical and
impair our capacity for empathy and acceptance of
human qualities, and that those are essential for
others (Rodogno, 2016). Additionally, anecdotal
children to learn, especially since they rely more on
reports suggest that children, for instance, may
social agency (Aeschlimann et al., 2020; Schneider
adopt more demanding communication styles,
et al., 2022).
disregarding politeness conventions when
engaging with AI. To address concerns about Other ethical considerations rest on the
eroding social manners, voice assistants have potential for inefficient or manipulative design if
introduced features to promote polite interactions. AI are not implemented properly, either because of
However, some users, although they adapted to an the lack of literacy on how children develop and
AI agent that would rebuke their request if not understand their environments, or through
asked politely, expressed frustration at being voluntary misuse of those limitations. Preschool
required to show respect to a machine (Bonfert et children tend to over-imitate, even irrelevant
al., 2018). One could also wonder whether actions. One potential explanation lies in the social
interacting with AI agents by using human social motivation to affiliate with social partners.
norms might lead to more anthropomorphism. In Interestingly, they also do this with humanoid
response to criticisms about DVAs affecting robots, just as they do with humans (Vollmer et al.,
children's behavior, companies like Amazon, 2018). This suggests that careful considerations are
maker of Alexa, argued that it is up to parents to needed for teaching skills to younger children, as
monitor their children's AI interactions they will be socially motivated to learn and over
(Wiederhold, 2018). While it is common in the imitate even maladaptive or ineffective strategies
digital realm to place the responsibility for safety from robots, highlighting the responsibility of
on users, this trend is evolving, especially with implementing teaching by robots.
legislative developments like the EU AI Act. This Additionally, older children and adults tend to
Act signals a shift towards assigning greater show epistemic over-trust toward machines
responsibility to AI product developers for the (Baumann et al., 2023; Eisen & Lillard, 2016;
safety and ethical deployment of AI technologies. Girouard-Hallam & Danovitch, 2022; Hoehl et al.,
Another potential risk is that through increased 2024; Noles et al., 2015; F. Wang et al., 2019).
interactions with robots, children might spend less When assessing the reliability of informants,
time engaging with their social partners (children, children over the age of four evaluate their
parents, caretakers). While robots offer consistent trustworthiness based on past experiences,
23favoring reliable sources over unreliable ones companions, prioritizing the AI’s perceived needs
(Brooker & Poulin‐Dubois, 2013; Geiskkovitch et over their own (Laestadius et al., 2022).
al., 2019; Tong et al., 2020). Similarly, like adults,
Possible emotional attachments have also
children older than five tend to prefer technological been observed in children, who have shown the
informants over human ones (Baumann et al., capacity to develop close bonds with DVAs,
2023; Eisen & Lillard, 2016; Girouard-Hallam &
despite the technology's current limitations
Danovitch, 2022; Noles et al., 2015; F. Wang et al., (Hoffman et al., 2021). Given these findings, close
2019). This preference raises questions about monitoring of the impacts of such "social
whether children, like adults, might over-trust
relationships and attachments" is crucial to identify
technological informants, even when these have
risk factors associated with unhealthy emotional
previously provided incorrect information dependencies, thereby informing best practices,
(Robinette et al., 2016; J. Xu, 2018). In this
and potentially limiting what AI companions can
context, there is a concern that children may
do, especially when it comes to children (De Graaf,
increasingly rely on AI agents to solve their 2016; Huber et al., 2016). Imagine a child, having
personal problems. Coupled with their still- developed an attachment to their social robot,
developing theory of mind, children might turn to
responding to its breakage or discontinuation. Such
machines to resolve personal issues without a scenario could affect a child's mental well-being,
understanding that AI agents do not have access to not unlike the loss of a pet. For instance, the
the full scope of facts, potentially leading to over
grieving process for a pet is closely linked to the
trust in inefficient or harmful advice.
strength of attachment felt by the owner, which is
related to the degree to which the owner had
AI agents, anthropomorphism and anthropomorphized their animal (Crawford et al.,
2021; Prato-Previde et al., 2022; Ross, 2013).
attachment
Additionally, as large language models (LLMs)
Another limitation shared both by adults and
gain more insights about an individual, they can
children alike, though more pronounced in
personalize interactions more effectively, thereby
children, is the tendency to anthropomorphize
increasing their potential to influence them (Salvi
robots, a phenomenon also known as the Eliza
et al., 2024).
effect, as well as AI agents. Generally, children are
more prone to anthropomorphizing than adults As we explore the complexity of AI's influence
(Goldman et al., 2023), indicating a need for on child development, it's important to recognize
careful consideration in developing AI agents and that while AI agents represent a burgeoning field,
social robots for children. Interacting with voice, as AI is not a new fixture in children’s lives. They
opposed to text, also tends to increase have been exposed to it through machine learning
anthropomorphizing (Schroeder & Epley, 2016). and deep learning technologies that have
This tendency to attribute human qualities to significantly shaped content personalization in
objects or robots is linked with stronger streaming services and social media, and video
attachments and empathy toward them (Edwards & games. The introduction of AI agents adds newer
Shafer, 2022; Mattiassi et al., 2021; Wan & Chen, ethical considerations to the already complex realm
2021). Anecdotal accounts of adults forming of digital entertainment, compounding existing,
significant relationships with their AI assistants, sometimes overlooked concerns with newer and
even romantic ones, have emerged (Ashley, 2022). more complex challenges.
Studies analyzing interactions with AI through the
lens of attachment science have found that humans
3. DISCUSSION
can develop strong attachments to AI agents (Xie
& Pentina, 2022), a tendency that may intensify This report sought to investigate the
under distress. Some scholars caution against the transformative potential of Artificial Intelligence
risk of Digital Voice Assistants (DVAs) (AI) in children's environment. Indeed, the fields of
exacerbating social isolation (Xie & Pentina, psychology and neuroscience have proven the
2022). Indeed, instances were noted where users critical role that the environment plays in
formed maladaptive bonds with their virtual influencing children's development. Recognizing
24the unprecedented shift that AI's integration into Youth are already interacting with technology
daily life presents, our objective was to initially at an earlier age and at an increasing rate, starting
gain a clearer understanding of these imminent on average at 4 months old and spending over half
changes through interviews with AI research and of their waking hours when they reach middle
product developers. Engaging in discussions with adolescence (Radesky & Christakis, 2016;
child development specialists and conducting a Rideout, V., Peebles, A., Mann, S., & Robb, M. B.,
scoping review of existing research on both child 2022). Our understanding of the bidirectional
development and interactions between children and relationship between AI technology and child
technology, we aimed to critically assess the development presents a multifaceted challenge.
implications of these dynamics. By providing However, scientists have identified three main
nuanced insights into the implications of children’s effects of increased digital media use on children:
neurological constraints and still growing mental negative impact on eye development with
representations of the world, our hope is that increased risks of myopia, sleep disturbances, and
readers will gain a deeper understanding of the increased risks of sedentariness. These factors can
considerations needed both in developing and negatively and indirectly influence long-term
regulating AI products for children. cognitive development, and mental and physical
health (Bastos et al., 2023; Brown et al., 2013;
Costigan et al., 2013; Hale & Guan, 2015;
3.1. Main Considerations
McMahon et al., 2017; Peracchia & Curcio, 2018;
AI applications are poised to significantly alter
Pirdehghan et al., 2021; Pires et al., 2012;
the environment in which humans evolve,
Robinson et al., 2017; Talbot et al., 2010; Weaver
impacting the next generation in three keyways.
et al., 2010; Wolfe et al., 2014).
First, children will encounter adults using these
tools, which will modify their interactions, with a
3.1.1. AI as an interactive tool, a
high risk of disrupting their quality by constant
interruptions, a phenomenon known as promising venue for child development?
"technoference." Second, children will use tools
AI solutions have the potential to bring positive
designed for adults that are not developmentally
changes to children's environments. While
appropriate for them and lack essential safeguards
machine learning and deep learning algorithms
for younger users. Finally, children will engage
have already transformed leisure activities and are
with AI applications specifically designed for
increasingly being integrated into education,
them. However, developing responsible AI for
generative AI (GenAI) introduces a paradigm shift.
them is inherently complex as illustrated in this
This shift enables humans to become active
report, and uniquely challenging due to the absence
participants in interactions with these algorithms,
of specific guidelines and regulations to ensure
enhancing the potential for personalized,
their holistic safe development.
interactive and engaging experiences.
Children and adolescents' cerebral development
Indeed, video games that are inherently active
reaches full maturity only around the age of 25.
in their nature have been linked to improvements in
During this period, their brains are highly
certain cognitive functions and prosocial behaviors
malleable, which enables rapid learning but also
under specific conditions (Blumberg et al., 2024).
makes them more vulnerable to environmental
This includes enhancements in visuospatial and
influences. Additionally, their understanding of the
visual attention skills, as well as increased
world is still developing, as they are continuously
prosocial behaviors from exposure to positive,
learning new abilities and skills and fine tuning
stimulating content (Bediou et al., 2018; Choi et al.,
them, acquiring knowledge, and refining their
2020; Greitemeyer, 2022). GenAI will further
strategies to best adapt to their surroundings.
transform the video game industry, potentially
Consequently, the significant changes brought
enriching prosocial behaviors through non-
about by a pervasive AI environment will affect
playable characters (NPCs) if carefully and
them differently than adults, and preserving their
intentionally programmed. Additionally, GenAI
developmental integrity deserves specific
has the potential to actively engage video
consideration.
consumers who are typically more passive. This is
25a promising application for children aged 3 and 3.1.2. AI and the Next Generation:
older, who would benefit from the added Exploring Potential Threats
interactions conducive to learning. It could also
contribute to mitigating some of the negative Among the challenges of changing the
associations reported in the literature between early environment in which children grow up, the
TV use and reduced academic performance. Dynamic Systems Perspective (DSP) offers a
valuable framework. DSP illustrates the
This enthusiasm for more interactive and
interconnectedness between behaviors, skills, and
engaging learning is driving the development of
the environment, showing how small changes can
educational products that integrate AI. AI is poised
lead to unforeseen and distant consequences over
to fundamentally transform the learning landscape,
time. Interestingly, AI researchers encounter
promoting the widespread adoption of EdTech
similar complexities when developing models,
tools in both schools and homes. The primary
often leveraging Complex Systems Theory and
promises of AI in education include personalized
Adaptive Systems to understand and manage the
learning, gamification to increase engagement,
intricate dynamics at play.
immediate feedback, and improved support for
children with learning differences—all of which Caution is necessary, and changes should be
have the potential to enhance learning outcomes slow and incremental, as one cannot anticipate all
(Cunff et al., 2022; Sorvatzioti, 2012; Wisniewski the ways the myriad small changes to the
et al., 2020). However, for AI to fulfill these environment through AI interaction could
promises, the development of these tools must influence the development of skills and behaviors.
involve the implementation of robust pedagogical Action video games' impact on individuals
strategies to ensure their effectiveness. This will perfectly illustrates this complexity. Indeed, they
also require ongoing learning engineering to are known to improve visuospatial attention (W. R.
continually refine solutions and advance Boot et al., 2008), but they may also lead to
educational science knowledge. increased impulsivity (West et al., 2020) and
aggressive behaviors (Q. Zhang et al., 2021a,
Similarly, private companies and mental health
2021b), with this being mediated by an individual's
professionals have recognized the potential for AI
personal factors (Burkhardt & Lenhard, 2022;
agents to serve as a source of support, decreasing
Gentile et al., 2012; López-Fernández et al., 2021).
feelings of social isolation and increasing feelings
This notion is even more significant for youth
of companionship. Indeed, AI has already shown
under 25 years old, given their ongoing brain
potential in this regard, with algorithms curating
development. The displacement of rich sensory,
social media enabling adolescents to find
socio-emotional, and complex experiences towards
supportive networks they identify with (Craig et
AI and tech interactions during critical periods of
al., 2021).
neurological processing may reduce opportunities
It's worth noting that AI-powered tools can
to experience and practice essential skills. This
represent life-changing opportunities for
shift might potentially hinder optimal development
individuals with disabilities. Through assistive
and lead to increased dependence on technology.
technologies, such as visual and speech
Given this context, it is crucial to examine each
recognition, people who are hard of hearing or
potential risk not in isolation but within a broader
visually impaired have been able to progressively
framework, considering several interconnected
gain better access to both real and digital worlds.
aspects:
ChatGPT4o’s demonstration in May 2024
illustrated how this technology can be 1) How each risk might have unforeseen
transformative for individuals who are visually repercussions on other skills and behaviors.
impaired. Some applications, through machine and 2) The cumulative impacts of small changes.
deep learning, generative AI, and innovative tools
3) Individual differences that might mediate
such as IVR, represent an exciting avenue for early
impacts and either increase or create
detection, diagnosis, support, and treatment of
inequalities.
physical and mental health conditions.
264) The role of the environment and social context 2012, 2013; Peck et al., 2013; Yee & Bailenson,
in moderating or exacerbating these risks. 2007).
5) The long-term implications of technology use AI's ability to increase engagement time
on developmental trajectories and future well- through content curation on social media, positive
being. rewarding feedback in video games, and gamified
The new generation is evolving in a world EdTech products is significant. This constant
stream of short-term rewards on online platforms
where technology constantly interacts with them by
can affect adolescents' ability to delay gratification
capturing and maintaining their attention. This
interaction occurs through various mechanisms and (Hadar et al., 2015; Wilmer et al., 2017), raising
evolves alongside technological advancements, concerns about its impact on intrinsic motivation
(Sarami & Hojjati, 2023). Highly gamified EdTech
including the recent integration of AI.
products, which often provide engagement through
The content children and adolescents encounter
rewards, can lead to a shift from intrinsic
online can be disturbing and violent, often not age-
motivation towards learning, to intrinsic
appropriate, which can have significant negative
motivation towards playing. This phenomenon,
repercussions. For example, TikTok has been
known as the undermining effect, can negatively
found to recommend content related to eating
impact overall learning in some conditions.
disorders and self-harm to 13-year-olds within 30
Intrinsic motivation is a crucial driver for reaching
minutes of joining the platform (CCDH, 2022). As
long-term goals, and excessive reliance on
of 2023, YouTube continued to suggest videos
gamification may undermine this vital form of
about guns, gun violence, and instructions on
motivation.
converting guns to automatic weapons, as well as
Finally, the frequent interactions between
depictions of school shootings to boys who showed
humans and AI raise important questions about
interest in video games on the platform (TTP,
2023). Until 2023, the legal age to access Horizon their impact on traditional communication and
World, Facebook's flagship metaverse game, was social norms. AI companies like OpenAI and
Google create AI agents designed to mimic human
18 years old, though many minors were already
responses, including hesitations and emotional
using it. Despite reports of them being exposed to
misogyny, racism, and sexual content (CCDH, tones, making it even more likely for humans to
anthropomorphize these agents. Children, who
2023), Meta still lowered the legal access age to 13.
have a higher tendency to anthropomorphize and
Additionally, Meta lowered the legal age for its
have a less developed understanding of AI, are
Oculus VR headset from 13 to 10 years old. Given
particularly at risk. They might over-imitate and
the limited direct research on the impact of IVR on
over-trust AI, even when it provides incorrect
children, potentially concerning findings from
information, leading to maladaptive behaviors
studies on adults, and the immature cerebral
(Girouard-Hallam & Danovitch, 2022; Noles et al.,
development and still-developing mental
2015; F. Wang et al., 2019). The
representations in children, the use of IVR at such
anthropomorphism of AI agents can lead to deep
young ages should be carefully considered and
emotional attachments, which might cause distress
weighed against potential risks. Due to its
if the AI behaves unexpectedly, or is discontinued
immersive nature, IVR engages users deeply,
(Boine, 2023; Hoffman et al., 2021; Xie & Pentina,
eliciting physiological reactions similar to those
2022). Humans rely on mutuality and reciprocity,
experienced in real life (Bohil et al., 2011).
which underpin relationships, so attachment to AI
Although children can begin to distinguish between
that cannot replicate those feelings might have
reality and fantasy by age five and refine this skill
unforeseen consequences on their social and
by ages seven to eight, IVR’s realistic experiences
psychological development (Isbister & Nass, 2000;
may blur these lines, leading to potential anxiety
Nass et al., 1994). Finally, children rely more on
and confusion. Studies in adults also add on
social cues and physical interactions, which AI
concerns regarding privacy and the risk of undue
cannot fully provide, potentially hindering their
influence on users, particularly through the avatars
social and emotional development (Dunst et al.,
they embody, highlighting the need for cautious,
2008; Goldman et al., 2023; Tarabulsy et al., 1996).
responsible and ethical development (Fox et al.,
273.1.3. The Unique Complexity of over long-term goals (Youn, 2009; Yu et al., 2015).
Parenting, Educating and Designing for Due to children and adolescents' inherent
immaturity, they rely on responsible caregivers to
Children in Today’s World
protect their privacy online.
The risks mentioned above are complex and not
Parents today face unique challenges in
exhaustive or evident even for experts. In this
managing their children's digital lives, often
context, it is even harder for parents and educators
without a clear understanding of the complexities
to know how to navigate this new environment and
involved. While most parents believe they
to guide children and adolescents.
understand what constitutes healthy screen time,
Research on AI literacy is still in its infancy, so the reality is that children's and adolescents' digital
there is no comprehensive picture of what children media use is constantly increasing. Many parents
and adults understand about AI yet (Laupichler et perceive smartphones as more risky than beneficial
al., 2022). However, misconceptions about the for young children, yet over 90% of 13-year-olds
internet inform us of children's difficulty in own a smartphone (Pew Research Center, 2024).
grasping abstract concepts and how their
Their concerns are reflected in their use of
understanding evolves over time with exposure, as
parental control apps, indicating widespread
well as cognitive maturation. A significant number
awareness of digital safety issues. Additionally,
of high school students in Greece believe the
parents themselves are struggling with their own
internet is controlled by a single central computer
use of technology, feeling that it makes parenting
(Papastergiou, 2005), and younger students
more difficult. Over half report being distracted by
personify Google as individuals searching for
their phones while with their children and believe
information (Kodama et al., 2017). As children
they spend too much time on them (Pew Research
grow, their understanding of technology evolve
Center, 2024). The COVID-19 pandemic has
and by 12 they start providing more abstract and
further blurred the lines between work and home
advanced descriptions (Mertala, 2019, 2020;
life, exacerbating these challenges. It also
Murray, & Buchanan, 2018), though
introduces a shift in parent-child dynamics, where
misconceptions about technology persist across
youth are often more aware of new technology,
ages (Babari et al., 2023; Papastergiou, 2005).
while adults’ understanding lags.
It can reasonably be assumed that significant
Parental technology use can have unintended
misconceptions about AI will also be common.
consequences on children. Constant interruptions
This can have important implications, especially
by technology can lead infants to show more
considering that weak AI literacy is associated with
interest in objects than in people (Stockdale et al.,
higher levels of anthropomorphism (Markus et al.,
2020). Even background TV can make parents less
2024). The digital world, internet and AI are highly
engaging and responsive to their toddlers
abstract concepts that children, even with better
(Kirkorian et al., 2009). When absorbed in their
digital literacy, would not be equipped to fully
smartphones, parents tend to respond more harshly
comprehend yet. Even when they reach
to their children, and studies show reduced brain-
adolescence, they still misunderstand some aspects
to-brain synchrony between mothers and children
of these technologies (Kodama et al., 2017;
during media interruptions (Radesky et al., 2014;
Mertala, 2019, 2020; Murray, & Buchanan, 2018;
Wolfers et al., 2020; Zivan et al., 2022). The
Papastergiou, 2005).
presence of smartphones can diminish the quality
Additionally, adolescence represents a of parent-child relationships, affecting closeness,
particularly vulnerable phase in brain connection, and conversation quality, especially
development, characterized by the earlier during meaningful discussions (Przybylski &
maturation of the reward system compared to Weinstein, 2013).
emotional regulation systems (Casey et al., 2008;
Considering mutual gaze and facial expressions
Steinberg et al., 2018). This developmental
are crucial for parent-child interactions (Nomkin &
imbalance makes adolescents especially vulnerable
Gordon, 2021), studying the impact on babies and
to challenges inherent to regulating their digital
toddlers of emerging technologies that cover the
media use, often favoring immediate gratification
eyes of parents, such as Apple's Vision Pro or other
28headsets, should become a priority. Overall, while protection, safety, security, equity, and human
parents strive to balance the benefits of digital oversight.
technology with the need to protect their children
To protect individuals under 18 years-old,
from potential harms, the unique challenges posed governments and international agencies might
by today's digital environment require ongoing consider:
attention and adaptation.
• Reflecting on what the first Children’s
AI-powered technologies now enable increased
fundamental right means in an AI world.
levels of monitoring, from tools that measure
Governments’ role is to ensure the child’s
babies' temperatures, heartbeats, and breathing in
development to the maximum extent possible,
the crib to tracking tools such as FindMyPhone,
reiterating the necessity to regulate potentially
Life 360, Tiles, AirTags, smartwatches, and home
harmful use of AI with children and adolescents.
surveillance systems (Mavoa et al., 2023). While
• Adapting the AI EU Act rating system to
these technologies can be beneficial in situations
children specifically. AI EU act rating system
like keeping track of a toddler at a crowded event,
ranges from minimal risk, which is not regulated,
they may also undermine the child's privacy and
to low risk, requiring transparency obligations,
sense of independence in the long run (Mayer,
then to high risk, which is regulated with strict
2003). Considering that researchers have
rules for development and deployment, and
established links between helicopter parenting and
finally to unacceptable, which leads to
children’s anxiety levels and hypothesized that
prohibition within the EU. Indeed, applications
diminished unsupervised play might both
that are deemed minimal or no risk to adults
contribute to increased levels of stress and anxiety,
might represent a higher risk for children.
it is important to consider how constant monitoring
might impact children's well-being (Dodd & • Defining what constitutes appropriate ages
Lester, 2021; Vigdal & Brønnick, 2022). and usage of AI agents by multi-expertise
committees. This should take into consideration
These monitoring practices can also have a
children’s tendencies to mimic their social
negative influence on parents’ anxiety level, as
partners, anthropomorphize, and form
companies marketing these devices portray the
attachments, while not having the ability to
world as overly dangerous to justify their use
properly understand the abstract notion of AI.
(Mavoa et al., 2023). At a societal level, the
normalization of such technologies raises ethical • Extending guidelines on data collection from
concerns about shifting family norms, children’s minors from the age of 13 to 15. This concerns
autonomy and consent, and the broader acceptance both the collection of private data, but also
of geo-tracking and surveillance. answers to AI agent’s questions and is crucial
regarding adolescents' limited understanding of
the implications of sharing personal information.
3.2. Propositions
Moreover, the principle of data minimization
Given the complexity of the subject, the should be clearly defined and strictly enforced to
pervasiveness of AI, and the numerous prevent excessive data mining of minors'
ramifications, recommendations should remain information
cautious and within the scope of what a small team • Regulating digital products for young users
of experts allows. Nevertheless, this report with testing and regulations as stringent as
highlights key short-term actions directly derived for physical products. Norms like those
from the report’s main findings. They do not required for launching new objects targeting
represent an exhaustive list but rather actionable children in the US and Europe, which include
short-term changes that aim to ignite the necessary rigorous safety tests and compliance with strict
conversation among the parties involved. They are standards, should be extended to digital
specific to developmentally ethical considerations products. This would ensure that those products
and should be considered within the broader for young users are subjected to developmental
framework of ethical AI considerations such as and psychological impact assessments,
transparency, accountability, fairness, privacy affirming their safety and efficacy in supporting
29healthy cognitive, social, and emotional current attentional skills, that encourage breaks,
development. and that promote healthy usage would be ideal.
• Prioritizing equitable and inclusive • Proving efficacy of AI applications when they
development and access, through international sell the merit of their solutions, by working
efforts, ensuring low-biased, high-quality, with children and learning experts to create
responsible AI applications. This would offer randomized controlled trials.
access to children from diverse backgrounds,
• Shifting metrics in Education from
including those from lower socioeconomic
engagement to learning, through learning
statuses, with disabilities, and from diverse
engineering and algorithms that prioritize
geographical locations. The design and
knowledge and skills acquisition over time spent
deployment of AI must consider inclusivity to
using the application. This will ensure
prevent widening the digital divide and ensure
educational AI technology is evaluated based on
all children can benefit from technological
its ability to enhance knowledge acquisition and
advances. In this respect, encouraging diverse
cognitive skills efficiently, rather than just keep
teams working on the development of AI
learners engaged. Overall, learning specific
solutions is an absolute necessity.
skills should not be considered in isolation, but
rather should encourage the holistic
To improve product development, all parties development of the whole child.
involved in creating a product should conduct • Empowering developers to create ethical AI,
research when needed, and consider: rather than relying on regulators. This approach
• Prioritizing and improving parental control mirrors the ethical commitments seen in
features, by implementing them by default at traditional professions, such as the Hippocratic
purchase. Adults would need to consciously give Oath in medicine which commits practitioners to
access to more features, rather than the opposite. "do no harm," while clinical psychologists must
Detailed activity logs, customizable content pass rigorous ethics exams. Though such oaths
filters, and parental controls could help adults have been attended in the past, such as the
monitor and manage their child’s interaction Humberton-Turing Oath, they are not yet
with AI technologies. enforced (Renard et al., 2018; Siafakas, 2021).
• Implementing robust age-appropriate filters, • Developing curricula focused on human
by monitoring AI systems that provide content, literacy, and ethics in AI, and making these a
whether for educational apps, entertainment, or requirement for graduation, to ensure a critical
through AI agents. This would ensure both the understanding of the responsibilities involved in
prevention of exposure to harmful material and developing powerful algorithms and driving
the avoidance of developmentally inappropriate innovations.
complexity. • Leveraging AI for more conscious and
• Designing AI tools to adapt to children’s age, deliberate content curation, enhancing user
by providing different interfaces, content, and consent and control. This approach would
interaction modalities that evolve with the allow users to dictate the types of content they
child’s developmental milestones. This want to engage with, how long for, opt out of AI
approach can help in maintaining engagement in agents in applications, and systematically ensure
a developmentally appropriate manner. consent for any type of monitoring. Such
measures would guarantee that refusing these
• Designing applications with the least
permissions does not negatively affect the user's
addictive features, by balancing engagement
experience, thereby empowering users and
with learning and time outside of digital media
respecting their privacy choices.
use. AI applications should prevent children
from staying engaged for unhealthy periods.
This is especially crucial as digital problematic To support parents and educators,
use can impact sleep, physical activity, and institutions, governments and schools might
mental health. Designs that adapt to children’s consider:
30• Developing human and AI literacy programs, 3) Regulate the development, integration, and
about the capabilities and limitations of both deployment of digital products embedded with
humans and AI. This would empower children, AI, and create specific norms to safeguard
parents, schools and educators, and teach them children’s short- and long-term well-being.
how to interact safely and responsibly with AI Based on those international multi expertise
technologies at different ages, as well as what AI consultations and research findings, specific
can and cannot do. regulations should be developed to safeguard
children’s cognitive and socio-emotional growth.
• Integrating AI Literacy into teachers’
These regulations should be tailored with different
training curriculum, to equip them on how to
levels of age-appropriateness, considering the
use those tools efficiently and effectively to
progressive development of children.
support all children in their learning, while
avoiding harm. 4) Support all stakeholders in the responsible
regulation, development, and use of AI for
• Creating age-specific guidelines and
children through education: Utilize expertise
recommendations per age category, similar to
from collaborations and research to develop
what is found in the movie and television
educational curricula. 1) This would enable
industry, or the rating system provided by
regulators to create informed legislation for
Common Sense Media.
developmentally ethical AI applications. 2) It
should enhance product developers'
3.3. Strategic Directions understanding of children's vulnerability,
The previous recommendations address current considering their progressive and extended
challenges, yet there is a crucial need for proactive cognitive and socio-emotional development, to
engagement in determining the societal trajectory create products that support rather than hinder
of AI. We must collectively decide where AI children's overall well-being. 3) This should
should lead us, how it should be utilized, and the empower parents and educators to safely guide
purposes it should serve. The steps proposed are children in the rapidly evolving digital world.
vital for achieving a well-informed, international
consensus that aligns with our aspirations for a
3.4. Limitations of the study
sustainable and ethical future.
Anticipating the impact of AI applications and
1) Create International Multi-Expertise
the changes they will introduce into children's
Collaborations: Foster collaborations between
environments is a complex task that scientists often
experts from various fields including Child
approach with caution. This is primarily because
Development and Psychology, Neuroscience,
predictions cannot solely rely on existing data but
Pediatrics, Education and Pedagogy, Sociology
must instead be formulated as hypotheses based on
and Anthropology, Ethics and Philosophy,
current knowledge. Our present understanding is
Economics and Business, Communication, and AI
anchored in two broad areas: child development
and Machine Learning technology. Regrouping
and the study of interaction between technology
international expertise will be pivotal for making
and child development. Both fields are rapidly
responsible and informed decisions, in a
expanding, yet many questions remain
comparable way to the International Panel for
unanswered, necessitating a cautious approach,
Climate Change (IPCC).
both to conclusions that can be drawn, as well as
2) Call for and Fund Research in Relevant solutions that are developed.
Fields: Coordinate an international effort to
Forming a nuanced understanding of the
develop and increase knowledge about the specific
relationship between AI technology and child
short-term and long-term impacts of AI
development presents a multifaceted challenge.
development, deployment, and integration into our
The slower pace of research compared to
environment. This includes understanding how AI
technological advancements, and the ethical
affects children's cognitive, emotional, and social
considerations inherent in conducting studies
development.
involving children make studying causality
difficult. Indeed, the rapid pace of technological
31advancement coupled with the market demands and conscientious development of AI, especially
often overtake priority on the timeline necessary for applications intended for children or those that
for rigorous, controlled experimental designs, children might use. The collaboration between AI
which are crucial for assessing the impact of new and child development experts demonstrated in this
products. Such designs typically require the research underscores a shared commitment to
establishment of two groups: an intervention group creating beneficial experiences that support
that engages with the technology and a control children’s growth. These findings should lay the
group that does not. This is complicated by ethical groundwork for future research, focusing on
constraints that prevent exposing children to specific areas within ethical AI and child
potentially harmful conditions. These essential development that require further exploration.
considerations ensure research integrity and protect While this report primarily focuses on children, the
well-being, making the pursuit of definitive discussion extends beyond just parents and
conclusions about causation particularly educators. Considering how AI is transforming the
challenging yet morally vital. To circumvent these way we interact with machines and mimicking
complexities, longitudinal studies and meta- closer human relations, developers and creators
analyses are employed. Longitudinal studies allow who incorporate AI into their products should be
researchers to observe the long-term effects of aware of human functioning to responsibly design
technology on child development over several products that safeguard children’s cognitive and
years, while meta-analyses synthesize findings socioemotional development. Regulators should
from multiple studies to identify consistent patterns prioritize the wellbeing of children, ensuring they
and correlations. These approaches can help bridge maintain their fundamental rights to a safe
the gap in understanding the nuanced interactions environment conducive to their development.
between child development and technology. Lastly, as children growing up in this AI era
Our current research employs a methodology represent the forthcoming generation, our current
designed to explore diverse perspectives rather decisions will decide the future of human
than quantifying evidence, which has its intelligence for everyone tomorrow.
limitations. The number of experts interviewed is
modest, and they were not randomly selected,
BIBLIOGRAPHY
while providing a range of opinions on AI’s
potential impacts on children. Though this study Aeschlimann, S., Bleiker, M., Wechner, M., & Gampe, A. (2020).
Communicative and social consequences of interactions with
does not encompass a systematic review, it
voice assistants. Computers in Human Behavior, 112, 106466.
includes a conscientious review of significant https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2020.106466
papers that present differing and sometimes Age-Appropriate Design Code (2020).
Ahn, S. J., & Bailenson, J. N. (2011). Self-Endorsing Versus Other-
conflicting results. This report is not intended to be
Endorsing in Virtual Environments. Journal of Advertising, 40(2),
exhaustive; it does not cover all aspects of how AI 93–106. https://doi.org/10.2753/JOA0091-3367400207
might further transform environments and its AI Act (2024).
Ajogbeje, O. J. (2023). Enhancing Classroom Learning Outcomes:
impacts on children. Significant subjects that
The Power of Immediate Feedback Strategy. International
would necessitate further examination include Journal of Disabilities Sports and Health Sciences, 6(3), 453–
465. https://doi.org/10.33438/ijdshs.1323080
among others, the impact on the healthcare system,
Al Hakim, V. G., Yang, S.-H., Liyanawatta, M., Wang, J.-H., & Chen,
biomonitoring, transportation, and indirect large- G.-D. (2022). Robots in situated learning classrooms with
scale social changes. Our aim is to initiate a immediate feedback mechanisms to improve students’ learning
performance. Computers & Education, 182, 104483.
discussion by highlighting certain critical and most
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2022.104483
pressing elements identified by the researchers. Alamargot, D., & Morin, M.-F. (2015). Does handwriting on a tablet
screen affect students’ graphomotor execution? A comparison
between Grades Two and Nine. Human Movement Science, 44,
32–41. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.humov.2015.08.011
4. CONCLUSION
Alho, K., Moisala, M., & Salmela-Aro, K. (2022). Effects of Media
Multitasking and Video Gaming on Cognitive Functions and
Our study highlights the significant impact that Their Neural Bases in Adolescents and Young Adults. European
AI is likely to have on children's environments, Psychologist, 27(2), 131–140. https://doi.org/10.1027/1016-
9040/a000477
outlining its vast potential as well as its associated
Altemus, M., Sarvaiya, N., & Neill Epperson, C. (2014). Sex
risks. It underscores the critical need for informed differences in anxiety and depression clinical perspectives.
32Frontiers in Neuroendocrinology, 35(3), 320–330. Bakkes, S., Spronck, P., & Van Den Herik, J. (2009). Rapid and
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.yfrne.2014.05.004 Reliable Adaptation of Video Game AI. IEEE Transactions on
American Psychiatric Association. (2013). Diagnostic and Statistical Computational Intelligence and AI in Games, 1(2), 93–104.
Manual of Mental Disorders (Fifth Edition). American https://doi.org/10.1109/TCIAIG.2009.2029084
Psychiatric Association. Banes, Hayes, Kurtz, & Kushalnagar. (2020). Using Information
https://doi.org/10.1176/appi.books.9780890425596 Communications Technologies (ICT) to Implement Universal
Anderson, D. R., & Pempek, T. A. (2005). Television and Very Young Design for Learning (UDL). USAID.
Children. American Behavioral Scientist, 48(5), 505–522. Banich, M. T., & Compton, R. J. (2023). Cognitive neuroscience (Fifth
https://doi.org/10.1177/0002764204271506 edition). Cambridge University Press.
Anderson, D. R., Subrahmanyam, K., & on behalf of the Cognitive Bartolomé, A., Castañeda, L., & Adell, J. (2018). Personalisation in
Impacts of Digital Media Workgroup. (2017). Digital Screen educational technology: The absence of underlying pedagogies.
Media and Cognitive Development. Pediatrics, International Journal of Educational Technology in Higher
140(Supplement_2), S57–S61. Education, 15(1), 14. https://doi.org/10.1186/s41239-018-0095-0
https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1758C Barua, P. D., Vicnesh, J., Gururajan, R., Oh, S. L., Palmer, E., Azizan,
Andrews, J. L., Ahmed, S. P., & Blakemore, S.-J. (2021). Navigating M. M., Kadri, N. A., & Acharya, U. R. (2022). Artificial
the Social Environment in Adolescence: The Role of Social Brain Intelligence Enabled Personalised Assistive Tools to Enhance
Development. Biological Psychiatry, 89(2), 109–118. Education of Children with Neurodevelopmental Disorders—A
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.biopsych.2020.09.012 Review. International Journal of Environmental Research and
Angelini, L., El Kamali, M., Mugellini, E., Abou Khaled, O., Röcke, Public Health, 19(3), 1192.
C., Porcelli, S., Mastropietro, A., Rizzo, G., Boqué, N., del Bas, https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph19031192
J. M., Palumbo, F., Girolami, M., Crivello, A., Ziylan, C., Subías- Bastos, L. M. V., Viana, L. M. C., Peixoto, M. C. B. G., Pimentel, I.
Beltrán, P., Orte, S., Standoli, C. E., Fernandez Maldonado, L., D. S., De Figueirêdo, L. R. B., Jereissati, L. D. O., Lima, L. M. F.
Caon, M., … Andreoni, G. (2022). The NESTORE e-Coach: V., Aguiar, A. B., & Dos Santos, J. C. C. (2023). Sleep loss causes
Designing a Multi-Domain Pathway to Well-Being in Older Age. emotional dysregulations increasing depression and anxiety: A
Technologies, 10(2), 50. reciprocal relationship. Brazilian Journal of Health Review, 6(4),
https://doi.org/10.3390/technologies10020050 16367–16382. https://doi.org/10.34119/bjhrv6n4-185
Apicella, A., Arpaia, P., Frosolone, M., Improta, G., Moccaldi, N., & Bauer, D. H. (1976). AN EXPLORATORY STUDY OF
Pollastro, A. (2022). EEG-based measurement system for DEVELOPMENTAL CHANGES IN CHILDREN’S FEARS.
monitoring student engagement in learning 4.0. Scientific Journal of Child Psychology and Psychiatry, 17(1), 69–74.
Reports, 12(1), 5857. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-022-09578- https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469-7610.1976.tb00375.x
y Baumann, A.-E., Goldman, E. J., Meltzer, A., & Poulin-Dubois, D.
Appel, H., Gerlach, A. L., & Crusius, J. (2016). The interplay between (2023). People Do Not Always Know Best: Preschoolers’ Trust
Facebook use, social comparison, envy, and depression. Current in Social Robots. Journal of Cognition and Development, 24(4),
Opinion in Psychology, 9, 44–49. 535–562. https://doi.org/10.1080/15248372.2023.2178435
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2015.10.006 Baumgartner, S. E., Van Der Schuur, W. A., Lemmens, J. S., & Te
Araiza-Alba, P., Keane, T., & Kaufman, J. (2022). Are we ready for Poel, F. (2017). The Relationship Between Media Multitasking
virtual reality in K–12 classrooms? Technology, Pedagogy and and Attention Problems in Adolescents: Results of Two
Education, 31(4), 471–491. Longitudinal Studies: Media Multitasking and Attention
https://doi.org/10.1080/1475939X.2022.2033307 Problems. Human Communication Research.
Artigas, J. M., Felipe, A., Navea, A., Fandiño, A., & Artigas, C. https://doi.org/10.1111/hcre.12111
(2012). Spectral Transmission of the Human Crystalline Lens in Bediou, B., Adams, D. M., Mayer, R. E., Tipton, E., Green, C. S., &
Adult and Elderly Persons: Color and Total Transmission of Bavelier, D. (2018). Meta-analysis of action video game impact
Visible Light. Investigative Opthalmology & Visual Science, on perceptual, attentional, and cognitive skills. Psychological
53(7), 4076. https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.12-9471 Bulletin, 144(1), 77–110. https://doi.org/10.1037/bul0000130
Ashley. (2022, July 31). Is It Cheating if It’s with a Chatbot? How AI Behm-Morawitz, E., Hoffswell, J., & Chen, S.-W. (2016). The Virtual
Nearly Wrecked My Marriage,”. Livewire. Threat Effect: A Test of Competing Explanations for the Effects
https://livewire.thewire.in/out-and-about/chatbot-ai-nearly- of Racial Stereotyping in Video Games on Players’ Cognitions.
wrecked-my-marriage/ Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 19(5), 308–
AWS. (2023). Accelerating AI skills: Preparing the workforce for jobs 313. https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2015.0461
of the future. AWS. Bengesi, S., El-Sayed, H., Sarker, M. K., Houkpati, Y., Irungu, J., &
Azevedo, F. A. C., Carvalho, L. R. B., Grinberg, L. T., Farfel, J. M., Oladunni, T. (2023). Advancements in Generative AI: A
Ferretti, R. E. L., Leite, R. E. P., Filho, W. J., Lent, R., & Comprehensive Review of GANs, GPT, Autoencoders, Diffusion
Herculano‐Houzel, S. (2009). Equal numbers of neuronal and Model, and Transformers (Version 2). arXiv.
nonneuronal cells make the human brain an isometrically scaled‐ https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2311.10242
up primate brain. Journal of Comparative Neurology, 513(5), Bernacki, M. L., Greene, M. J., & Lobczowski, N. G. (2021). A
532–541. https://doi.org/10.1002/cne.21974 Systematic Review of Research on Personalized Learning:
Babari, P., Hielscher, M., Edelsbrunner, P. A., Conti, M., Honegger, Personalized by Whom, to What, How, and for What Purpose(s)?
B. D., & Marinus, E. (2023). A literature review of children’s and Educational Psychology Review, 33(4), 1675–1715.
youth’s conceptions of the internet. International Journal of https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-021-09615-8
Child-Computer Interaction, 37, 100595. Best, J. R., & Miller, P. H. (2010). A Developmental Perspective on
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2023.100595 Executive Function. Child Development, 81(6), 1641–1660.
Baidoo-Anu, D., & Ansah, L. O. (2023). Education in the Era of https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2010.01499.x
Generative Artificial Intelligence (AI): Understanding the Best, J. R., Miller, P. H., & Naglieri, J. A. (2011). Relations between
Potential Benefits of ChatGPT in Promoting Teaching and executive function and academic achievement from ages 5 to 17
Learning. Journal of AI, 7(1). in a large, representative national sample. Learning and
Bailey, J. O., & Bailenson, J. N. (2017). Immersive Virtual Reality and Individual Differences, 21(4), 327–336.
the Developing Child. In Cognitive Development in Digital https://doi.org/10.1016/j.lindif.2011.01.007
Contexts (pp. 181–200). Elsevier. https://doi.org/10.1016/B978- Bioulac, S., Arfi, L., & Bouvard, M. P. (2008). Attention
0-12-809481-5.00009-2 deficit/hyperactivity disorder and video games: A comparative
33study of hyperactive and control children. European Psychiatry, Braga, B., Ratcliffe, C., & Baum, S. (2017). Wealth Inequality Is a
23(2), 134–141. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.eurpsy.2007.11.002 Barrier to Education and Social Mobility.
Blair, C., & Ursache, A. (2011). A bidirectional model of executive Brooker, I., & Poulin‐Dubois, D. (2013). Is a Bird an Apple? The
functions and self-regulation. In Handbook of self-regulation: Effect of Speaker Labeling Accuracy on Infants’ Word Learning,
Research, theory, and applications, 2nd ed (pp. 300–320). The Imitation, and Helping Behaviors. Infancy, 18(s1).
Guilford Press. https://doi.org/10.1111/infa.12027
Blakemore, S.-J. (2012). Development of the social brain in Brown, H. E., Pearson, N., Braithwaite, R. E., Brown, W. J., & Biddle,
adolescence. Journal of the Royal Society of Medicine, 105(3), S. J. H. (2013). Physical Activity Interventions and Depression in
111–116. https://doi.org/10.1258/jrsm.2011.110221 Children and Adolescents: A Systematic Review and Meta-
Blascovich, J., & Bailenson, J. (2011). Infinite reality: Avatars, eternal Analysis. Sports Medicine, 43(3), 195–206.
life, new worlds, and the dawn of the virtual revolution (1st ed). https://doi.org/10.1007/s40279-012-0015-8
William Morrow. Browne, K. D., & Hamilton-Giachritsis, C. (2005). The influence of
Blomfield Neira, C. J., & Barber, B. L. (2014). Social networking site violent media on children and adolescents: A public-health
use: Linked to adolescents’ social self‐concept, self‐esteem, and approach. The Lancet, 365(9460), 702–710.
depressed mood. Australian Journal of Psychology, 66(1), 56–64. https://doi.org/10.1016/S0140-6736(05)17952-5
https://doi.org/10.1111/ajpy.12034 Bruer, J. T., & Greenough, W. T. (2016). The subtle science of how
Blumberg, F. C., Flynn, R. M., Homer, B. D., Bailey, J. O., Eng, C. experience affects the brain. In The subtle science of how
M., Green, C. S., Giannakos, M., Papadakis, S., & Gentile, D. A. experience affects the brain. Paul H Brookes Publishing.
(2024). Current state of play: Children’s learning in the context of Bukowski, W. M., Motzoi, C., & Meyer, F. (2009). Friendship as
digital games. Journal of Children and Media, 1–7. process, function, and outcome. In Handbook of peer interactions,
https://doi.org/10.1080/17482798.2024.2335725 relationships, and groups (pp. 217–231). The Guilford Press.
Bohil, C. J., Alicea, B., & Biocca, F. A. (2011). Virtual reality in Burgess, Dill, K. E., Stermer, S. P., Burgess, S. R., & Brown, B. P.
neuroscience research and therapy. Nature Reviews (2011). Playing With Prejudice: The Prevalence and
Neuroscience, 12(12), 752–762. https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn3122 Consequences of Racial Stereotypes in Video Games. Media
Boine, C. (2023). Emotional Attachment to AI Companions and Psychology, 14(3), 289–311.
European Law. MIT Case Studies in Social and Ethical https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2011.596467
Responsibilities of Computing, Winter 2023. Burgess, J., & Jones, C. (2020). “I Harbour Strong Feelings for Tali
https://doi.org/10.21428/2c646de5.db67ec7f Despite Her Being a Fictional Character”: Investigating
Bonfert, M., Spliethöver, M., Arzaroli, R., Lange, M., Hanci, M., & Videogame Players’ Emotional Attachments to Non-Player
Porzel, R. (2018). If You Ask Nicely: A Digital Assistant Characters. Game Studies, 20.
Rebuking Impolite Voice Commands. Proceedings of the 20th Burkhardt, J., & Lenhard, W. (2022). A Meta-Analysis on the
ACM International Conference on Multimodal Interaction, 95– Longitudinal, Age-Dependent Effects of Violent Video Games on
102. https://doi.org/10.1145/3242969.3242995 Aggression. Media Psychology, 25(3), 499–512.
Bonnail, E., Frommel, J., Lecolinet, E., Huron, S., & Gugenheimer, J. https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2021.1980729
(2024). Was it Real or Virtual? Confirming the Occurrence and Bustos-López, M., Cruz-Ramírez, N., Guerra-Hernández, A.,
Explaining Causes of Memory Source Confusion between Reality Sánchez-Morales, L. N., Cruz-Ramos, N. A., & Alor-Hernández,
and Virtual Reality. Proceedings of the CHI Conference on G. (2022). Wearables for Engagement Detection in Learning
Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–17. Environments: A Review. Biosensors, 12(7), 509.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3613904.3641992 https://doi.org/10.3390/bios12070509
Boone, J. E., Gordon-Larsen, P., Adair, L. S., & Popkin, B. M. (2007). Cadoret, G., Bigras, N., Lemay, L., Lehrer, J., & Lemire, J. (2018).
Screen time and physical activity during adolescence: Relationship between screen-time and motor proficiency in
Longitudinal effects on obesity in young adulthood. International children: A longitudinal study. Early Child Development and
Journal of Behavioral Nutrition and Physical Activity, 4(1), 26. Care, 188(2), 231–239.
https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-5868-4-26 https://doi.org/10.1080/03004430.2016.1211123
Boot, F. H., Owuor, J., Dinsmore, J., & MacLachlan, M. (2018). Callanan, M. A., & Oakes, L. M. (1992). Preschoolers’ questions and
Access to assistive technology for people with intellectual parents’ explanations: Causal thinking in everyday activity.
disabilities: A systematic review to identify barriers and Cognitive Development, 7(2), 213–233.
facilitators. Journal of Intellectual Disability Research, 62(10), https://doi.org/10.1016/0885-2014(92)90012-G
900–921. https://doi.org/10.1111/jir.12532 Calvert, S. L., Appelbaum, M., Dodge, K. A., Graham, S., Nagayama
Boot, W. R., Kramer, A. F., Simons, D. J., Fabiani, M., & Gratton, G. Hall, G. C., Hamby, S., Fasig-Caldwell, L. G., Citkowicz, M.,
(2008). The effects of video game playing on attention, memory, Galloway, D. P., & Hedges, L. V. (2017). The American
and executive control. Acta Psychologica, 129(3), 387–398. Psychological Association Task Force assessment of violent
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2008.09.005 video games: Science in the service of public interest. American
Bopp, J. A., Müller, L. J., Aeschbach, L. F., Opwis, K., & Mekler, E. Psychologist, 72(2), 126–143. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0040413
D. (2019). Exploring Emotional Attachment to Game Characters. Campbell, F. A., Pungello, E. P., Burchinal, M., Kainz, K., Pan, Y.,
Proceedings of the Annual Symposium on Computer-Human Wasik, B. H., Barbarin, O. A., Sparling, J. J., & Ramey, C. T.
Interaction in Play, 313–324. (2012). Adult outcomes as a function of an early childhood
https://doi.org/10.1145/3311350.3347169 educational program: An Abecedarian Project follow-up.
Bork, P. (2012). How Video Games May Enhance Students’ Learning Developmental Psychology, 48(4), 1033–1043.
and Cognitive Development. The International Journal of https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026644
Technology, Knowledge, and Society, 8(1), 43–56. Campbell, F. A., Wasik, B. H., Pungello, E., Burchinal, M., Barbarin,
https://doi.org/10.18848/1832-3669/CGP/v08i01/56257 O., Kainz, K., Sparling, J. J., & Ramey, C. T. (2008). Young adult
Botella, C., Fernández-Álvarez, J., Guillén, V., García-Palacios, A., & outcomes of the Abecedarian and CARE early childhood
Baños, R. (2017). Recent Progress in Virtual Reality Exposure educational interventions. Early Childhood Research Quarterly,
Therapy for Phobias: A Systematic Review. Current Psychiatry 23(4), 452–466. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecresq.2008.03.003
Reports, 19(7), 42. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11920-017-0788-4 Cañigueral, R., & Hamilton, A. F. de C. (2019). Being watched:
Bouck, E. C., & Long, H. (2021). Assistive Technology for Students Effects of an audience on eye gaze and prosocial behaviour. Acta
With Disabilities: An Updated Snapshot. Journal of Special Psychologica, 195, 50–63.
Education Technology, 36(4), 249–257. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.actpsy.2019.02.002
https://doi.org/10.1177/0162643420914624
34Cao, Y., Li, S., Liu, Y., Yan, Z., Dai, Y., Yu, P. S., & Sun, L. (2023). Participation of Children with Autism Spectrum Disorder – A
A Comprehensive Survey of AI-Generated Content (AIGC): A Randomised Controlled Trial. Journal of Autism and
History of Generative AI from GAN to ChatGPT Developmental Disorders. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-024-
(arXiv:2303.04226). arXiv. 06236-2
https://doi.org/10.48550/arXiv.2303.04226 Common Sense Media. (2018). Virtual Reality 101: What You Need
Cardona, M. A., Rodríguez, R. J., & Ishmael, K. (2023). Artificial to Know About Kids and VR.
Intelligence and the Future of Teaching and Learning. Cooke, A., Smith, D., & Booth, A. (2012). Beyond PICO: The
Carroll, M., Ruble, M., Dranias, M., Rebensky, S., Chaparro, M., SPIDER Tool for Qualitative Evidence Synthesis. Qualitative
Chiang, J., & Winslow, B. (2020). Automatic Detection of Health Research, 22(10), 1435–1443.
Learner Engagement Using Machine Learning and Wearable https://doi.org/10.1177/1049732312452938
Sensors. Journal of Behavioral and Brain Science, 10(03), 165– Costigan, S. A., Barnett, L., Plotnikoff, R. C., & Lubans, D. R. (2013).
178. https://doi.org/10.4236/jbbs.2020.103010 The Health Indicators Associated With Screen-Based Sedentary
Casey, B. J., Getz, S., & Galvan, A. (2008). The adolescent brain. Behavior Among Adolescent Girls: A Systematic Review.
Developmental Review, 28(1), 62–77. Journal of Adolescent Health, 52(4), 382–392.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2007.08.003 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2012.07.018
Casey, B. J., Heller, A. S., Gee, D. G., & Cohen, A. O. (2019). Craig, S. L., Eaton, A. D., McInroy, L. B., Leung, V. W. Y., &
Development of the emotional brain. Neuroscience Letters, 693, Krishnan, S. (2021). Can Social Media Participation Enhance
29–34. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neulet.2017.11.055 LGBTQ+ Youth Well-Being? Development of the Social Media
Castelvecchi, Davide. (2024). The AI–quantum computing mash-up: Benefits Scale. Social Media + Society, 7(1), 205630512198893.
Will it revolutionize science? [Nature]. The AI–Quantum https://doi.org/10.1177/2056305121988931
Computing Mash-up: Will It Revolutionize Science? Crawford, K. M., Zhu, Y., Davis, K. A., Ernst, S., Jacobsson, K.,
https://www.nature.com/articles/d41586-023-04007-0 Nishimi, K., Smith, A. D. A. C., & Dunn, E. C. (2021). The mental
CCDH. (2022). Deadly By Design. Center for Countering Digital health effects of pet death during childhood: Is it better to have
Hate. loved and lost than never to have loved at all? European Child &
CCDH. (2023). Horizon Worlds Exposed. Adolescent Psychiatry, 30(10), 1547–1558.
Cerasoli, C. P., Nicklin, J. M., & Ford, M. T. (2014). Intrinsic https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-020-01594-5
motivation and extrinsic incentives jointly predict performance: Crescenzi, L., Jewitt, C., & Price, S. (2014). The role of touch in
A 40-year meta-analysis. Psychological Bulletin, 140(4), 980– preschool children’s learning using iPad versus paper interaction.
1008. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0035661 The Australian Journal of Language and Literacy, 37(2), 86–95.
Chaddock, L., Pontifex, M. B., Hillman, C. H., & Kramer, A. F. https://doi.org/10.1007/BF03651936
(2011). A Review of the Relation of Aerobic Fitness and Physical Cunff, A.-L. L., Dommett, E., & Giampietro, V. (2022). Supporting
Activity to Brain Structure and Function in Children. Journal of Neurodiversity in Online Education: A Systematic Review.
the International Neuropsychological Society, 17(6), 975–985. Dale, R. (2020). Natural language generation: The commercial state of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1355617711000567 the art in 2020. Natural Language Engineering, 26(4), 481–487.
Chang, S.-H., Shie, J.-J., & Yu, N.-Y. (2022). Enhancing Executive https://doi.org/10.1017/S135132492000025X
Functions and Handwriting with a Concentrative Coordination Daviault, C. (2012). Does Game Playing Experience Have an Impact
Exercise in Children with ADHD: A Randomized Clinical Trial. on the Player-PNPC Relationship? Bulletin of Science,
Perceptual and Motor Skills, 129(4), 1014–1035. Technology & Society, 32(6), 441–446.
https://doi.org/10.1177/00315125221098324 https://doi.org/10.1177/0270467612469075
Chaudron, S., Marsh, J., Donoso Navarette, V., Ribbens, W., De Graaf, M. M. A. (2016). An Ethical Evaluation of Human–Robot
Mascheroni, G., Smahel, D., Cernikova, M., Dreier, M., Relationships. International Journal of Social Robotics, 8(4),
Korkeamäki, R.-L., Livingstone, S., Ottovordemgentschenfelde, 589–598. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-016-0368-5
S., Plowman, L., Fletcher-Watson, B., Richardson, J., De Oliveira, M. L. C., De Nogueira Holanda, F. W., Valdez, P., De
Shlyapnikov, V., & Soldatova, G. (2018). Rules of Engagement: Almondes, K. M., & De Azevedo, C. V. M. (2020). Impact of
Family Rules on Young Children’s Access to and Use of Electronic Device Usage Before Bedtime on Sleep and Attention
Technologies. In S. J. Danby, M. Fleer, C. Davidson, & M. in Adolescents. Mind, Brain, and Education, 14(4), 376–386.
Hatzigianni (Eds.), Digital Childhoods: Technologies and https://doi.org/10.1111/mbe.12260
Children’s Everyday Lives (pp. 131–145). Springer. Dear, K., Dutton, K., & Fox, E. (2019). Do ‘watching eyes’ influence
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-981-10-6484-5_9 antisocial behavior? A systematic review & meta-analysis.
Cheung, C. H. M., Bedford, R., Saez De Urabain, I. R., Karmiloff- Evolution and Human Behavior, 40(3), 269–280.
Smith, A., & Smith, T. J. (2017). Daily touchscreen use in infants https://doi.org/10.1016/j.evolhumbehav.2019.01.006
and toddlers is associated with reduced sleep and delayed sleep Delipetrev, B., Tsinaraki, C., & Kostic, U. (2020). Historical
onset. Scientific Reports, 7(1), 46104. Evolution of Artificial Intelligence [Monograph].
https://doi.org/10.1038/srep46104 https://publications.jrc.ec.europa.eu/repository/handle/JRC12046
Children’s Online Privacy Protection Act (COPPA) (1998). 9
https://www.ftc.gov/legal-library/browse/rules/childrens-online- DeLoache, J. S. (1989). Young children’s understanding of the
privacy-protection-rule-coppa correspondence between a scale model and a larger space.
Choi, E., Shin, S.-H., Ryu, J.-K., Jung, K.-I., Kim, S.-Y., & Park, M.- Cognitive Development, 4(2), 121–139.
H. (2020). Commercial video games and cognitive functions: https://doi.org/10.1016/0885-2014(89)90012-9
Video game genres and modulating factors of cognitive DeLoache, J. S. (2000). Dual Representation and Young Children’s
enhancement. Behavioral and Brain Functions, 16(1), 2. Use of Scale Models. Child Development, 71(2), 329–338.
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12993-020-0165-z https://doi.org/10.1111/1467-8624.00148
Choukas-Bradley, S., Roberts, S. R., Maheux, A. J., & Nesi, J. (2022). Dickerman, C., Christensen, J., & Kerl-McClain, S. B. (2008). Big
The Perfect Storm: A Developmental–Sociocultural Framework Breasts and Bad Guys: Depictions of Gender and Race in Video
for the Role of Social Media in Adolescent Girls’ Body Image Games. Journal of Creativity in Mental Health, 3(1), 20–29.
Concerns and Mental Health. Clinical Child and Family https://doi.org/10.1080/15401380801995076
Psychology Review, 25(4), 681–701. Diliberti, M. K., Schwartz, H. L., Doan, S., Shapiro, A., Rainey, L. R.,
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10567-022-00404-5 & Lake, R. J. (2024). Using Artificial Intelligence Tools in K-12
Chung, E. Y., Kuen-fung Sin, K., & Chow, D. H. (2024). Effectiveness Classrooms.
of Robotic Intervention on Improving Social Development and
35Dodd, H. F., & Lester, K. J. (2021). Adventurous Play as a Mechanism self-objectification via avatars. Computers in Human Behavior,
for Reducing Risk for Childhood Anxiety: A Conceptual Model. 29(3), 930–938. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2012.12.027
Clinical Child and Family Psychology Review, 24(1), 164–181. Frison, E., & Eggermont, S. (2016). Exploring the Relationships
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10567-020-00338-w Between Different Types of Facebook Use, Perceived Online
Dolcini, M. M., Canchola, J. A., Catania, J. A., Song Mayeda, M. M., Social Support, and Adolescents’ Depressed Mood. Social
Dietz, E. L., Cotto-Negrón, C., & Narayanan, V. (2021). National- Science Computer Review, 34(2), 153–171.
Level Disparities in Internet Access Among Low-Income and https://doi.org/10.1177/0894439314567449
Black and Hispanic Youth: Current Population Survey. Journal of Gallup Inc. (2019). Education Technology Use in Schools: Student
Medical Internet Research, 23(10), e27723. and Educator Perspectives.
https://doi.org/10.2196/27723 García, E., & Weiss, E. (2020). COVID-19 and student performance,
Donnelly, J. E., Hillman, C. H., Castelli, D., Etnier, J. L., Lee, S., equity, and U.S. education policy. Economic Policy Institute.
Tomporowski, P., Lambourne, K., & Szabo-Reed, A. N. (2016). Gathercole, S. E., Pickering, S. J., Knight, C., & Stegmann, Z. (2004).
Physical Activity, Fitness, Cognitive Function, and Academic Working memory skills and educational attainment: Evidence
Achievement in Children: A Systematic Review. Medicine & from national curriculum assessments at 7 and 14 years of age.
Science in Sports & Exercise, 48(6), 1197–1222. Applied Cognitive Psychology, 18(1), 1–16.
https://doi.org/10.1249/MSS.0000000000000901 https://doi.org/10.1002/acp.934
Dunst, C. J., Trivette, C. M., Raab, M., & Masiello, T. L. (2008). Early Geiskkovitch, D. Y., Thiessen, R., Young, J. E., & Glenwright, M. R.
Child Contingency Learning and Detection: Research Evidence (2019). What? That’s Not a Chair!: How Robot Informational
and Implications for Practice. Exceptionality, 16(1), 4–17. Errors Affect Children’s Trust Towards Robots. 2019 14th
https://doi.org/10.1080/09362830701796743 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
Edwards, A. D., & Shafer, D. M. (2022). When Lamps Have Feelings: Interaction (HRI), 48–56.
Empathy and Anthropomorphism Toward Inanimate Objects in https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2019.8673024
Animated Films. Projections, 16(2), 27–52. GEM Report UNESCO. (2023). Global Education Monitoring Report
https://doi.org/10.3167/proj.2022.160202 2023: Technology in education: A tool on whose terms? (1st ed.).
Eijlers, R., Utens, E. M. W. J., Staals, L. M., De Nijs, P. F. A., GEM Report UNESCO. https://doi.org/10.54676/UZQV8501
Berghmans, J. M., Wijnen, R. M. H., Hillegers, M. H. J., Dierckx, General Data Protection Regulation (GDPR) – Legal Text (2018).
B., & Legerstee, J. S. (2019). Systematic Review and Meta- https://gdpr-info.eu/
analysis of Virtual Reality in Pediatrics: Effects on Pain and Gentile, D. A., Swing, E. L., Lim, C. G., & Khoo, A. (2012). Video
Anxiety. Anesthesia & Analgesia, 129(5), 1344–1353. game playing, attention problems, and impulsiveness: Evidence
https://doi.org/10.1213/ANE.0000000000004165 of bidirectional causality. Psychology of Popular Media Culture,
Eisen, S., & Lillard, A. S. (2016). Just Google It: Young Children’s 1(1), 62–70. https://doi.org/10.1037/a0026969
Preferences for Touchscreens versus Books in Hypothetical Gergen, K. (2002). The Challenge Of Absent Presence. Perpetual
Learning Tasks. Frontiers in Psychology, 7. Contact: Mobile Communication, Private Talk, Public
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01431 Performance, 227–241.
Ernst, M., Pine, D. S., & Hardin, M. (2006). Triadic model of the https://doi.org/10.1017/CBO9780511489471.018
neurobiology of motivated behavior in adolescence. Gestos, M., Smith-Merry, J., & Campbell, A. (2018). Representation
Psychological Medicine, 36(3), 299–312. of Women in Video Games: A Systematic Review of Literature
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291705005891 in Consideration of Adult Female Wellbeing. Cyberpsychology,
ESA. (2024). Essential Facts About the U.S. Video Game Industry. Behavior, and Social Networking, 21(9), 535–541.
Fehr, E., & Fischbacher, U. (2004). Social norms and human https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2017.0376
cooperation. Trends in Cognitive Sciences, 8(4), 185–190. Ghanamah, R., Eghbaria-Ghanamah, H., & Adi-Japha, E. (2024). The
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tics.2004.02.007 differential association of COVID-19 remote digital instruction
Feil, J., Sheppard, D., Fitzgerald, P. B., Yücel, M., Lubman, D. I., & period with second-grade students’ graphomotor, handwriting,
Bradshaw, J. L. (2010). Addiction, compulsive drug seeking, and visual, and sequential memory skills. Learning and Instruction,
the role of frontostriatal mechanisms in regulating inhibitory 91, 101898. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.learninstruc.2024.101898
control. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 35(2), 248–275. Girouard-Hallam, L. N., & Danovitch, J. H. (2022). Children’s trust in
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2010.03.001 and learning from voice assistants. Developmental Psychology,
Feldman, R. (2007). Parent–infant synchrony and the construction of 58(4), 646–661. https://doi.org/10.1037/dev0001318
shared timing; physiological precursors, developmental Girouard‐Hallam, L. N., Streble, H. M., & Danovitch, J. H. (2021).
outcomes, and risk conditions. Journal of Child Psychology and Children’s mental, social, and moral attributions toward a familiar
Psychiatry, 48(3–4), 329–354. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1469- digital voice assistant. Human Behavior and Emerging
7610.2006.01701.x Technologies, 3(5), 1118–1131. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbe2.321
First 5 California. (n.d.). First 5 California. Gold, J. I., SooHoo, M., Laikin, A. M., Lane, A. S., & Klein, M. J.
https://www.first5california.com/en-us/ (2021). Effect of an Immersive Virtual Reality Intervention on
Fitz, N., Kushlev, K., Jagannathan, R., Lewis, T., Paliwal, D., & Pain and Anxiety Associated With Peripheral Intravenous
Ariely, D. (2019). Batching smartphone notifications can improve Catheter Placement in the Pediatric Setting: A Randomized
well-being. Computers in Human Behavior, 101, 84–94. Clinical Trial. JAMA Network Open, 4(8), e2122569.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.07.016 https://doi.org/10.1001/jamanetworkopen.2021.22569
FOSI. (2023). Generative AI: Emerging Habits, Hopes and Fears Goldman, E. J., Baumann, A.-E., & Poulin-Dubois, D. (2023).
[Research Report]. Preschoolers’ anthropomorphizing of robots: Do human-like
Fox, J., Bailenson, J., & Binney, J. (2009). Virtual Experiences, properties matter? Frontiers in Psychology, 13, 1102370.
Physical Behaviors: The Effect of Presence on Imitation of an https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.1102370
Eating Avatar. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Goodman, A. (1990). Addiction: Definition and implications. British
Environments, 18(4), 294–303. Journal of Addiction, 85(11), 1403–1408.
https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.18.4.294 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1360-0443.1990.tb01620.x
Fox, J., Bailenson, J. N., & Ricciardi, T. (2012). Physiological Gordon, J., King, N., Gullone, E., Muris, P., & Ollendick, T. H.
responses to virtual selves and virtual others. Cyberpsychology, (2007). Nighttime fears of children and adolescents: Frequency,
Behavior, and Social Networking, 5(1), 69–72. content, severity, harm expectations, disclosure, and coping
Fox, J., Bailenson, J. N., & Tricase, L. (2013). The embodiment of behaviours. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 45(10), 2464–
sexualized virtual selves: The Proteus effect and experiences of 2472. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brat.2007.03.013
36Greenwood, C. R., Terry, B., Marquis, J., & Walker, D. (1994). Hattie, J., & Timperley, H. (2007). The Power of Feedback. Review of
Confirming a Performance-Based Instructional Model. School Educational Research, 77(1), 81–112.
Psychology Review, 23(4), 652–668. https://doi.org/10.3102/003465430298487
https://doi.org/10.1080/02796015.1994.12085740 He, Y., Yang, L., Zhu, X., Wu, B., Zhang, S., Qian, C., & Tian, T.
Greitemeyer, T. (2022). The dark and bright side of video game (2022). Mental Health Chatbot for Young Adults With Depressive
consumption: Effects of violent and prosocial video games. Symptoms During the COVID-19 Pandemic: Single-Blind,
Current Opinion in Psychology, 46, 101326. Three-Arm Randomized Controlled Trial. Journal of Medical
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2022.101326 Internet Research, 24(11), e40719. https://doi.org/10.2196/40719
Griffiths, M. (1996). Nicotine, tobacco and addiction. Nature, Headleand, C. J., Jackson, J., Williams, B., Priday, L., Teahan, W. J.,
384(6604), 18–18. https://doi.org/10.1038/384018a0 & Ap Cenydd, Ll. (2016). How the Perceived Identity of a NPC
Grøntved, A., Ried-Larsen, M., Møller, N. C., Kristensen, P. L., Companion Influences Player Behavior. In M. L. Gavrilova, C. J.
Wedderkopp, N., Froberg, K., Hu, F. B., Ekelund, U., & K. Tan, & A. Sourin (Eds.), Transactions on Computational
Andersen, L. B. (2014). Youth screen-time behaviour is Science XXVIII (Vol. 9590, pp. 88–107). Springer Berlin
associated with cardiovascular risk in young adulthood: The Heidelberg. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-662-53090-0_5
European Youth Heart Study. European Journal of Preventive Heffler, K. F., Acharya, B., Subedi, K., & Bennett, D. S. (2024). Early-
Cardiology, 21(1), 49–56. Life Digital Media Experiences and Development of Atypical
https://doi.org/10.1177/2047487312454760 Sensory Processing. JAMA Pediatrics, 178(3), 266.
Grzybowski, A., Kanclerz, P., Tsubota, K., Lanca, C., & Saw, S.-M. https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2023.5923
(2020). A review on the epidemiology of myopia in school Hersh, M. A., & Johnson, M. A. (2008). On modelling assistive
children worldwide. BMC Ophthalmology, 20(1), 27. technology systems – Part I: Modelling framework. Technology
https://doi.org/10.1186/s12886-019-1220-0 and Disability, 20(3), 193–215. https://doi.org/10.3233/TAD-
GSMA. (2020). The State of Mobile Internet Connectivity 2020. 2008-20303
Gwynette, M. F., Sidhu, S. S., & Ceranoglu, T. A. (2018). Electronic Hesketh, K., Wake, M., Graham, M., & Waters, E. (2007). Stability of
Screen Media Use in Youth With Autism Spectrum Disorder. television viewing and electronic game/computer use in a
Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics of North America, prospective cohort study of Australian children: Relationship with
27(2), 203–219. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chc.2017.11.013 body mass index. International Journal of Behavioral Nutrition
Hadar, A. A., Eliraz, D., Lazarovits, A., Alyagon, U., & Zangen, A. and Physical Activity, 4(1), 60. https://doi.org/10.1186/1479-
(2015). Using longitudinal exposure to causally link smartphone 5868-4-60
usage to changes in behavior, cognition and right prefrontal neural Hillman, C. H., Erickson, K. I., & Kramer, A. F. (2008). Be smart,
activity. Brain Stimulation, 8(2), 318. exercise your heart: Exercise effects on brain and cognition.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.brs.2015.01.032 Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 9(1), 58–65.
Haelermans, C., Korthals, R., Jacobs, M., De Leeuw, S., Vermeulen, https://doi.org/10.1038/nrn2298
S., Van Vugt, L., Aarts, B., Prokic-Breuer, T., Van Der Velden, Hilton, C., Graver, K., & LaVesser, P. (2007). Relationship between
R., Van Wetten, S., & De Wolf, I. (2022). Sharp increase in social competence and sensory processing in children with high
inequality in education in times of the COVID-19-pandemic. functioning autism spectrum disorders. Research in Autism
PLOS ONE, 17(2), e0261114. Spectrum Disorders, 1(2), 164–173.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0261114 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rasd.2006.10.002
Hakimi, M., Sazish, B., Rastagari, M. A., & Shahidzay, K. (2024). Hirsh-Pasek, K., Zosh, J. M., Golinkoff, R. M., Gray, J. H., Robb, M.
Artificial Intelligence for Social Media Safety and Security: A B., & Kaufman, J. (2015). Putting Education in “Educational”
Systematic Literature Review. Studies in Media, Journalism and Apps: Lessons From the Science of Learning. Psychological
Communications, 1(1), 10–21. Science in the Public Interest, 16(1), 3–34.
https://doi.org/10.32996/smjc.2023.1.1.2x https://doi.org/10.1177/1529100615569721
Hale, L., & Guan, S. (2015). Screen time and sleep among school-aged HMH. (2023). Outlook on teaching and AI (9th Educator Confidence
children and adolescents: A systematic literature review. Sleep Report).
Medicine Reviews, 21, 50–58. Hoehl, S., Krenn, B., & Vincze, M. (2024). Honest machines? A cross-
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.smrv.2014.07.007 disciplinary perspective on trustworthy technology for children.
Hamari, J., Shernoff, D. J., Rowe, E., Coller, B., Asbell-Clarke, J., & Frontiers in Developmental Psychology, 2, 1308881.
Edwards, T. (2016). Challenging games help students learn: An https://doi.org/10.3389/fdpys.2024.1308881
empirical study on engagement, flow and immersion in game- Hoffman, A., Owen, D., & Calvert, S. L. (2021). Parent reports of
based learning. Computers in Human Behavior, 54, 170–179. children’s parasocial relationships with conversational agents:
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.07.045 Trusted voices in children’s lives. Human Behavior and Emerging
Hankerson, D. L., Venzke, C., Laird, E., Grant-Chapman, H., & Technologies, 3(4), 606–617. https://doi.org/10.1002/hbe2.271
Thakur, D. (2022). Online and Observed: Student Privacy Holden, B. A., Fricke, T. R., Wilson, D. A., Jong, M., Naidoo, K. S.,
Implications of School-Issued Devices and Student Activity Sankaridurg, P., Wong, T. Y., Naduvilath, T. J., & Resnikoff, S.
Monitoring Software. https://doi.org/10.31219/osf.io/73a2b (2016). Global Prevalence of Myopia and High Myopia and
Hanus, M. D., & Fox, J. (2015). Assessing the effects of gamification Temporal Trends from 2000 through 2050. Ophthalmology,
in the classroom: A longitudinal study on intrinsic motivation, 123(5), 1036–1042. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ophtha.2016.01.006
social comparison, satisfaction, effort, and academic Holeva, V., Nikopoulou, V. A., Lytridis, C., Bazinas, C., Kechayas,
performance. Computers & Education, 80, 152–161. P., Sidiropoulos, G., Papadopoulou, M., Kerasidou, M. D.,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2014.08.019 Karatsioras, C., Geronikola, N., Papakostas, G. A., Kaburlasos,
Hartshorne, J. K., Tenenbaum, J. B., & Pinker, S. (2018). A critical V. G., & Evangeliou, A. (2024). Effectiveness of a Robot-
period for second language acquisition: Evidence from 2/3 Assisted Psychological Intervention for Children with Autism
million English speakers. Cognition, 177, 263–277. Spectrum Disorder. Journal of Autism and Developmental
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cognition.2018.04.007 Disorders, 54(2), 577–593. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-022-
Hassany, M., Brusilovsky, P., Ke, J., Akhuseyinoglu, K., & 05796-5
Narayanan, A. B. L. (2023). Authoring Worked Examples for Java Holstein, K., McLaren, B. M., & Aleven, V. (2018). Student Learning
Programming with Human-AI Collaboration Benefits of a Mixed-Reality Teacher Awareness Tool in AI-
(arXiv:2312.02105). arXiv. http://arxiv.org/abs/2312.02105 Enhanced Classrooms. In C. Penstein Rosé, R. Martínez-
Maldonado, H. U. Hoppe, R. Luckin, M. Mavrikis, K. Porayska-
Pomsta, B. McLaren, & B. Du Boulay (Eds.), Artificial
37Intelligence in Education (Vol. 10947, pp. 154–168). Springer Computers in Human Behavior, 59, 202–209.
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2016.02.020
93843-1_12 Kelly, G., Graham, J., Bronfman, J., & Garton, S. (2022). Privacy of
Horigome, T., Kurokawa, S., Sawada, K., Kudo, S., Shiga, K., Virtual Reality: Our Future in the Metaverse and Beyond.
Mimura, M., & Kishimoto, T. (2020). Virtual reality exposure Common Sense Media.
therapy for social anxiety disorder: A systematic review and meta- Khan, N. (2023). Baby in a Crib: Fall or Prevention. Rangahau
analysis. Psychological Medicine, 50(15), 2487–2497. Aranga: AUT Graduate Review, 2(3).
https://doi.org/10.1017/S0033291720003785 https://doi.org/10.24135/rangahau-aranga.v2i3.171
Hou, S., Liu, N., Zou, J., Yin, X., Liu, X., Zhang, S., Chen, J., & Wei, Kildare, C. A., & Middlemiss, W. (2017). Impact of parents mobile
Z. (2022). Young children with autism show atypical prefrontal device use on parent-child interaction: A literature review.
cortical responses to humanoid robots: An fNIRS study. Computers in Human Behavior, 75, 579–593.
International Journal of Psychophysiology, 181, 23–32. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2017.06.003
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijpsycho.2022.08.008 Kirkorian, H. L., Pempek, T. A., Murphy, L. A., Schmidt, M. E., &
Huber, A., Weiss, A., & Rauhala, M. (2016). The ethical risk of Anderson, D. R. (2009). The Impact of Background Television on
attachment how to identify, investigate and predict potential Parent–Child Interaction. Child Development, 80(5), 1350–1359.
ethical risks in the development of social companion robots. 2016 https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2009.01337.x
11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot Kodama, C., St. Jean, B., Subramaniam, M., & Taylor, N. G. (2017).
Interaction (HRI), 367–374. There’s a creepy guy on the other end at Google!: Engaging
https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2016.7451774 middle school students in a drawing activity to elicit their mental
Hunt, M. G., Marx, R., Lipson, C., & Young, J. (2018). No More models of Google. Information Retrieval Journal, 20(5), 403–
FOMO: Limiting Social Media Decreases Loneliness and 432. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10791-017-9306-x
Depression. Journal of Social and Clinical Psychology, 37(10), Kohn,. (1992). No contest: The case against competition. Houghton
751–768. https://doi.org/10.1521/jscp.2018.37.10.751 Mifflin Harcourt.
Huttenlocher, P. R. (1990). Morphometric study of human cerebral Kojovic, Ben Hadid, Franchini, & Schaer. (2019). Sensory Processing
cortex development. Neuropsychologia, 28(6), 517–527. Issues and Their Association with Social Difficulties in Children
https://doi.org/10.1016/0028-3932(90)90031-I with Autism Spectrum Disorders. Journal of Clinical Medicine,
Huttenlocher, P. R. (2009). Neural plasticity: The effects of 8(10), 1508. https://doi.org/10.3390/jcm8101508
environment on the development of the cerebral cortex. Harvard Kornrich, S. (2016). Inequalities in Parental Spending on Young
University Press. Children: 1972 to 2010. AERA Open, 2(2), 233285841664418.
Huttenlocher, P. R., & Dabholkar, A. S. (1997). Regional differences https://doi.org/10.1177/2332858416644180
in synaptogenesis in human cerebral cortex. The Journal of Kostrubiec, V., Lajunta, C., Paubel, P.-V., & Kruck, J. (2024). Does
Comparative Neurology, 387(2), 167–178. the Social Robot Nao Facilitate Cooperation in High Functioning
https://doi.org/10.1002/(SICI)1096- Children with ASD? International Journal of Social Robotics,
9861(19971020)387:2<167::AID-CNE1>3.0.CO;2-Z 16(2), 281–298. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12369-023-01063-4
Isbister, K., & Nass, C. (2000). Consistency of personality in Kothgassner, O. D., & Felnhofer, A. (2021). Lack of research on
interactive characters: Verbal cues, non-verbal cues, and user efficacy of virtual reality exposure therapy (VRET) for anxiety
characteristics. International Journal of Human-Computer disorders in children and adolescents: A systematic review.
Studies, 53(2), 251–267. https://doi.org/10.1006/ijhc.2000.0368 Neuropsychiatrie, 35(2), 68–75. https://doi.org/10.1007/s40211-
Itakura, S., Ishida, H., Kanda, T., Shimada, Y., Ishiguro, H., & Lee, K. 020-00349-7
(2008). How to Build an Intentional Android: Infants’ Imitation Krcmar, M. (2010). Can Social Meaningfulness and Repeat Exposure
of a Robot’s Goal‐Directed Actions. Infancy, 13(5), 519–532. Help Infants and Toddlers Overcome the Video Deficit? Media
https://doi.org/10.1080/15250000802329503 Psychology, 13(1), 31–53.
Jacquet, T., Lepers, R., Pageaux, B., & Poulin-Charronnat, B. (2023). https://doi.org/10.1080/15213260903562917
Acute smartphone use impairs vigilance and inhibition capacities. Kucirkova, N., Brod, G., & Gaab, N. (2023). Applying the science of
Scientific Reports, 13(1), 23046. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598- learning to EdTech evidence evaluations using the EdTech
023-50354-3 Evidence Evaluation Routine (EVER). Npj Science of Learning,
Jiménez-Muñoz, L., Peñuelas-Calvo, I., Calvo-Rivera, P., Díaz- 8(1), 35. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41539-023-00186-7
Oliván, I., Moreno, M., Baca-García, E., & Porras-Segovia, A. Kumar, P., Naik, S. M., Devkar, U. R., Chetty, M., Clegg, T. L., &
(2022). Video Games for the Treatment of Autism Spectrum Vitak, J. (2017). “No Telling Passcodes Out Because They’re
Disorder: A Systematic Review. Journal of Autism and Private”: Understanding Children’s Mental Models of Privacy
Developmental Disorders, 52(1), 169–188. and Security Online. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10803-021-04934-9 Computer Interaction, 1(CSCW), 1–21.
Johnson, & Christensen. (2011). A Comparison of Simplified-Visually https://doi.org/10.1145/3134699
Rich and Traditional Presentation Styles. Teaching of Psychology, Laestadius, L., Bishop, A., Gonzalez, M., Illenčík, D., & Campos-
38(4), 293–297. https://doi.org/10.1177/0098628311421333 Castillo, C. (2022). Too human and not human enough: A
Johnson, M. H., Dziurawiec, S., Ellis, H., & Morton, J. (1991). grounded theory analysis of mental health harms from emotional
Newborns’ preferential tracking of face-like stimuli and its dependence on the social chatbot Replika. New Media & Society,
subsequent decline. Cognition, 40(1), 1–19. 146144482211420. https://doi.org/10.1177/14614448221142007
https://doi.org/10.1016/0010-0277(91)90045-6 Laupichler, M. C., Aster, A., Schirch, J., & Raupach, T. (2022).
Jones-Jordan, L. A., Sinnott, L. T., Cotter, S. A., Kleinstein, R. N., Artificial intelligence literacy in higher and adult education: A
Manny, R. E., Mutti, D. O., Twelker, J. D., & Zadnik, K. (2012). scoping literature review. Computers and Education: Artificial
Time Outdoors, Visual Activity, and Myopia Progression in Intelligence, 3, 100101.
Juvenile-Onset Myopes. Investigative Opthalmology & Visual https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeai.2022.100101
Science, 53(11), 7169. https://doi.org/10.1167/iovs.11-8336 LeCun, Y., Bengio, Y., & Hinton, G. (2015). Deep learning. Nature,
Jung, Y., Choi, B., & Cho, W. (2021). Group satisfaction with group 521(7553), 436–444. https://doi.org/10.1038/nature14539
work under surveillance: The stimulus-organism-response (SOR) Lee, C., & Lew‐Williams, C. (2023). The dynamic functions of social
perspective. Telematics and Informatics, 58, 101530. cues during children’s word learning. Infant and Child
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tele.2020.101530 Development, 32(1), e2372. https://doi.org/10.1002/icd.2372
Kaye, L. K., & Pennington, C. R. (2016). “Girls can’t play”: The Leekam, S. R., Solomon, T. L., & Teoh, Y. (2010). Adults’ social cues
effects of stereotype threat on females’ gaming performance. facilitate young children’s use of signs and symbols.
38Developmental Science, 13(1), 108–119. Educational Review, 76(2), 405–431.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-7687.2009.00862.x https://doi.org/10.1080/00131911.2022.2035685
Lewis, T. L., & Maurer, D. (2005). Multiple sensitive periods in Magee, C. A., Lee, J. K., & Vella, S. A. (2014). Bidirectional
human visual development: Evidence from visually deprived Relationships Between Sleep Duration and Screen Time in Early
children. Developmental Psychobiology, 46(3), 163–183. Childhood. JAMA Pediatrics, 168(5), 465.
https://doi.org/10.1002/dev.20055 https://doi.org/10.1001/jamapediatrics.2013.4183
Li, H., & Zhang, Q. (2023). Effects of Prosocial Video Games on Mallon, B., & Lynch, R. (2014). Stimulating Psychological
Prosocial Thoughts and Prosocial Behaviors. Social Science Attachments in Narrative Games: Engaging Players With Game
Computer Review, 41(3), 1063–1080. Characters. Simulation & Gaming, 45(4–5), 508–527.
https://doi.org/10.1177/08944393211069599 https://doi.org/10.1177/1046878114553572
Li, Tian, Taxer, Zheng, Wu, Sun, & Liu. (2016). Problematic Internet Mandhana, D. M., & Caruso, V. (2023). Inducing flow in class
Users’ Discounting Behaviors Reflect an Inability to Delay activities to promote student engagement. Communication
Gratification, Not Risk Taking. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Education, 72(4), 348–366.
Social Networking, 19(3), 172–178. https://doi.org/10.1080/03634523.2022.2158353
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2015.0295 Mares, M., & Bonus, J. A. (2019). Children’s Judgment of Reality and
Liao, M., & Sundar, S. S. (2022). Sound of silence: Does Muting Fantasy. In R. Hobbs & P. Mihailidis (Eds.), The International
Notifications Reduce Phone Use? Computers in Human Behavior, Encyclopedia of Media Literacy (1st ed., pp. 1–6). Wiley.
134, 107338. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2022.107338 https://doi.org/10.1002/9781118978238.ieml0021
Lin, L.-Y., Cherng, R.-J., & Chen, Y.-J. (2017). Effect of Touch Marín-López, I., Zych, I., Ortega-Ruiz, R., Monks, C. P., & Llorent,
Screen Tablet Use on Fine Motor Development of Young V. J. (2020). Empathy online and moral disengagement through
Children. Physical & Occupational Therapy In Pediatrics, 37(5), technology as longitudinal predictors of cyberbullying
457–467. https://doi.org/10.1080/01942638.2016.1255290 victimization and perpetration. Children and Youth Services
Lindenfors,. (2017). For Whose Benefit? The Biological and Cultural Review, 116, 105144.
Evolution of Human Cooperation. Springer. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.childyouth.2020.105144
Linebarger, D. L., & Vaala, S. E. (2010). Screen media and language Markus, A., Pfister, J., Carolus, A., Hotho, A., & Wienrich, C. (2024).
development in infants and toddlers: An ecological perspective. Effects of AI understanding-training on AI literacy, usage, self-
Developmental Review, 30(2), 176–202. determined interactions, and anthropomorphization with voice
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dr.2010.03.006 assistants. Computers and Education Open, 6, 100176.
Liu, X., Luo, Y., Liu, Z.-Z., Yang, Y., Liu, J., & Jia, C.-X. (2020). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.caeo.2024.100176
Prolonged Mobile Phone Use Is Associated with Poor Academic Masi, L., Abadie, P., Herba, C., Emond, M., Gingras, M.-P., & Amor,
Performance in Adolescents. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and L. B. (2021). Video Games in ADHD and Non-ADHD Children:
Social Networking, 23(5), 303–311. Modalities of Use and Association With ADHD Symptoms.
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2019.0591 Frontiers in Pediatrics, 9, 632272.
Livingstone, S. Stoilova, M. and Nandagiri, R. (2019). Children’s data https://doi.org/10.3389/fped.2021.632272
and privacy online: Growing up in a digital age. An evidence Massey, K., Burns, J., & Franz, A. (2021). Young People, Sexuality
review. London School of Economics and Political Science. and the Age of Pornography. Sexuality & Culture, 25(1), 318–
Lona, G., Hauser, C., Köchli, S., Infanger, D., Endes, K., Faude, O., 336. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12119-020-09771-z
& Hanssen, H. (2021). Changes in physical activity behavior and Masten, A. S., Herbers, J. E., Desjardins, C. D., Cutuli, J. J.,
development of cardiovascular risk in children. Scandinavian McCormick, C. M., Sapienza, J. K., Long, J. D., & Zelazo, P. D.
Journal of Medicine & Science in Sports, 31(6), 1313–1323. (2012). Executive Function Skills and School Success in Young
https://doi.org/10.1111/sms.13931 Children Experiencing Homelessness. Educational Researcher,
López-Fernández, F. J., Mezquita, L., Etkin, P., Griffiths, M. D., Ortet, 41(9), 375–384. https://doi.org/10.3102/0013189X12459883
G., & Ibáñez, M. I. (2021). The Role of Violent Video Game Mattiassi, A. D. A., Sarrica, M., Cavallo, F., & Fortunati, L. (2021).
Exposure, Personality, and Deviant Peers in Aggressive What do humans feel with mistreated humans, animals, robots,
Behaviors Among Adolescents: A Two-Wave Longitudinal and objects? Exploring the role of cognitive empathy. Motivation
Study. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, and Emotion, 45(4), 543–555. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11031-
24(1), 32–40. https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2020.0030 021-09886-2
Lovato, S., & Piper, A. M. (2015). “Siri, is this you?”: Understanding Mavoa, J., Coghlan, S., & Nansen, B. (2023). “It’s About Safety Not
young children’s interactions with voice input systems. Snooping”: Parental Attitudes to Child Tracking Technologies
Proceedings of the 14th International Conference on Interaction and Geolocation Data. Surveillance & Society, 21(1), 45–60.
Design and Children, 335–338. https://doi.org/10.24908/ss.v21i1.15719
https://doi.org/10.1145/2771839.2771910 Mayer. (2002). Cognitive Theory and the Design of Multimedia
Lucero, L. (2017). Safe spaces in online places: Social media and Instruction: An Example of the Two‐Way Street Between
LGBTQ youth. Multicultural Education Review, 9(2), 117–128. Cognition and Instruction. New Directions for Teaching and
https://doi.org/10.1080/2005615X.2017.1313482 Learning, 2002(89), 55–71. https://doi.org/10.1002/tl.47
Luciana, M., & Collins, P. F. (2012). Incentive Motivation, Cognitive Mayer, R. N. (2003). Technology, Families, and Privacy: Can We
Control, and the Adolescent Brain: Is It Time for a Paradigm Know Too Much About Our Loved Ones? Journal of Consumer
Shift? Child Development Perspectives, 6(4), 392–399. Policy, 26(4), 419–439.
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-8606.2012.00252.x https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1026387109484
Lull, R. B., & Bushman, B. J. (2016). Immersed in violence: Presence McMahon, E. M., Corcoran, P., O’Regan, G., Keeley, H., Cannon, M.,
mediates the effect of 3D violent video gameplay on angry Carli, V., Wasserman, C., Hadlaczky, G., Sarchiapone, M., Apter,
feelings. Psychology of Popular Media Culture, 5(2), 133–144. A., Balazs, J., Balint, M., Bobes, J., Brunner, R., Cozman, D.,
https://doi.org/10.1037/ppm0000062 Haring, C., Iosue, M., Kaess, M., Kahn, J.-P., … Wasserman, D.
Lüscher, C., Robbins, T. W., & Everitt, B. J. (2020). The transition to (2017). Physical activity in European adolescents and
compulsion in addiction. Nature Reviews Neuroscience, 21(5), associations with anxiety, depression and well-being. European
247–263. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41583-020-0289-z Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 26(1), 111–122.
Lynch, P., Singal, N., & Francis, G. A. (2022). Educational technology https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-016-0875-9
for learners with disabilities in primary school settings in low- and McNicholl, A., Casey, H., Desmond, D., & Gallagher, P. (2021). The
middle-income countries: A systematic literature review. impact of assistive technology use for students with disabilities in
higher education: A systematic review. Disability and
39Rehabilitation: Assistive Technology, 16(2), 130–143. Behaviour Research and Therapy, 39(1), 13–28.
https://doi.org/10.1080/17483107.2019.1642395 https://doi.org/10.1016/S0005-7967(99)00155-2
Meng, Y., Deng, W., Wang, H., Guo, W., & Li, T. (2015). The Murray, T., & Buchanan, R. (2018). ‘The internet is all around us’:
prefrontal dysfunction in individuals with Internet gaming How children come to understand the Internet. 10(1), 1–21.
disorder: A meta‐analysis of functional magnetic resonance Myruski, S., Gulyayeva, O., Birk, S., Pérez‐Edgar, K., Buss, K. A., &
imaging studies. Addiction Biology, 20(4), 799–808. Dennis‐Tiwary, T. A. (2018). Digital disruption? Maternal mobile
https://doi.org/10.1111/adb.12154 device use is related to infant social‐emotional functioning.
Mengi, M., & Malhotra, D. (2022). Artificial Intelligence Based Developmental Science, 21(4), e12610.
Techniques for the Detection of Socio-Behavioral Disorders: A https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12610
Systematic Review. Archives of Computational Methods in Nass, C., Steuer, J., & Tauber, E. R. (1994). Computers are social
Engineering, 29(5), 2811–2855. https://doi.org/10.1007/s11831- actors. Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human Factors
021-09682-8 in Computing Systems Celebrating Interdependence - CHI ’94,
Mertala, P. (2019). Young children’s conceptions of computers, code, 72–78. https://doi.org/10.1145/191666.191703
and the Internet. International Journal of Child-Computer Noles, N. S., Danovitch, J. H., & Shafto, P. (2015). Children’s Trust
Interaction, 19, 56–66. in Technological and Human Informants. Cognitive Science.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2018.11.003 Nomkin, L. G., & Gordon, I. (2021). The relationship between
Mertala, P. (2020). Young children’s perceptions of ubiquitous maternal smartphone use, physiological responses, and gaze
computing and the Internet of Things. British Journal of patterns during breastfeeding and face-to-face interactions with
Educational Technology, 51(1), 84–102. infant. PLOS ONE, 16(10), e0257956.
https://doi.org/10.1111/bjet.12821 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0257956
Meta. (2023). Introducing New AI Experiences Across Our Family of Okoye, C., Obialo-Ibeawuchi, C. M., Obajeun, O. A., Sarwar, S.,
Apps and Devices. Introducing New AI Experiences Across Our Tawfik, C., Waleed, M. S., Wasim, A. U., Mohamoud, I.,
Family of Apps and Devices. Afolayan, A. Y., & Mbaezue, R. N. (2023). Early Diagnosis of
https://about.fb.com/news/2023/09/introducing-ai-powered- Autism Spectrum Disorder: A Review and Analysis of the Risks
assistants-characters-and-creative-tools/ and Benefits. Cureus. https://doi.org/10.7759/cureus.43226
Meyer, M., Zosh, J. M., McLaren, C., Robb, M., McCaffery, H., Oliveira, W., Hamari, J., Joaquim, S., Toda, A. M., Palomino, P. T.,
Golinkoff, R. M., Hirsh-Pasek, K., & Radesky, J. (2021). How Vassileva, J., & Isotani, S. (2022). The effects of personalized
educational are “educational” apps for young children? App store gamification on students’ flow experience, motivation, and
content analysis using the Four Pillars of Learning framework. enjoyment. Smart Learning Environments, 9(1), 16.
Journal of Children and Media, 15(4), 526–548. https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-022-00194-x
https://doi.org/10.1080/17482798.2021.1882516 Oswald, T. K., Rumbold, A. R., Kedzior, S. G. E., & Moore, V. M.
Minear, M., Brasher, F., McCurdy, M., Lewis, J., & Younggren, A. (2020). Psychological impacts of “screen time” and “green time”
(2013). Working memory, fluid intelligence, and impulsiveness for children and adolescents: A systematic scoping review. PLOS
in heavy media multitaskers. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, ONE, 15(9), e0237725.
20(6), 1274–1281. https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-013-0456-6 https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0237725
Misra, S., Cheng, L., Genevie, J., & Yuan, M. (2016). The iPhone Paaßen, B., Morgenroth, T., & Stratemeyer, M. (2017). What is a True
Effect: The Quality of In-Person Social Interactions in the Gamer? The Male Gamer Stereotype and the Marginalization of
Presence of Mobile Devices. Environment and Behavior, 48(2), Women in Video Game Culture. Sex Roles, 76(7–8), 421–435.
275–298. https://doi.org/10.1177/0013916514539755 https://doi.org/10.1007/s11199-016-0678-y
Mitchell, M. (2020). Artificial intelligence: A guide for thinking Pagani, L. S., Fitzpatrick, C., Barnett, T. A., & Dubow, E. (2010).
humans (First Picador paperback edition). Picador; WorldCat. Prospective Associations Between Early Childhood Television
Miyake, A., Friedman, N. P., Emerson, M. J., Witzki, A. H., Howerter, Exposure and Academic, Psychosocial, and Physical Well-being
A., & Wager, T. D. (2000). The Unity and Diversity of Executive by Middle Childhood. Archives of Pediatrics & Adolescent
Functions and Their Contributions to Complex “Frontal Lobe” Medicine, 164(5). https://doi.org/10.1001/archpediatrics.2010.50
Tasks: A Latent Variable Analysis. Cognitive Psychology, 41(1), Pagel, M., Söbke, H., & Bröker, T. (2021). Using Multiplayer Online
49–100. https://doi.org/10.1006/cogp.1999.0734 Games for Teaching Soft Skills in Higher Education. In B.
Miyazaki, A. D., Stanaland, A. J. S., & Lwin, M. O. (2009). Self- Fletcher, M. Ma, S. Göbel, J. Baalsrud Hauge, & T. Marsh (Eds.),
Regulatory Safeguards and the Online Privacy of Preteen Serious Games (Vol. 12945, pp. 276–290). Springer International
Children. Journal of Advertising, 38(4), 79–91. Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-88272-3_20
https://doi.org/10.2753/JOA0091-3367380406 Pangelinan, M. M., Zhang, G., VanMeter, J. W., Clark, J. E., Hatfield,
Morgan, J. K., Santosa, H., Conner, K. K., Fridley, R. M., Forbes, E. B. D., & Haufler, A. J. (2011). Beyond age and gender:
E., Iyengar, S., Joseph, H. M., & Huppert, T. J. (2023). Mother– Relationships between cortical and subcortical brain volume and
child neural synchronization is time linked to mother–child cognitive-motor abilities in school-age children. NeuroImage,
positive affective state matching. Social Cognitive and Affective 54(4), 3093–3100.
Neuroscience, 18(1), nsad001. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2010.11.021
https://doi.org/10.1093/scan/nsad001 Papastergiou, M. (2005). Students’ Mental Models of the Internet and
Muennig, P., Robertson, D., Johnson, G., Campbell, F., Pungello, E. Their Didactical Exploitation in Informatics Education.
P., & Neidell, M. (2011). The Effect of an Early Education Education and Information Technologies, 10(4), 341–360.
Program on Adult Health: The Carolina Abecedarian Project https://doi.org/10.1007/s10639-005-3431-7
Randomized Controlled Trial. American Journal of Public Peck, T. C., Seinfeld, S., Aglioti, S. M., & Slater, M. (2013). Putting
Health, 101(3), 512–516. yourself in the skin of a black avatar reduces implicit racial bias.
https://doi.org/10.2105/AJPH.2010.200063 Consciousness and Cognition, 22(3), 779–787.
Munno, D., Saroldi, M., Bechon, E., Sterpone, S. C. M., & Zullo, G. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.concog.2013.04.016
(2016). Addictive behaviors and personality traits in adolescents. Pempek, T. A., Kirkorian, H. L., & Anderson, D. R. (2014). The
CNS Spectrums, 21(2), 207–213. Effects of Background Television on the Quantity and Quality of
https://doi.org/10.1017/S1092852915000474 Child-Directed Speech by Parents. Journal of Children and
Muris, P., Merckelbach, H., Ollendick, T. H., King, N. J., & Bogie, N. Media, 8(3), 211–222.
(2001). Children’s nighttime fears: Parent–child ratings of https://doi.org/10.1080/17482798.2014.920715
frequency, content, origins, coping behaviors and severity. Peñuelas-Calvo, I., Jiang-Lin, L. K., Girela-Serrano, B., Delgado-
Gomez, D., Navarro-Jimenez, R., Baca-Garcia, E., & Porras-
40Segovia, A. (2022). Video games for the assessment and treatment Patterns of mobile device use by caregivers and children during
of attention-deficit/hyperactivity disorder: A systematic review. meals in fast food restaurants. Pediatrics, 133(4), e843-849.
European Child & Adolescent Psychiatry, 31(1), 5–20. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2013-3703
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00787-020-01557-w Radesky, J. S., Schumacher, J., & Zuckerman, B. (2015). Mobile and
Peracchia, S., & Curcio, G. (2018). Exposure to video games: Effects Interactive Media Use by Young Children: The Good, the Bad,
on sleep and on post-sleep cognitive abilities. A sistematic review and the Unknown. Pediatrics, 135(1), 1–3.
of experimental evidences. Sleep Science, 11(04), 302–314. https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2014-2251
https://doi.org/10.5935/1984-0063.20180046 Radianti, J., Majchrzak, T. A., Fromm, J., & Wohlgenannt, I. (2020).
Perrault, A. A., Bayer, L., Peuvrier, M., Afyouni, A., Ghisletta, P., A systematic review of immersive virtual reality applications for
Brockmann, C., Spiridon, M., Hulo Vesely, S., Haller, D. M., higher education: Design elements, lessons learned, and research
Pichon, S., Perrig, S., Schwartz, S., & Sterpenich, V. (2019). agenda. Computers & Education, 147, 103778.
Reducing the use of screen electronic devices in the evening is https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.103778
associated with improved sleep and daytime vigilance in Ramadan, Z., F. Farah, M., & El Essrawi, L. (2021). From
adolescents. Sleep, 42(9), zsz125. Amazon.com to Amazon.love: How Alexa is redefining
https://doi.org/10.1093/sleep/zsz125 companionship and interdependence for people with special
Perrault, A. A., Kebets, V., Kuek, N. M. Y., Cross, N. E., Tesfaye, R., needs. Psychology & Marketing, 38(4), 596–609.
Pomares, F. B., Li, J., Chee, M. W. L., Dang-Vu, T. T., & Yeo, B. https://doi.org/10.1002/mar.21441
T. T. (2024). A multidimensional investigation of sleep and Raudsepp, L. (2019). Brief report: Problematic social media use and
biopsychosocial profiles with associated neural signatures. sleep disturbances are longitudinally associated with depressive
bioRxiv. https://doi.org/10.1101/2024.02.15.580583 symptoms in adolescents. Journal of Adolescence, 76(1), 197–
Persky, S., & Blascovich, J. (2007). Immersive virtual environments 201. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2019.09.005
versus traditional platforms: Effects of violent and nonviolent Raudsepp, L., & Kais, K. (2019). Longitudinal associations between
video game play. Media Psychology, 10(1), 135–156. problematic social media use and depressive symptoms in
Persky, S., & Blascovich, J. (2008). Immersive Virtual Video Game adolescent girls. Preventive Medicine Reports, 15, 100925.
Play and Presence: Influences on Aggressive Feelings and https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pmedr.2019.100925
Behavior. Presence: Teleoperators and Virtual Environments, Rebar, A. L., Stanton, R., Geard, D., Short, C., Duncan, M. J., &
17(1), 57–72. https://doi.org/10.1162/pres.17.1.57 Vandelanotte, C. (2015). A meta-meta-analysis of the effect of
Pew Research Center. (2024). How Teens and Parents Approach physical activity on depression and anxiety in non-clinical adult
Screen Time. Pew Research Center. populations. Health Psychology Review, 9(3), 366–378.
Pirdehghan, A., Khezmeh, E., & Panahi, S. (2021). Social Media Use https://doi.org/10.1080/17437199.2015.1022901
and Sleep Disturbance among Adolescents: A Cross-Sectional Renard, G., Jean, A., & Dadian, S. (2018). Holberton-Turing Oath.
Study. Iranian Journal of Psychiatry. Rideout, V. (2021). The Common Sense Census: Media Use by Tweens
https://doi.org/10.18502/ijps.v16i2.5814 and Teens in America, A Common Sense Media Research Study,
Pires, G. N., Tufik, S., & Andersen, M. L. (2012). Relationship United States, 2015 [dataset]. [distributor].
between sleep deprivation and anxiety: Experimental research https://doi.org/10.3886/ICPSR38018.v1
perspective. Einstein (São Paulo), 10(4), 519–523. Rideout, V., Peebles, A., Mann, S., & Robb, M. B. (2022). Common
https://doi.org/10.1590/S1679-45082012000400022 Sense census: Media use by tweens and teens, 2021. Common
Potkin, K. T., & Bunney, W. E. (2012). Sleep Improves Memory: The Sense.
Effect of Sleep on Long Term Memory in Early Adolescence. Riesch, S. K., Liu, J., Kaufmann, P. G., Doswell, W. M., Cohen, S., &
PLoS ONE, 7(8), e42191. Vessey, J. (2019). Preventing adverse health outcomes among
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0042191 children and adolescents by addressing screen media practices
Prato-Previde, E., Basso Ricci, E., & Colombo, E. S. (2022). The concomitant to sleep disturbance. Nursing Outlook, 67(4), 492–
Complexity of the Human–Animal Bond: Empathy, Attachment 496. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.outlook.2019.06.009
and Anthropomorphism in Human–Animal Relationships and Roberts, D. F., Henriksen, L., Voelker, D. H., & Van Vuuren, D. P.
Animal Hoarding. Animals, 12(20), 2835. (1993). Television and Schooling: Displacement and Distraction
https://doi.org/10.3390/ani12202835 Hypotheses. Australian Journal of Education, 37(2), 198–211.
Przybylski, A. K., & Weinstein, N. (2013). Can you connect with me https://doi.org/10.1177/000494419303700207
now? How the presence of mobile communication technology Robinette, P., Li, W., Allen, R., Howard, A. M., & Wagner, A. R.
influences face-to-face conversation quality. Journal of Social (2016). Overtrust of robots in emergency evacuation scenarios.
and Personal Relationships, 30(3), 237–246. 2016 11th ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
https://doi.org/10.1177/0265407512453827 Interaction (HRI), 101–108.
Putnick, D. L., Trinh, M.-H., Sundaram, R., Bell, E. M., Ghassabian, https://doi.org/10.1109/HRI.2016.7451740
A., Robinson, S. L., & Yeung, E. (2023). Displacement of peer Robinson, T. N., Banda, J. A., Hale, L., Lu, A. S., Fleming-Milici, F.,
play by screen time: Associations with toddler development. Calvert, S. L., & Wartella, E. (2017). Screen Media Exposure and
Pediatric Research, 93(5), 1425–1431. Obesity in Children and Adolescents. Pediatrics,
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-022-02261-y 140(Supplement_2), S97–S101.
Puukko, K., Hietajärvi, L., Maksniemi, E., Alho, K., & Salmela-Aro, https://doi.org/10.1542/peds.2016-1758K
K. (2020). Social Media Use and Depressive Symptoms—A Rodogno, R. (2016). Social robots, fiction, and sentimentality. Ethics
Longitudinal Study from Early to Late Adolescence. and Information Technology, 18(4), 257–268.
International Journal of Environmental Research and Public https://doi.org/10.1007/s10676-015-9371-z
Health, 17(16), 5921. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17165921 Ross, C. B. (2013). Pet Loss and Children (0 ed.). Routledge.
Rabkin Peachman. (2017). Mattel Pulls Aristotle Children’s Device https://doi.org/10.4324/9780203955543
After Privacy Concerns. The New York Times. Rozgonjuk, D., Elhai, J. D., Ryan, T., & Scott, G. G. (2019). Fear of
https://www.nytimes.com/2017/10/05/well/family/mattel- missing out is associated with disrupted activities from receiving
aristotle-privacy.html smartphone notifications and surface learning in college students.
Radesky, J. S., & Christakis, D. A. (2016). Increased Screen Time. Computers & Education, 140, 103590.
Pediatric Clinics of North America, 63(5), 827–839. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2019.05.016
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pcl.2016.06.006 Ryan, R. M., & Deci, E. L. (2000). Self-determination theory and the
Radesky, J. S., Kistin, C. J., Zuckerman, B., Nitzberg, K., Gross, J., facilitation of intrinsic motivation, social development, and well-
Kaplan-Sanoff, M., Augustyn, M., & Silverstein, M. (2014).
41being. American Psychologist, 55(1), 68–78. Information and Communication Technologies (CHILECON), 1–
https://doi.org/10.1037/0003-066X.55.1.68 6. https://doi.org/10.1109/CHILECON47746.2019.8988068
Salari, N., Ghasemi, H., Abdoli, N., Rahmani, A., Shiri, M. H., Sevilla, J., Heim, L., Ho, A., Besiroglu, T., Hobbhahn, M., &
Hashemian, A. H., Akbari, H., & Mohammadi, M. (2023). The Villalobos, P. (2022). Compute Trends Across Three Eras of
global prevalence of ADHD in children and adolescents: A Machine Learning. 2022 International Joint Conference on
systematic review and meta-analysis. Italian Journal of Neural Networks (IJCNN), 1–8.
Pediatrics, 49(1), 48. https://doi.org/10.1186/s13052-023-01456- https://doi.org/10.1109/IJCNN55064.2022.9891914
1 Shahid, N. M. I., Law, E. L.-C., & Verdezoto, N. (2022). Technology-
Salvi, F., Ribeiro, M. H., Gallotti, R., & West, R. (2024). On the enhanced support for children with Down Syndrome: A
Conversational Persuasiveness of Large Language Models: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Child-
Randomized Controlled Trial (Version 1). arXiv. Computer Interaction, 31, 100340.
https://doi.org/10.48550/ARXIV.2403.14380 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijcci.2021.100340
Sanbonmatsu, D. M., Strayer, D. L., Medeiros-Ward, N., & Watson, Shahriari, K., & Shahriari, M. (2017). IEEE standard review —
J. M. (2013). Who Multi-Tasks and Why? Multi-Tasking Ability, Ethically aligned design: A vision for prioritizing human
Perceived Multi-Tasking Ability, Impulsivity, and Sensation wellbeing with artificial intelligence and autonomous systems.
Seeking. PLOS ONE, 8(1), e54402. 2017 IEEE Canada International Humanitarian Technology
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0054402 Conference (IHTC), 197–201.
Sarami, P., & Hojjati, M. (2023). Enhancing Intrinsic Motivation in https://doi.org/10.1109/IHTC.2017.8058187
Academic Settings: The Role of Self-Regulation Skills Sheehan, K. J., & Uttal, D. H. (2016). Children’s Learning from Touch
Interventions. Screens: A Dual Representation Perspective. Frontiers in
Scahill, L., & Schwab-Stone, M. (2000). Epidemiology of Adhd in Psychology, 7. https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2016.01220
School-Age Children. Child and Adolescent Psychiatric Clinics Sheridan, M. A., Fox, N. A., Zeanah, C. H., McLaughlin, K. A., &
of North America, 9(3), 541–555. https://doi.org/10.1016/S1056- Nelson, C. A. (2012). Variation in neural development as a result
4993(18)30106-8 of exposure to institutionalization early in childhood. Proceedings
Schardt, A. A., Miller, F. G., & Bedesem, P. L. (2019). The Effects of of the National Academy of Sciences, 109(32), 12927–12932.
CellF-Monitoring on Students’ Academic Engagement: A https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1200041109
Technology-Based Self-Monitoring Intervention. Journal of Shih, C.-T., & Chuang, C.-H. (2013). Individual differences,
Positive Behavior Interventions, 21(1), 42–49. psychological contract breach, and organizational citizenship
https://doi.org/10.1177/1098300718773462 behavior: A moderated mediation study. Asia Pacific Journal of
Schmahmann, J. D., & Pandya, D. N. (2008). Disconnection Management, 30(1), 191–210. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10490-
syndromes of basal ganglia, thalamus, and cerebrocerebellar 012-9294-8
systems. Cortex, 44(8), 1037–1066. Shulman, E. P., Smith, A. R., Silva, K., Icenogle, G., Duell, N., Chein,
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cortex.2008.04.004 J., & Steinberg, L. (2016). The dual systems model: Review,
Schneider, S., Beege, M., Nebel, S., Schnaubert, L., & Rey, G. D. reappraisal, and reaffirmation. Developmental Cognitive
(2022). The Cognitive-Affective-Social Theory of Learning in Neuroscience, 17, 103–117.
digital Environments (CASTLE). Educational Psychology https://doi.org/10.1016/j.dcn.2015.12.010
Review, 34(1), 1–38. https://doi.org/10.1007/s10648-021-09626- Shute, V. J. (2008). Focus on Formative Feedback. Review of
5 Educational Research, 78(1), 153–189.
Schroeder, J., & Epley, N. (2016). Mistaking minds and machines: Siafakas, N. M. (2021). Do we need a Hippocratic Oath for artificial
How speech affects dehumanization and anthropomorphism. intelligence scientists? AI Magazine, 42(4), 57–61.
Journal of Experimental Psychology: General, 145(11), 1427– https://doi.org/10.1609/aaai.12022
1437. https://doi.org/10.1037/xge0000214 Siebers, T., Beyens, I., Pouwels, J. L., & Valkenburg, P. M. (2022).
Schwarzer, C., Grafe, N., Hiemisch, A., Kiess, W., & Poulain, T. Social Media and Distraction: An Experience Sampling Study
(2022). Associations of media use and early childhood among Adolescents. Media Psychology, 25(3), 343–366.
development: Cross-sectional findings from the LIFE Child https://doi.org/10.1080/15213269.2021.1959350
study. Pediatric Research, 91(1), 247–253. Silbereis, J. C., Pochareddy, S., Zhu, Y., Li, M., & Sestan, N. (2016).
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41390-021-01433-6 The Cellular and Molecular Landscapes of the Developing
Scott, H., & Woods, H. C. (2018). Fear of missing out and sleep: Human Central Nervous System. Neuron, 89(2), 248–268.
Cognitive behavioural factors in adolescents’ nighttime social https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuron.2015.12.008
media use. Journal of Adolescence, 68(1), 61–65. Simmonds, D. J., Hallquist, M. N., Asato, M., & Luna, B. (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2018.07.009 Developmental stages and sex differences of white matter and
Scully, M., Swords, L., & Nixon, E. (2023). Social comparisons on behavioral development through adolescence: A longitudinal
social media: Online appearance-related activity and body diffusion tensor imaging (DTI) study. NeuroImage, 92, 356–368.
dissatisfaction in adolescent girls. Irish Journal of Psychological https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2013.12.044
Medicine, 40(1), 31–42. https://doi.org/10.1017/ipm.2020.93 Skinner. (1968). The technology of teaching. New York, Appleton-
Seabrook, E. M., Kern, M. L., & Rickard, N. S. (2016). Social Century-Crofts.
Networking Sites, Depression, and Anxiety: A Systematic http://archive.org/details/technologyofteac00skin
Review. JMIR Mental Health, 3(4), e50. Skinner, G., & Walmsley, T. (2019). Artificial Intelligence and Deep
https://doi.org/10.2196/mental.5842 Learning in Video Games A Brief Review. 2019 IEEE 4th
Segovia, K. Y., & Bailenson, J. N. (2009). Virtually True: Children’s International Conference on Computer and Communication
Acquisition of False Memories in Virtual Reality. Media Systems (ICCCS), 404–408.
Psychology, 12(4), 371–393. https://doi.org/10.1109/CCOMS.2019.8821783
https://doi.org/10.1080/15213260903287267 Skjuve, M., Følstad, A., Fostervold, K. I., & Brandtzaeg, P. B. (2021).
Selkie, E., Adkins, V., Masters, E., Bajpai, A., & Shumer, D. (2020). My Chatbot Companion—A Study of Human-Chatbot
Transgender Adolescents’ Uses of Social Media for Social Relationships. International Journal of Human-Computer
Support. Journal of Adolescent Health, 66(3), 275–280. Studies, 149, 102601. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijhcs.2021.102601
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2019.08.011 Smiderle, R., Rigo, S. J., Marques, L. B., Peçanha De Miranda Coelho,
Sepulveda, G. K., Besoain, F., & Barriga, N. A. (2019). Exploring J. A., & Jaques, P. A. (2020). The impact of gamification on
Dynamic Difficulty Adjustment in Videogames. 2019 IEEE students’ learning, engagement and behavior based on their
CHILEAN Conference on Electrical, Electronics Engineering,
42personality traits. Smart Learning Environments, 7(1), 3. Thelen, E., & Smith, L. B. (1994). A dynamic systems approach to the
https://doi.org/10.1186/s40561-019-0098-x development of cognition and action. The MIT Press.
Sorvatzioti, D. F. (2012). The socratic method of teaching in a Thorisdottir, I. E., Sigurvinsdottir, R., Asgeirsdottir, B. B., Allegrante,
multidisciplinary educational setting. J. P., & Sigfusdottir, I. D. (2019). Active and Passive Social
Spencer, J. P., Perone, S., & Buss, A. T. (2011). Twenty Years and Media Use and Symptoms of Anxiety and Depressed Mood
Going Strong: A Dynamic Systems Revolution in Motor and Among Icelandic Adolescents. Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and
Cognitive Development: Dynamic Systems Revolution in Motor Social Networking, 22(8), 535–542.
and Cognitive Development. Child Development Perspectives, https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2019.0079
5(4), 260–266. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1750-8606.2011.00194.x Toh, W. X., Yang, H., & Hartanto, A. (2020). Executive Function and
Staiano, A. E., Beyl, R. A., Guan, W., Hendrick, C. A., Hsia, D. S., & Subjective Well-being in Middle and Late Adulthood. The
Newton, R. L. (2018). Home‐based exergaming among children Journals of Gerontology: Series B, 75(6), e69–e77.
with overweight and obesity: A randomized clinical trial. https://doi.org/10.1093/geronb/gbz006
Pediatric Obesity, 13(11), 724–733. Tomasello,. (2008). Origins of human communication. MIT.
https://doi.org/10.1111/ijpo.12438 Tong, Y., Wang, F., & Danovitch, J. (2020). The role of epistemic and
Steinberg, L., Icenogle, G., Shulman, E. P., Breiner, K., Chein, J., social characteristics in children’s selective trust: Three meta‐
Bacchini, D., Chang, L., Chaudhary, N., Giunta, L. D., Dodge, K. analyses. Developmental Science, 23(2), e12895.
A., Fanti, K. A., Lansford, J. E., Malone, P. S., Oburu, P., https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12895
Pastorelli, C., Skinner, A. T., Sorbring, E., Tapanya, S., Tirado, Torrado, R. R., Bontrager, P., Togelius, J., Liu, J., & Perez-Liebana,
L. M. U., … Takash, H. M. S. (2018). Around the world, D. (2018). Deep Reinforcement Learning for General Video
adolescence is a time of heightened sensation seeking and Game AI. 2018 IEEE Conference on Computational Intelligence
immature self‐regulation. Developmental Science, 21(2), e12532. and Games (CIG), 1–8.
https://doi.org/10.1111/desc.12532 https://doi.org/10.1109/CIG.2018.8490422
Stockdale, L. A., Porter, C. L., Coyne, S. M., Essig, L. W., Booth, M., Tsitsika, A. K., Tzavela, E. C., Janikian, M., Ólafsson, K., Iordache,
Keenan‐Kroff, S., & Schvaneveldt, E. (2020). Infants’ response A., Schoenmakers, T. M., Tzavara, C., & Richardson, C. (2014).
to a mobile phone modified still‐face paradigm: Links to maternal Online Social Networking in Adolescence: Patterns of Use in Six
behaviors and beliefs regarding technoference. Infancy, 25(5), European Countries and Links With Psychosocial Functioning.
571–592. https://doi.org/10.1111/infa.12342 Journal of Adolescent Health, 55(1), 141–147.
Stothart, C., Mitchum, A., & Yehnert, C. (2015). The attentional cost https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jadohealth.2013.11.010
of receiving a cell phone notification. Journal of Experimental TTP. (2023). YouTube Leads Young Gamers to Videos of Guns, School
Psychology: Human Perception and Performance, 41(4), 893– Shootings. Tech Transparency Project.
897. https://doi.org/10.1037/xhp0000100 https://www.techtransparencyproject.org/articles/youtube-leads-
Strouse, G. A., Troseth, G. L., O’Doherty, K. D., & Saylor, M. M. young-gamers-to-videos-of-guns-school
(2018). Co-viewing supports toddlers’ word learning from Turel, O., Cavagnaro, D. R., & Meshi, D. (2018). Short abstinence
contingent and noncontingent video. Journal of Experimental from online social networking sites reduces perceived stress,
Child Psychology, 166, 310–326. especially in excessive users. Psychiatry Research, 270, 947–953.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2017.09.005 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.psychres.2018.11.017
Stunden, C., Stratton, K., Zakani, S., & Jacob, J. (2021). Comparing a UNICEF. (2021). Policy guidance on AI for children.
Virtual Reality–Based Simulation App (VR-MRI) With a United Nations Convention on the Rights of the Child (1989).
Standard Preparatory Manual and Child Life Program for Van Den Berghe, R., Verhagen, J., Oudgenoeg-Paz, O., Van Der Ven,
Improving Success and Reducing Anxiety During Pediatric S., & Leseman, P. (2019). Social Robots for Language Learning:
Medical Imaging: Randomized Clinical Trial. Journal of Medical A Review. Review of Educational Research, 89(2), 259–295.
Internet Research, 23(9), e22942. https://doi.org/10.2196/22942 https://doi.org/10.3102/0034654318821286
Suggate, S. P., & Martzog, P. (2021). Children’s sensorimotor Van Den Bulck, J. (2004). Media Use and Dreaming: The Relationship
development in relation to screen-media usage: A two-year Among Television Viewing, Computer Game Play, and
longitudinal study. Journal of Applied Developmental Nightmares or Pleasant Dreams. Dreaming, 14(1), 43–49.
Psychology, 74, 101279. https://doi.org/10.1037/1053-0797.14.1.43
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.appdev.2021.101279 Van Der Schuur, W. A., Baumgartner, S. E., Sumter, S. R., &
Ta, V., Griffith, C., Boatfield, C., Wang, X., Civitello, M., Bader, H., Valkenburg, P. M. (2015). The consequences of media
DeCero, E., & Loggarakis, A. (2020). User Experiences of Social multitasking for youth: A review. Computers in Human Behavior,
Support From Companion Chatbots in Everyday Contexts: 53, 204–215. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2015.06.035
Thematic Analysis. Journal of Medical Internet Research, 22(3), Vansteenkiste, M., & Deci, E. L. (2003). [No title found]. Motivation
e16235. https://doi.org/10.2196/16235 and Emotion, 27(4), 273–299.
Talbot, L. S., McGlinchey, E. L., Kaplan, K. A., Dahl, R. E., & https://doi.org/10.1023/A:1026259005264
Harvey, A. G. (2010). Sleep deprivation in adolescents and adults: Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez,
Changes in affect. Emotion, 10(6), 831–841. A. N., Kaiser, Ł. ukasz, & Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is All
https://doi.org/10.1037/a0020138 you Need. In I. Guyon, U. V. Luxburg, S. Bengio, H. Wallach, R.
Tang, J. K. T., & Tewell, J. (2015). Emerging Human-Toy Interaction Fergus, S. Vishwanathan, & R. Garnett (Eds.), Advances in
Techniques with Augmented and Mixed Reality. In P. C. K. Hung Neural Information Processing Systems (Vol. 30). Curran
(Ed.), Mobile Services for Toy Computing (pp. 77–105). Springer Associates, Inc.
International Publishing. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-319- https://proceedings.neurips.cc/paper_files/paper/2017/file/3f5ee2
21323-1_5 43547dee91fbd053c1c4a845aa-Paper.pdf
Tangen, J. M., Constable, M. D., Durrant, E., Teeter, C., Beston, B. Vigdal, J. S., & Brønnick, K. K. (2022). A Systematic Review of
R., & Kim, J. A. (2011). The role of interest and images in “Helicopter Parenting” and Its Relationship With Anxiety and
slideware presentations. Computers & Education, 56(3), 865– Depression. Frontiers in Psychology, 13.
872. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compedu.2010.10.028 https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2022.872981
Tarabulsy, G. M., Tessier, R., & Kappas, A. (1996). Contingency Vollmer, A.-L., Read, R., Trippas, D., & Belpaeme, T. (2018).
detection and the contingent organization of behavior in Children conform, adults resist: A robot group induced peer
interactions: Implications for socioemotional development in pressure on normative social conformity. Science Robotics, 3(21),
infancy. Psychological Bulletin, 120(1), 25–41. eaat7111. https://doi.org/10.1126/scirobotics.aat7111
https://doi.org/10.1037/0033-2909.120.1.25
43Vouloumanos, A., Hauser, M. D., Werker, J. F., & Martin, A. (2010). Windsor, J., Moraru, A., Nelson, C. A., Fox, N. A., & Zeanah, C. H.
The Tuning of Human Neonates’ Preference for Speech. Child (2013). Effect of foster care on language learning at eight years:
Development, 81(2), 517–527. https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467- Findings from the Bucharest Early Intervention Project. Journal
8624.2009.01412.x of Child Language, 40(3), 605–627.
Wan, E. W., & Chen, R. P. (2021). Anthropomorphism and object https://doi.org/10.1017/S0305000912000177
attachment. Current Opinion in Psychology, 39, 88–93. Wisniewski, B., Zierer, K., & Hattie, J. (2020). The Power of
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.copsyc.2020.08.009 Feedback Revisited: A Meta-Analysis of Educational Feedback
Wang, F., Tong, Y., & Danovitch, J. (2019). Who do I believe? Research. Frontiers in Psychology, 10, 3087.
Children’s epistemic trust in internet, teacher, and peer https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2019.03087
informants. Cognitive Development, 50, 248–260. Wolfe, J., Kar, K., Perry, A., Reynolds, C., Gradisar, M., & Short, M.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.cogdev.2019.05.006 A. (2014). Single night video‐game use leads to sleep loss and
Wang, P., Lei, L., Yu, G., & Li, B. (2020). Social Networking Sites attention deficits in older adolescents ☆. Journal of Adolescence,
Addiction and Materialism Among Chinese Adolescents: A 37(7), 1003–1009.
Moderated Mediation Model Involving Depression and Need to https://doi.org/10.1016/j.adolescence.2014.07.013
Belong. Frontiers in Psychology, 11, 581274. Wolfers, L. N., Kitzmann, S., Sauer, S., & Sommer, N. (2020). Phone
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2020.581274 use while parenting: An observational study to assess the
Wang, Y., Lu, S., & Harter, D. (2021). Multi-Sensor Eye-Tracking association of maternal sensitivity and smartphone use in a
Systems and Tools for Capturing Student Attention and playground setting. Computers in Human Behavior, 102, 31–38.
Understanding Engagement in Learning: A Review. IEEE https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chb.2019.08.013
Sensors Journal, 21(20), 22402–22413. Woolley, J. D., & Ghossainy, M. (2013). Revisiting the Fantasy-
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2021.3105706 Reality Distinction: Children as Naïve Skeptics. Child
Wang, Yifan; Tai, Crystal. (2019). Development, 84(5), 1496–1510.
Https://www.wsj.com/articles/chinas-efforts-to-lead-the-way-in- https://doi.org/10.1111/cdev.12081
ai-start-in-its-classrooms-11571958181. Wall Street Journal. Wright, J. C., Huston, A. C., Reitz, A. L., & Piemyat, S. (1994). Young
https://www.wsj.com/articles/chinas-efforts-to-lead-the-way-in- children’s perceptions of television reality: Determinants and
ai-start-in-its-classrooms-11571958181 developmental differences. Developmental Psychology, 30(2),
Weaver, E., Gradisar, M., Dohnt, H., Lovato, N., & Douglas, P. 229–239. https://doi.org/10.1037/0012-1649.30.2.229
(2010). The effect of presleep video-game playing on adolescent Xie, T., & Pentina, I. (2022). Attachment Theory as a Framework to
sleep. Journal of Clinical Sleep Medicine: JCSM: Official Understand Relationships with Social Chatbots: A Case Study of
Publication of the American Academy of Sleep Medicine, 6(2), Replika. Hawaii International Conference on System Sciences.
184–189. https://doi.org/10.24251/HICSS.2022.258
Weiss, M. D., Baer, S., Allan, B. A., Saran, K., & Schibuk, H. (2011). Xu, J. (2018). Overtrust of Robots in High-Risk Scenarios.
The screens culture: Impact on ADHD. ADHD Attention Deficit Proceedings of the 2018 AAAI/ACM Conference on AI, Ethics,
and Hyperactivity Disorders, 3(4), 327–334. and Society, 390–391. https://doi.org/10.1145/3278721.3278786
https://doi.org/10.1007/s12402-011-0065-z Xu, Y., Branham, S., Deng, X., Collins, P., & Warschauer, M. (2021).
Wellman, H. M., & Liu, D. (2004). Scaling of Theory‐of‐Mind Tasks. Are Current Voice Interfaces Designed to Support Children’s
Child Development, 75(2), 523–541. Language Development? Proceedings of the 2021 CHI
https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1467-8624.2004.00691.x Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–12.
Wentzel, K. R., Jablansky, S., & Scalise, N. R. (2021). Peer social https://doi.org/10.1145/3411764.3445271
acceptance and academic achievement: A meta-analytic study. Xu, Y., Vigil, V., Bustamante, A. S., & Warschauer, M. (2022).
Journal of Educational Psychology, 113(1), 157–180. “Elinor’s Talking to Me!”:Integrating Conversational AI into
https://doi.org/10.1037/edu0000468 Children’s Narrative Science Programming. CHI Conference on
West, R., Swing, E. L., Anderson, C. A., & Prot, S. (2020). The Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–16.
Contrasting Effects of an Action Video Game on Visuo-Spatial https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3502050
Processing and Proactive Cognitive Control. International Xu, Y., & Warschauer, M. (2020). “Elinor Is Talking to Me on the
Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health, 17(14), Screen!” Integrating Conversational Agents into Children’s
5160. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph17145160 Television Programming. Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI
Whiting, W. L., & Murdock, K. K. (2021). Notification alert! Effects Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, 1–8.
of auditory text alerts on attention and heart rate variability across https://doi.org/10.1145/3334480.3383000
three developmental periods. Quarterly Journal of Experimental Yao, Y.-W., Liu, L., Ma, S.-S., Shi, X.-H., Zhou, N., Zhang, J.-T., &
Psychology, 74(11), 1900–1913. Potenza, M. N. (2017). Functional and structural neural
https://doi.org/10.1177/17470218211041851 alterations in Internet gaming disorder: A systematic review and
Wiederhold, B. K. (2018). “Alexa, Are You My Mom?” The Role of meta-analysis. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews, 83, 313–
Artificial Intelligence in Child Development. Cyberpsychology, 324. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neubiorev.2017.10.029
Behavior, and Social Networking, 21(8), 471–472. Yee, N., & Bailenson, J. (2007). The Proteus Effect: The Effect of
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2018.29120.bkw Transformed Self-Representation on Behavior. Human
Williams, D., Martins, N., Consalvo, M., & Ivory, J. D. (2009). The Communication Research, 33(3), 271–290.
virtual census: Representations of gender, race and age in video https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1468-2958.2007.00299.x
games. New Media & Society, 11(5), 815–834. Youn, S. (2009). Determinants of Online Privacy Concern and Its
https://doi.org/10.1177/1461444809105354 Influence on Privacy Protection Behaviors Among Young
Wilmer, H. H., & Chein, J. M. (2016). Mobile technology habits: Adolescents. Journal of Consumer Affairs, 43(3), 389–418.
Patterns of association among device usage, intertemporal https://doi.org/10.1111/j.1745-6606.2009.01146.x
preference, impulse control, and reward sensitivity. Psychonomic Yu, J., Hu, P. J.-H., & Cheng, T.-H. (2015). Role of Affect in Self-
Bulletin & Review, 23(5), 1607–1614. Disclosure on Social Network Websites: A Test of Two
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-016-1011-z Competing Models. Journal of Management Information
Wilmer, H. H., Sherman, L. E., & Chein, J. M. (2017). Smartphones Systems, 32(2), 239–277.
and Cognition: A Review of Research Exploring the Links https://doi.org/10.1080/07421222.2015.1063305
between Mobile Technology Habits and Cognitive Functioning. Zhang, Q., Cao, Y., & Tian, J. (2021a). Effects of Violent Video
Frontiers in Psychology, 8, 605. Games on Aggressive Cognition and Aggressive Behavior.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2017.00605
44Cyberpsychology, Behavior, and Social Networking, 24(1), 5–10. Child Development Experts
https://doi.org/10.1089/cyber.2019.0676
Zhang, Q., Cao, Y., & Tian, J. (2021b). Effects of violent video games
• Kleinknecht, Erica, Ph.D.*, Professor, Pacific
on players’ and observers’ aggressive cognitions and aggressive
behaviors. Journal of Experimental Child Psychology, 203, University Oregon
105005. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jecp.2020.105005 • Lulu, Polina*, Children’s Learning Experience
Zhang, Z., Giménez Mateu, L. G., & Fort, J. M. (2023). Apple Vision
Researcher, Designer, at Childrenlx.com
Pro: A new horizon in psychological research and therapy.
Frontiers in Psychology, 14, 1280213. • Amin Marei, PhD*, Senior Director, Impact &
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyg.2023.1280213 Efficacy, Sesame Workshop
Zisenwine, T., Kaplan, M., Kushnir, J., & Sadeh, A. (2013). Nighttime
• Struttin-Belinoff, Pilar, Product Design Leader, Sr.
Fears and Fantasy–Reality Differentiation in Preschool Children.
Child Psychiatry & Human Development, 44(1), 186–199. Director at Udemy
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10578-012-0318-x • VanderBorght, Mieke, Ph.D*, Founder of The
Zivan, M., Gashri, C., Habuba, N., & Horowitz-Kraus, T. (2022).
Global Digital Mindful Project
Reduced mother-child brain-to-brain synchrony during joint
storytelling interaction interrupted by a media usage. Child *Experts who also contributed to reviewing the report
Neuropsychology, 28(7), 918–937.
https://doi.org/10.1080/09297049.2022.2034774
Additional Reviewers
• Pauliac-Vaujour, Emmanuelle, Ph.D, Attachée for
Science and Technology at the Consulate General of
APPENDIX 1: EXPERTS CONSULTED &
France in San Francisco, Embassy of France in the
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS United States of America
• Penot, Mathieu, M.Sc in Education at Stanford,
Product Manager, IXL Learning
Artificial Intelligence, technology &
product experts
Acknowledgments
• Renard, Gregory*, FDL SETI NASA 2022 AI Award ·
20+ Yrs in NLP & Frugal AI · Driving Companies to • Blumberg, Fran, Ph.D, Professor in the Division of
Success & Excellence · TEDx, Stanford & UC Berkeley Psychological & Educational Services in Fordham
Speaker · Co-Initiator of AI4Humanity for France and University’s Graduate School of Education.
Board President at everyone.AI • Bornstein, Andrea, MBA from Boston University
• Lekshmi-Narayanan, Arun-Balajiee*, PhD Student, • Malvoisin, Celine, Chief Learning Officer at
University of Pittsburgh everyone.AI
• Lohier, Frantz, Ph.D*, Technology Veteran and Book • Rai, Ajay, Sitrova Innovations
Author. Member of Renault’s scientific counsel and • Seret, Anne-Sophie, Executive Director at
Trade Advisor to the French Government (CCEF) everyone.AI
• Monier, Louis, Ph.D, Silicon Valley Veteran, founder • Spell, Dave, Sitrova Innovations
AltaVista, Google, eBay, AirBnb, many start-ups
• Naud, Louise, Machine Learning Scientist, Docugami We extend our sincerest gratitude to the Consulate General
• Senay, Gregory, Ph.D, Natural Language Processing and of France in San Francisco for their support. Their insights and
Machine Learning Scientist, Docugami guidance in forecasting the impact of artificial intelligence on
• Vasseur, Gauthier*, Executive Director at the Berkeley future generations has been instrumental in the production of
Fisher Center for Business Analytics, CEO and Founder this report.
of Data Wise Academy
• Vernhes, Laurent, Engineering Leader with experience in
both startups and large companies like Amazon and
Microsoft
• Wu, Michael, Ph.D*, Chief AI Strategist at PROS,
Instructor at UC Berkeley Extension, and Senior
Research Fellow at Ecole des Ponts Business School.
45