Effects of Distributed Friction Actuation
During Sliding Touch
MacKenzie Harnett, Paras Kumar, Rebecca F. Friesen*, Member, IEEE.
Abstract—Friction modulation allows for a range of different Significant advantages include circumventing the need to use
sensationsandtexturestobesimulatedonflattouchscreens,yetis anintermediarytool—suchasastylusorwearabledevice[7],
largelyunabletorenderfundamentaltactileinteractionssuchas
[8] and more naturalistic sensations relative to vibrotactile
pathfollowingorshapediscriminationduetolackofspatialforce
feedback, rendered directly at the fingertip [9].
distribution across the fingerpad. In order to expand the range
of sensations rendered via friction modulation, in this paper Despitetheirmanycapabilities,modernfrictionmodulating
we explore the possibility of applying spatial feedback on the screens are limited in the range of sensations that they can
fingerpad via differing friction forces on flat touchscreens. To generate [10], including an inability to effectively facilitate
this end, we fabricated six distinct flat surfaces with different
fundamental tasks such as shape recognition, path following,
spatial distributions of friction and observed deformation of the
or edge detection [11]–[13]. Such interactions may require fingerpadskininresponsetomotionalongthesephysicalsamples.
In our study, friction changes that occur sequentially along a spatial distribution of forces across the fingerpad. While
the sliding direction introduced little transitory spatial warping classical implementations of friction modulation can have
such as compression or stretching to the fingerpad, suggesting highspatio-temporalresolutionwithrespecttofingerposition,
limited perceptual differences in comparison to ’classic’ friction
they apply only one friction state to the entire fingerpad
modulation. Distributing friction across the direction of motion,
at any given time, even when attempting to render inter- however, showed pattern-dependent shearing of the fingertip
skin,openingavenuesfornewsensationsandillusionsheretofore fingerpad differences as depicted in Figure 1 (a)-(b). Virtual
unachievable on flat touchscreen surfaces. texture rendering is limited by current friction modulation
Index Terms—Force Rendering, Friction Modulation, Surface techniques as well; several research groups have proposed
Haptics
that the limitations of current generation (hereafter referred to
as ’classic’) friction modulating screens in generating virtual
I. INTRODUCTION
textures are due to a lack of spatio-temporal feedback within
In the modern era, touchscreen devices are ubiquitous and the fingerpad [10], [14]. The integration of spatial feedback
essential for many day-to-day tasks; touchscreens are on our within the finger contact patch has the potential to improve
phones and tablets, in elevators and cars, and anywhere else rendering of existing textures and produce a broader library
we might want to push a button or read a display. They of potential sensations on touchscreens.
make information and education more accessible and sup-
portunprecedentedlevelsofsocialization,globalengagement,
real features classic friction discretized
and communication. However, this extensive integration and
dependency on touchscreens has led to a sharp decline in
haptic feedback often associated with more analog devices.
low friction
This feedback is necessary for dexterous movements, natural
feeling sensations, and complex touch-based tasks. These are
all essential components of interpreting the world around us;
high friction
thus, it is highly beneficial to develop a mechanism by which
this feedback can be reproduced on touchscreens.
A promising method of applying haptic actuation on flat
low friction
screensisfrictionmodulation.Manyrecentfriction-modulated (a) (b) (c)
screens exploit an electroadhesive effect to increase friction
forcesonabarefingerasafunctionofappliedvoltage[1]–[3]. Fig.1. DifferentFrictionRenderingStrategies.Illustrationcomparingreal
texturedsurfaces,classicfrictionmodulation,anddiscretizationofafriction
Thiseffecthasalsobeenaccomplishedbydynamicallyreduc-
modulatingsurface.(a)afingerslidesoverarealsurfacewithphysicalridges,
ing friction forces via ultrasonic vibration of the screen [4]– (b) a finger slides over a friction modulating screen simulating the leftmost
[6]. Regardless of the specific approach, friction modulation realsurfacebyapplyinga’High’or’Low’frictionforceontothefingerpad,
(c)afingerslidesoverafrictionmodulatingscreen,whichissegmentedinto
has the advantage of applying strong, high bandwidth lateral
discretesectionstosimulatethesensationofthefingerpadasitisslidingon
forces directly to the fingertip when in contact with a screen. theborderbetweentwodistinctfrictionstates.
AuthorsarewiththeDepartmentofMechanicalEngineering,TexasA&M In recent years, a variety ofmethods for providing spatially
University,USA(e-mail:rfriesen@tamu.edu).
distributed feedback have been proposed. While previous
*Correspondingauthor.
ManuscriptreceivedXXXXX;revisedXXXXXXX. work has documented some perceptual effects of spatially
4202
voN
8
]CH.sc[
1v96750.1142:viXra
emitdistributed changes in oscillating friction force on the bare
stage
fingerpad via a flat touchscreen [15], none, to the best of our
motion 1 4
knowledge, have characterized the physical response of the
fingerpad to static distributions of friction force. One group
has observed physical displacement of friction-actuated pucks (a) 2 5
wornbetweenafingerandascreen[16],[17].Theirelectroad-
hesive pucks actuate different sections of the fingerpad skin, 3 6
and they found that adjacent sections of the fingerpad would
displace along with the one under the actuated puck, resulting 1.4 µ1
in participants struggling to discriminate between neighboring 1.2 µ2
1 pucks.Bothultrasonicandelectroadhesivefrictionmodulating
(b) 0.8
screenswithsegmentedfrictionfeedbackhavebeendeveloped
0.6
[18], [19], but only with coarse discretization for multi-touch 0.4
applications. 0.2
0
In order to thoroughly evaluate the potential effective-
1 2 3 4
ness of high resolution multi-electrode friction modulating Participant ID
screens, we constructed discretized, multi-friction surfaces
and examined the physical response of the fingerpad when Fig. 2. Sample Configurations (a) Geometries and distribution of friction
foreachofthesixsamplesevaluatedinthisstudy;(b)CoefficientofFriction
travelling along these surfaces. Figure 1 (c) conceptualizes
(COF)measurementsforallfourparticipants.AverageCOFforthehighand
analternativeapproachtosingle-electrodefrictionmodulating low friction samples was calculated to be µ1 = 0.886 and µ2 = 0.376,
surface, instead using spatially distributed friction patterns. respectively.
We anticipate that the outcome of this work will inform
future design of friction modulating screens, in the event
all pieces were leveled to the same height. The first three
that discretized friction surfaces expand and enhance the user
samples apply an overall decrease in friction at the transition,
tactile experience. The work presented here utilizes samples
whiletheremainingthreeapplyanincreaseinfriction.Twoof
withreal,physicalchangesinfriction;weoptedtofirstobserve
the samples (1, 4) orient the only resultant change in friction
fingerpad behavior on real friction patterns as opposed to
sequentially along the direction of motion, and the remaining
immediately developing multi-electrode friction modulating
four (2, 3, 5, & 6) also include a change in friction across the
screens.Wehavedonethistoverifythepresenceoffingerpad
direction of motion.
behaviors unique to discretized friction surfaces so as to
A tribometer, which consisted of a lateral stage (Thorlabs
test the merit of the proposed touchscreen design prior to
DDS300) and two force sensors (ATI nano43), was used to
manufacturing.Throughthisweaimtoexplorethepotentialof
measure the coefficient of friction (COF) for both the treated
2D tactile screens in simulating a broader range of sensations
and untreated acrylic surfaces across all study participants.
in the tactile space and facilitate novel 2D virtual tactile
The surfaces were moved laterally under each fingerpad at
environments, such as rendering distinct shapes or enabling
20mm/swithanormalforcebetween0.2-0.3N,mirroringthe
edge detection.
conditions of the experimental procedure. A light dusting of
II. METHODSANDMATERIALS cornstarch powder was applied to the fingerpad prior to these
measurements, again to mirror experimental conditions. The
When building test surfaces that have discrete areas with
lateral and normal force data was collected, averaged across
distinct friction properties, we set two primary design objec-
0.7 seconds of data (1.4kHz sampling rate), and the ratio of
tives. Firstly, we designed surfaces to be as transparent as
the lateral and normal forces was used to calculate the COFs.
possible so as to enable visual capture of skin deformation
These values were found to be, on average, 0.886 for the
within a finger contact patch. Secondly, we looked for surface
plain acrylic sample and 0.376 for the treated sample across
finisheswithsubstantiallydifferentfrictioncoefficients.Using
participants (see: Figure 2).
afinelytexturedsurfacecoatingtolowerfriction,wegenerated
six samples with distinct interface geometries to determine
B. Marker Application
whether and how the fingerpad contact area deforms when
straddling multiple friction states. Prior work [20]–[23] has implemented an ’optical flow’
method to evaluate fingerpad deformation through the motion
A. Sample Preparation
of landmarks on the fingerpad (e.g., fingerprint ridges). While
A total of six 25x150mm2 surface geometries were con- this technique yields high resolution of strain, it was imprac-
structed and are illustrated in Figure 2. Each sample consists tical in our case due to limited visibility through our samples
ofacrylicpieceswithtwodifferentfrictioncoefficients.Lower caused by our friction-lowering textured spray. Instead, we
friction pieces were treated with a clear spray with a satin opted for dark markers applied to the fingerpad to ensure
finish (Krylon K05562007, Satin) to lower the coefficient of uninterruptedtrackingoffourdistinctpointsthroughthesemi-
friction (COF) while maintaining sample transparency, and transparent samples [24]. A 2x2 marker grid was applied to
fo
tneiciffeoc
)FOC(
noitcirf(a)
load nth crop image extract and
video frame and isolate label centers
(a) (b)
dot objects using KLT
algorithm
Fig. 3. Marker Application (a) finger with stencil, (b) participant fingers
post-tattooapplication.
R1 R1
33
1 y R2 y R2
4 22
(b)
r1A rnA
44 r1B rnB
2 x x
frame 1 frames 1...n
3 55 1
Fig.5. MarkerTracking(a)VisualizationforImageProcessingandlabelling
of2-by-2dotgrid.(b)Visualizationoftotaldotdisplacementvaluesusedin
(a) (b)
absoluteandrelativedisplacementcalculations
Fig.4. ExperimentalSetupIllustrationoffinalexperimentalsetup.(a)Top
view,(b)SideView.(1)MotorizedLinearStage,(2)Sample,(3)FingerBrace,
(4)SampleReservoir/Mount,(5)Camera.Weonlyrecorddataasthereservoir Prior to interacting with any sample, participants were
movestotheright,relativetothereader. asked to wash their hands with isopropyl alcohol and ap-
ply a light dusting of cornstarch-based powder (Clubman)
to their fingerpad to reduce sweat buildup and stick-slip
the tip of the right index finger using temporary tattoo ink
effects. Each surface sample was secured within the frame
(INKBOX). Each marker has a diameter of 1.5mm and a
of a moving platform to ensure constant height, then moved
center-to-center spacing of 4mm. A custom stencil was used
laterally with respect to a stationary finger via a motorized
to ensure precise application of the marker grid as shown
stage. Index fingers were braced against a finger holder to
in Figure 3. Unlike traditional ink, the temporary tattoo ink
ensure the finger up to the distal joint remained fixed, and
penetrates the epidermis and does not smear during sliding
theparticipantfocusedonmaintainingconstantpressingforce
touch.
throughout motorized swipes. Samples were actuated along
the participant’s fingerpad at a speed of 20mm/s for a total
III. DATACOLLECTION
distance of 100mm. For the duration of each trial, fingerpad
We recorded and evaluated the deformation of the marker deformation was recorded using a camera (Imaging Source
grid tattooed on the fingerpad for the six different sample DFK 37BUX273) mounted directly below the sample. The
configurations across four participants (2 female, ages 24-37). camera had a maximum resolution of 1440 x 1080 pixels
This study was approved by the Institutional Review Board (px) and a frame rate of 30 frames-per-second (FPS). After
of Texas A&M University (IRB2024-0539), and participants three trials, the next sample configuration was placed in the
were compensated for their participation. We began with a samplereservoirandtheprocedurewasrepeated.Atotalof18
small number of participants due to the time intensive nature trials were collected and evaluated for each participant. The
of the study (approximately four hours), multi-day tattoo experimental setup is illustrated in Figure 4.
application procedure, and because the study did not collect
subjective judgements prone to additional noise.
A. Image Processing and Marker Tracking
A minimum of one day before testing, each participant’s
right index finger was tattooed with the 2x2 marker grid. Videoswerecroppedtotheareaofinterest.Eachframewas
Each participants tattooed fingerpad is presented in Figure 3. thresholded to convert into a black and white image, isolating
Immediatelybeforetesting,participantswereaskedtopractice the four markers from surrounding noise. These markers were
applying a normal pressing force kept within the range 0.2— labelled, sorted, and their positions tracked using the Kanade-
0.3N to a flat surface affixed to a force sensor (SingleTact Lucas-Tomasi (KLT) feature-tracking algorithm [25], [26]
8mm Diameter, 10N/2.2lb Force). The applied force was in Matlab. This process is illustrated in Figure 5(a). The
monitored on an external display. After participants were able initial position of each marker centroid was extracted from
to consistently apply a force within the specified range a the first frame of the video and used to determine the pixel
minimum of three times in a row, they proceeded to data to mm scaling ratio using the 4mm absolute distance between
collection. markers.Foreachframe,themarkercentroidswereidentified,demarkedwithacoloreddottoindicateaccuratetracking,and
1 2 3 4 5 6
their (x, y) values stored in an array.
Data was low-pass filtered (f = 5Hz) to remove
pass .5
mechanicalnoise.Theframeatwhichtheleadingedgeofdots
0
crossedthefrictiontransitionwasmanuallyextractedfromthe
videodataandlabeledastimet1.Thetrailingedgeofdotshits
thefrictiontransition5frameslater(0.167seconds)attimet2. .5
Werefertothetimebetweent1andt2asthetransitionperiod, 0
during which the fingerpad is spanning the friction transition.
Dot displacement for the nth frame, d n, was calculated as .5
the difference between current position r n and the position at 0
frame one, r .
1
d =r −r (1)
n n 1 .5
Here, frame one is defined as five frames before the friction 0
transition hits the leading edge of the finger, at which point
t1 t2 t1 t2 t1 t2 t1 t2 t1 t2 t1 t2
the skin had reached a steady state sliding on the first friction time (s)
region. Relative displacement is calculated as the difference
between two positions A and B using the corresponding Fig. 6. Total Displacement Plots Total displacement plots summarizing
all participants, samples, and trials. Each row of plots corresponds to the
variables defined in Figure 5(b):
averaged results across three trials for each participant, with the results of
each individual trial in light grey. The vertical grey lines indicate when the
d =r −r (2)
nAB nA nB leadingandtrailingcolumnsofdotshitsthefrictiontransition,respectively.
Forallplots,t2-t1=.167seconds.
When calculating final overall displacement, we compared
the average displacements from the five frames immediately
preceding and following the transition period: 1 4
(cid:80)m+4d (cid:80)5d
∆d final = m 5 i − 51 i (3) 1 leading column
trailing column
Here, m corresponds to the frame at which the trailing edge 0.5 difference
of markers crosses the transition region. (a)
0
IV. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
Dot displacement for all participants, samples, and trials is -0.5
summarized in Figure 6. Skin behavior for a given participant
across trials was consistent; the similar behavior of individual
0.2
trials are shown in lighter gray and averaged for each par-
0.1 ticipant and sample combination. Behavior across participants
was more variable despite efforts to ensure consistent touch (b) 0
conditions. In the following analysis, we observe trends in -0.1
P1 P2
bothtransitoryandsustainedskindeformationacrossdifferent -0.2 P3 P4
sample types.
t1 t2 t1 t2
time (s) time (s)
A. Transitory Friction Change
Whenslidingacrosssamples1and4,thefingerexperiences Fig. 7. Relative Displacement Plots Relative displacement plots for sam-
a transitory period with multiple distributed friction forces ples 1 and 4. (a) Comparison of relative displacement with total column
displacement,averagedacrossallparticipants.(b)Zoomed-incomparisonof
before returning to a single, new friction force. Across all
participant results for relative displacement. Negative displacement indicate
samples, the grid, on average, moved in bulk as the leading compressionofthemarkergrid,positivedisplacementindicatesstretchingof
edgeofthefingerpadtransitionedontothesucceedingfriction thegrid.Shadedregionrepresentsthestandarderror.
state. That is, all dots began displacing at the same point in
time, regardless of when they individually hit the transition.
ThisissummarizedinFigure7(a),whichshowsthatdifference and 4 had compression or stretching, respectively, between
betweentheleadingandtrailingcolumnsvariedverylittleover the columns as the trailing edge crossed the transition period.
the transition region, especially relative to total displacement. Regardless of these differences, the largest changes in relative
The magnitude of change in total displacement was more column displacement are sustained post-transition, indicating
dramatic for low-to-high transitions than for high-to-low tran- that they are due not to the distributed friction states but to
sitions. We did see differences in skin behavior between the overall change in friction.
individual participants; Figure 7(b) shows that participants 1 Theseresultsdemonstratethatsequentialchangesinfriction
)mm(
tnemecalpsid
nmuloc
egaraeva
nmuloc
evitaler
)mm(
tnemecalpsid
)mm(
tnemecalpsid1 2 3 4 5 6
high starting friction
low starting friction
2
1
1
2
0
3
-1
4
-2
(µ2-µ1) 0 -(µ2-µ1)
Fig.8. DeformationVisualization.Visualizationofthefinaldeformationof difference in post-transition
each dot grid for each sample. The middle four rows depict final relative
friction coefficients
deformation for each participant, averaged across 3 trials. The final row
represents the averaged results across participants. To improve visibility,
displacementswerescaledbyafactorof10. Fig.9. ShearBarcharts.Resultsforsheardisplacementacross3trialsfor4
participants.ThesamplescorrespondingtoeachCOFaredepictedabovethe
plot.Errorbarscorrespondtothestandarderrorofeachdistribution.
along the fingerpad’s motion induce primarily simultaneous
bulk movement of the fingerpad, which would not deviate
distributions of friction. Shear displacement (∆x) was calcu-
significantly from the behavior expected on a single electrode
lated as the x-axis difference in displacement between the
friction modulating screen. Therefore, we anticipate limited
centers of each row of markers before and after they cross
benefits from distributing friction along the fingerpad path
over the sample transition region.
for the purposes of new sensations enabling edge detection
or contour rendering. Additionally, the magnitude of total ∆x =∆x −∆x (4)
avg R1 R2
displacement for high-to-low changes in friction was much
less dramatic than seen in the low-to-high cases despite an The difference in the post-transition friction coefficient (∆µ)
equalabsolutechangeinfriction.Deformationbehavioristhus was calculated as the difference between the bottom and top
dependent on the order in which different friction states are halves of the second half of the sample’s friction coefficients.
encountered.
∆µ=µ −µ (5)
B T
B. Sustained Friction Change
Summarized shearing is shown in Figure 9. For both the
To more thoroughly understand sustained changes in defor- low-to-high and high-to-low cases, the shear displacement
mation, we visualized final marker displacement relative to increases as the difference in the post-transition friction coef-
starting position; see equation 3. ficientsbecomesmorepositive.Regardlessofstartingfriction,
These averaged relative displacements were then used to the fingerpad shears strongly in one direction when friction is
recreate the final deformed state of the fingerpad, which is high on top and low on the bottom row, and shears weakly in
illustrated in Figure 8. As we anticipated, there was minimal the other direction when friction is low on top and high on
movement along the y-axis, perpendicular to swipe direction. the bottom row. By distributing friction across the fingerpad’s
Instead, much of the resultant deformation manifested as path,aswasdoneinsamples(2-3)and(5-6),wecaninfluence
shearing between the top and bottom rows. the resultant shearing behavior of the fingerpad.
Changes were particularly dramatic for the low-to-high Consistent with the results from IV-A, the magnitude of
changes, where shearing was readily observed across all shear displacement for the low-to-high samples is generally
samples.Thischangewaslessdramaticwhenonlythebottom larger than that of the high-to-low samples, but both show the
row of dots cross onto a high friction state (sample (5)), as same trend.
opposedtogreatershearingwhenonlythetoprowhitsahigh These results promise new patterns of deformation actuated
friction state (sample (6)). by statically distributed friction across the fingerpad path.
After confirming the existence of shearing with our visual- The ability to control the deformation of the fingerpad
ization, we quantified how shearing was affected by different can facilitate novel sensations that classic friction modulating
DI
tnapicitraP
egareva
trats
dne
)mm(
tnemecalpsid
raehsscreens are incapable of generating due to innate ’whole- [4] T. Watanabe and S. Fukui, “A method for controlling tactile sensation
finger’ changes in friction. of surface roughness using ultrasonic vibration,” in Robotics and Au-
tomation,1995.Proceedings.,1995IEEEInternationalConferenceon,
vol.1,pp.1134–1139,IEEE,1995.
C. Study Limitations and Future Work
[5] L.Winfield,J.Glassmire,J.E.Colgate,andM.Peshkin,“T-pad:Tactile
This work focused on fingerpad deformation on real tex- pattern display through variable friction reduction,” in EuroHaptics
Conference, 2007 and Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual
tured samples, complicating direct perceptual comparison to Environment and Teleoperator Systems. World Haptics 2007. Second
temporal changes in whole-finger friction only possible on Joint,pp.421–426,IEEE,2007.
friction modulating devices. Our results motivate construction [6] M.Wiertlewski,R.FentonFriesen,andJ.E.Colgate,“Partialsqueeze
filmlevitationmodulatesfingertipfriction,”Proceedingsofthenational
ofspatially-distributedfrictionmodulationsurfaces,butfuture academyofsciences,vol.113,no.33,pp.9210–9215,2016.
work must validate whether such spatial distributions can cre- [7] H. Culbertson, J. Unwin, and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Modeling and
ateperceptuallydistinctsensationsthatmirrordistinctpatterns renderingrealistictexturesfromunconstrainedtool-surfaceinteractions,”
IEEEtransactionsonhaptics,vol.7,no.3,pp.381–393,2014.
in skin deformation. Furthermore, our experimental setup was
[8] R. F. Friesen and Y. Vardar, “Perceived realism of virtual textures
limitedinlowspatialresolutionofthe2x2markergridandlow rendered by a vibrotactile wearable ring display,” IEEE Transactions
temporal resolution of the 30 fps collection rate; we believe
onHaptics,2023.
[9] S. Choi and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Vibrotactile display: Perception,
this resolution was adequate for observing gross trends, but technology,andapplications,”ProceedingsoftheIEEE,vol.101,no.9,
subsequentworkcanmorecloselyexaminesubtledeformation pp.2093–2104,2012.
effects occurring in the short transition window for abrupt [10] R.F.Friesen,R.L.Klatzky,M.A.Peshkin,andJ.E.Colgate,“Building
a navigable fine texture design space,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics,
friction changes. Increasing grid resolution would allow us to
vol.14,no.4,pp.897–906,2021.
bettercharacterizedistributeddeformationacrossthefingerpad [11] P. Gershon, R. L. Klatzky, H. Palani, and N. A. Giudice, “Visual,
under different conditions. Finally, this work only observed tangible, and touch-screen: comparison of platforms for displaying
simplegraphics,”AssistiveTechnology,vol.28,no.1,pp.1–6,2016.
contact during lateral finger motion in one direction, and for
[12] B.Sadia,A.Sadic,M.Ayyildiz,andC.Basdogan,“Explorationstrate-
only two friction forces. In vivo interactions with touchscreen giesfortactilegraphicsdisplayedbyelectrovibrationonatouchscreen,”
surfaces involve sliding the finger in all directions, and it
InternationalJournalofHuman-ComputerStudies,vol.160,p.102760,
2022.
wouldbeinterestingtoseehowshearingoccursalongdifferent
[13] R. H. Osgouei, J. R. Kim, and S. Choi, “Identification of primitive
axesoffingermotionandgreaterrangesoffrictiondifferences. geometricalshapesrenderedusingelectrostaticfrictiondisplay,”in2016
IEEEHapticsSymposium(HAPTICS),pp.198–204,2016.
[14] M. Wiertlewski, J. Lozada, and V. Hayward, “The spatial spectrum
V. CONCLUSION
of tangential skin displacement can encode tactual texture,” IEEE
This study examined the effects of discrete friction forces TransactionsonRobotics,vol.27,no.3,pp.461–472,2011.
[15] H. Ishizuka, K. Suzuki, K. Terao, H. Takao, F. Shimokawa, and
actuatedacrossthefingerpad,inordertoascertainthepotential
H.Kajimoto,“Evaluationofmulti-electrodeeffectsonelectrovibration
of multi-electrode friction modulating screens to manipulate tactile stimulation,” Transactions of The Japan Institute of Electronics
finger skin deformation patterns in new ways. We found Packaging,vol.10,pp.E17–004–1–E17–004–8,2017.
[16] S.Tan,R.D.Roosa,R.L.Klatzky,M.A.Peshkin,andJ.E.Colgate,
that discretized friction may be unable to provide the high
“Asoftwearabletactiledeviceusinglateralskinstretch,”in2021IEEE
resolutionfeedbacknecessaryforedgedetection,asthefinger WorldHapticsConference(WHC),pp.697–702,IEEE,2021.
skin moves largely in bulk when passing over friction transi- [17] S. Tan, R. L. Klatzky, M. A. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate, “Pixelite: A
thin and wearable high bandwidth electroadhesive haptic array,” IEEE
tions. There may be opportunities for other novel sensations,
TransactionsonHaptics,2023.
however; we observed controllable shearing direction when [18] G. Ilkhani and E. Samur, “Creating multi-touch haptic feedback on
thefingerspanneddiscretefrictionregionsdistributedperpen- an electrostatic tactile display,” in 2018 IEEE Haptics Symposium
(HAPTICS),pp.163–168,IEEE,2018.
dicular to direction of motion. Future work aims to determine
[19] K.KatumuandJ.L.Gorlewicz,“Usingmodalsuperpositionforgener-
the extent by which the fingerpad can be manipulated and atinglocalizedtactileeffectsonvariablefrictiontouchscreens,”in2016
deformed, how individuals perceive these distributed forces, ieeehapticssymposium(haptics),pp.211–216,IEEE,2016.
[20] N.Huloux,L.Willemet,andM.Wiertlewski,“Howtomeasurethearea
and further define potential applications. The imaging method
ofrealcontactofskinonglass,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.14,
defined in this paper also allows us to image through semi- no.2,pp.235–241,2021.
transparenttexturedsurfaces,whichwillhelpcharacterizeand [21] A.Barrea,B.P.Delhaye,P.Lefe`vre,andJ.-L.Thonnard,“Perceptionof
partialslipsundertangentialloadingofthefingertip,”Scientificreports,
catalog the physical response of the fingerpad in contact with
vol.8,no.1,p.7032,2018.
a variety of textured surfaces. [22] M. Tada and T. Kanade, “An imaging system of incipient slip for
modellinghowhumanperceivesslipofafingertip,”inThe26thAnnual
REFERENCES International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
BiologySociety,vol.1,pp.2045–2048,IEEE,2004.
[1] O. Bau, I. Poupyrev, A. Israr, and C. Harrison, “Teslatouch: electrovi- [23] B. Delhaye, A. Barrea, B. B. Edin, P. Lefevre, and J.-L. Thonnard,
bration for touch surfaces,” in Proceedings of the 23nd annual ACM “Surfacestrainmeasurementsoffingertipskinundershearing,”Journal
symposium on User interface software and technology, pp. 283–292, ofTheRoyalSocietyInterface,vol.13,no.115,p.20150874,2016.
2010. [24] S. Kaneko and H. Kajimoto, “Measurement system for finger skin
[2] Y. Vardar, B. Gu¨c¸lu¨, and C. Basdogan, “Effect of waveform on tac- displacement on a textured surface using index matching,” Applied
tile perception by electrovibration displayed on touch screens,” IEEE Sciences,vol.10,no.12,p.4184,2020.
transactionsonhaptics,vol.10,no.4,pp.488–499,2017. [25] B.D.LucasandT.Kanade,“Aniterativeimageregistrationtechnique
[3] C. Shultz, M. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate, “The application of tactile,
withanapplicationtostereovision,”inIJCAI’81:7thinternationaljoint
audible, and ultrasonic forces to human fingertips using broadband
conferenceonArtificialintelligence,vol.2,pp.674–679,1981.
electroadhesion,”IEEEtransactionsonhaptics,vol.11,no.2,pp.279– [26] C. Tomasi and T. Kanade, “Detection and tracking of point,” Int J
290,2018.
ComputVis,vol.9,no.137-154,p.3,1991.