Socially-Aware Opinion-Based Navigation with Oval Limit Cycles
Giulia d’Addato1,3, Placido Falqueto2, Luigi Palopoli2, Daniele Fontanelli3
Abstract—Whenhumansmoveinasharedspace,theychoose and reactive adjustments to our trajectories operates in strict
navigation strategies that preserve their mutual safety. At the coordination. They are so deeply embedded in our social
same time, each human seeks to minimise the number of
behaviour that their use hardly touches the conscious level.
modifications to her/his path. In order to achieve this result,
Socially-aware navigation, or simply social navigation, is a
humans use unwritten rules and reach a consensus on their
decisionsaboutthemotiondirectionbyexchangingnon-verbal research area that seeks to approximate the logic of human
messages. They then implement their choice in a mutually behaviour summarised above on a robot.
acceptable way. Socially-aware navigation denotes a research Related work. An intense research activity on social navi-
effort aimed at replicating this logic inside robots. Existing
gationinthepastfewyearshasdelivereddifferentstrategies
resultsfocuseitheronhowrobotscanparticipateinnegotiations
aimed at ensuring a safe and efficient interaction between
withhumans,oronhowtheycanmoveinasociallyacceptable
way. We propose a holistic approach in which the two aspects robots and humans [3], [4]. Research in this area includes
are jointly considered. Specifically, we show that by combining various approaches designed to address the complexities
opinion dynamics (to reach a consensus) with vortex fields (to of navigating in dynamic environments shared with hu-
generatesociallyacceptabletrajectories),theresultoutperforms
mans, with both proactive and reactive approaches being
the application of the two techniques in isolation.
explored[5],[6].Inshort,proactivestrategiesattempttopre-
dict and adapt to human behaviour, while reactive strategies
I. INTRODUCTION
respond to real-time environmental changes.
An increasing number of applications requires mobile
Reactive methods are essential when people in a crowd
robots to move through human-populated areas. Significant
movedependingonthesurroundingsituation,requiringrapid
examples include automated guided vehicles (AGVs) used
re-planningoftherobot’strajectory.However,asthenumber
for intra-factory logistics and warehouse management, mo-
ofpeopleincreases,accurateandfastpathplanningbecomes
bile robots used for shipping and delivery in urban environ-
more difficult, increasing the computational time required to
ments, and assistive robots used to support the mobility of
findtheoptimalpath.Morecomputationallyefficientreactive
disabled and elderly users. The nature of these applications
methods are artificial potential fields [7], [8], the velocity
requires the robot to accomplish its task reliably and effi-
obstacle (VO) [9], and the social force model (SFM) [10],
ciently. At the same time, the safety of human bystanders
[11]. SFM describes pedestrian movement as influenced by
must not be imperilled. Last but not least, the trajectories
social forces that guide acceleration towards desired veloci-
followed by the robot should be perceived as smooth and
ties while maintaining interpersonal distances. Although ef-
human-friendly as those followed by its human counterparts
fective for large groups, SFM struggles with individual-level
(this is even truer when the robot is carrying or guiding a
interactions in open environments. Enhanced models, such
human). To generate this kind of trajectory on a robot, we
astheHeadedSocialForceModel(HSFM)[12],incorporate
needtotakeinspirationfromwhathumansdo.Whenhumans
pedestrian heading to better predict non-holonomic motion.
move in a shared and crowded space, they exchange a short
Proactivestrategies,ontheotherhand,accountformutual
but intense stream of non-verbal signals to decide which
interactionsincrowdedsituations,enablingrobotstocooper-
directioneachofthemshouldtake.Onceeachhumanmakes
atewithhumans.Theseapproachesinvolvepredictinghuman
up her/his mind on the direction to follow, s/he implements
behavior and proactively planning a collision-free path. Ex-
thechoicebymodifyingthetrajectorythats/hewillfollowin
amplesincludeproactivemodelsbasedonSFM[13],opinion
thenextfewseconds.Thismodificationminimisestheenergy
dynamics [14], and dynamic path planning techniques such
spent and the strain on the junctures [1], but at the same
as the Morphing algorithm [15].
time it respects the private space of the other humans [2].
Sampling-based motion planning methods, such as
This complex set of communication protocols, social rules
Rapidly-exploring Random Tree (RRT) [16], [17] and Risk-
RRT [18], are also commonly used for dynamic environ-
1 Project co-funded by the European Union – Next Generation Eu ments. However, these methods can struggle with the com-
- under the National Recovery and Resilience Plan (NRRP), Mission 4 plexitiesofinteractivebehaviorsinhuman-populatedspaces.
Component 1 Investment 4.1 - Decree No. 118 (2/03/2023) of Italian Finally, learning-based approaches, including reinforcement
Ministry of University and Research - Concession Decree No. 2333
learning (RL) [19], deep RL (DRL) [20], and inverse RL
(22/12/2023)oftheItalianMinistryofUniversityandResearch,Projectcode
D93C23000470005, within the Italian National Program PhD Programme (IRL) [21], [22], are increasingly being explored for crowd
inAutonomousSystems(DAuSy). navigation. These methods are promising but often lack
2 Department of Information Engineering and Computer Science, Uni-
analyticaltractabilityandcanbecomputationallydemanding
versita` diTrento,Italy.
3 DepartmentofIndustrialEngineering,Universita` diTrento,Italy. in real-time scenarios.
4202
voN
7
]OR.sc[
1v87640.1142:viXraPaper Contribution. In the short report above, we have indicating whether agent i can observe agent k, and b is an
i
mentioned two important classes of work: proactive and internal bias or external stimulus.
reactive path planning. In the first class, the robot negotiates This model can be extended specifically to the robot
with humans the direction of motion that each should take, navigation framework [14], focusing on forming opinions to
buttheimplementationofthedecisionisnotguaranteedtobe drive its motion through a space with human movers. The
safe and does not meet the quality standards that the human evolutionoftherobot’sopinionz aboutitspassingdirection
r
requires. In the second, the decision is taken and the robot (left if z >0, right if z <0) is given by:
r r
concentrates on implementing it through a human-friendly
z˙ =−d z +u tanh(α z +γ zˆ +b ), (2)
trajectory. The missing piece in this case is a mechanism r r r r r r r h r
that generates the “strategic” decision. where zˆ = tan(η ) approximates the human’s perceived
h h
In this paper, we propose to merge the two phases into opinion on passing direction, with η being the relative
h
a unified holistic approach. We use social dynamics to heading of the human. The robot’s attention u , critical to
r
implement the negotiation phase [14], and potential fields overcome deadlocks, is modelled dynamically in this way:
with oval-shaped limit cycles to generate a socially-aware
τ u˙ =−u +g(κ,χ,R ), (3)
trajectory [8]. The opinion dynamics module generates a u r r r
variable that encodes the decision to be made by the robot where g is a function proportional to human-robot distance,
(‘turn right’, ‘turn left’ or ‘go straight’) and consequently as κ and χ measure the relative approach of the human and
this variable modifies the geometric parameters of the limit R is a critical distance parameter. A significant advantage
r
cycle. As shown in the paper, the combined use of the two of this approach is the guaranteed deadlock-free navigation.
techniques fills the conceptual gaps that we have identified As the robot’s attention u surpasses the critical value R ,
r r
foreachofthem,leadingtoasignificantimprovementinthe theneutralopinionz =0becomesunstable,andthesystem
r
resulting behaviour of the robot. goes through a pitchfork bifurcation, leading to one of two
stable equilibrium points (strong opinions for passing left or
II. BACKGROUND
right). Thismechanism ensuresthat therobot decideson the
This section introduces the methods employed in this pa- passing direction, even in the absence of clear cues from
per,detailingeachcomponentindividuallyandthencombin- the human. This proactive mechanism ensures that the robot
ingthemintheproposedapproach,whichintegratespotential dynamicallyadaptstonewencountersandmaintainsefficient
fields with limit cycles and nonlinear opinion dynamics. progress towards its goal.
However, in [14], the robot’s heading θ changes accord-
A. Nonlinear Opinion Dynamics r
ing to a parameter angle β adjusting the robot’s deviation
r
The nonlinear opinion dynamics model [23] is a tech- from its direct path and balancing between reliable collision
nique to emulate the process of opinion formation based avoidance and path efficiency. This choice is not guaranteed
on the communication of verbal and non-verbal information tobecollision-freeinhighlycomplexscenariosorforincor-
betweenhumans.Inhuman-awaremotionplanningandnav- rect parameter settings for β . Indeed, if β is too low, the
r r
igation,thismethodcanbeusedtoenabletherobottoadopt difference between the reference and actual trajectories will
human-likenavigationprotocolsandquicklyformadecisive beminimal,butthiswillresultinashorterdistancebetween
opinion about whether to pass an approaching human on the the robot and the human, with potential risks. Conversely,
leftortherightside[14],thusenablingareal-timetrajectory if it is too high, there is more safety, but less efficiency.
modification to avoid collisions. This process is driven by a For this reason, a trade-off between efficiency and safety is
variablemodellingtherobot’sattentiontosocialcues.When required, but an optimal value for β could be difficult to
r
the attention exceeds a threshold, the state associated with find, especially when human movements are unpredictable
theneutralopinionisdriventoanewequilibriumassociated and the lack of cooperation leads to a critical passage. As
with a directional preference. discussedinthenextsections,toovercometheselimitations,
Consider a system where each agent i forms opinions weintegrateopiniondynamicswithpotentialfieldsandlimit
about two options. The opinion z i ∈ R represents agent i’s cycles, always ensuring collision avoidance thanks to the
preference for the first option if z i > 0, and for the second addition of a vortex repulsive field around humans.
one if z < 0. A neutral opinion is represented by z = 0.
i i
B. Potential Fields and Oval Limit Cycles
The continuous update of agent i’s opinion is described by
the following equation: The combination of classical potential fields with limit
  cycles,describedin[8],aimsatfacilitatingthenavigationin
(cid:88) dynamic environments filled with obstacles and pedestrians.
z˙
i
=−d iz i+u itanhα iz i+γ
i
a ikz k+b i, (1)
By merging these methods and introducing an innovative
k̸=i
oval shape for the limit cycles, the paths generated are not
where d > 0 determines how quickly the influence of past only short and smooth, but also socially acceptable and
i
opinionsdecays,u ≥0representstheagent’sattentionlevel, comfortable, especially for assistive robots. This approach
i
α >0 and γ ∈R weight the influence of the agent’s own respects the safety and psychological comfort of humans by
i i
opinionandtheopinionsofothers,a isabinaryparameter maintaining a clear distance from their personal space.
ikBridge between
Optitrack opinion dynamics
Human and Nonlinear Opinion z and potential fields Rotation Potential Attractive New robot
Robot poses DO yp ni an mio in
cs
Attention u z ɣ vs oe rn tese
x
ɣ
fi
o elf
d
lf ii mel id ts
c
w ycit lh
es
and fr oe rp cu el ssive heading
States update
Fig.1. Thegeneraldiagramofourframework.
First, the robot moves by following the gradient direction
of the potential function, which naturally attracts it to its
goal, while dynamic obstacles are treated in this context as
sources of repulsive fields. However, the use of repulsive
potentials alone may have some limitations, especially with
(a) z<0,γ=1 (b) z>0,γ=−1
moving obstacles, as the trajectories generated can be jerky
and potentially leading to oscillatory behaviours. To avoid Fig. 2. Passage preference, i.e., rotation direction γ, depending on the
value of z: if z < 0, then γ = 1, i.e. the vortex field is clockwise; vice
these problems, a vortex field is used to steer the robot
versa,ifz>0,thenγ=−1,i.e.thevortexfieldiscounterclockwise.
towards a limit cycle, which creates a closed trajectory
around the obstacles as the robot approaches them.
The use of oval shapes instead of the traditional circular Theorientationoftheoval’smajoraxisalsoplaysacrucial
ones[24]forthelimitcyclesreducesthetrajectorycurvature, role in the avoidance manoeuvre. A practical approach to
minimisesthejerk,andrespectsthehumans’personalspace. setting this orientation is to align the oval’s heading towards
The oval limit cycle is governed by the implicit equation: therobot,namelyalongthehuman-robotaxis.Thisreasoning
follows from a psychological study according to which, in
(cid:18)
x
(cid:19)2 (cid:18)
x
(cid:19)2
ρ=1− 1 − 2 eνx1, (4) general, humans feel safer if the “bypass” trajectory occurs
b 1 b 2 as early as possible, respecting the proxemics limit. In this
sense, regardless of the human’s direction of advance, the
whereb andb arethesemi-axislengthsandν isadeforma-
1 2
robot starts to deviate as soon as possible.
tion parameter (the oval reduces to an ellipse when ν =0).
The equations for the oval trajectory, with feedforward and
III. OURMETHODOLOGY
feedback components, are derived as follows:
As stated in Section II-A, the pure opinion dynamics
(cid:20) (cid:21)
x x ν
x = −b 2eν/2x1; b 1e−ν/2x1 +x2eν/2x1 , method does not always generate trajectories respecting
ff 1b 2 2b 1 2 2b 1b 2 human comfort and can lead to collisions if the parameters
x =[x −x ;x ]ρ. arenotproperlyconfiguredorifthescenariosareparticularly
fb 1 t 2
(5) complex.Thepotentialfieldstrategy,ontheotherhand,does
This leads to the state evolution equations: not allow to choose the rotation direction around the vortex
field, sometimes resulting in paths that are not convenient
x˙ =−γx eν/2x¯1 +α (x −x )ρ,
1 2 1 1 t or too long. To address these limitations, we enhance the
(cid:16) ν(cid:17) (6)
x˙ =γ x¯ e−ν/2x¯1 +x2eν/2x¯1 +α x ρ, potential fields and the limit cycles around obstacles, which
2 1 2 2 2 2
are ovally-shaped for the benefits detailed in Section II-B,
where α and α are constants, γ determines the rotation and we incorporate the concepts of opinion and attention to
1 2
direction, and x is a fixed distance representing the oval’s further refine the navigation strategy. By integrating these
t
centre translation along the major axis to strategically posi- concepts, we can dynamically adjust the passing direction
tion the limit cycle with the human in the largest part of and the repulsion intensity based on human interactions.
the oval, ensuring effective obstacle avoidance. The term This integration aims to create a more adaptive and respon-
x¯ represents the translated version of x along the x axis sive system, improving safety and efficiency in navigation
1 1
to account for the relative position and orientation of the through complex environments.
obstaclew.r.t.theoval’scentre.Hence,inthestateevolution The idea is to use the opinion concept described in
equations, x¯ is used to adjust the feedforward dynamics so Section II-A to determine the direction of rotation around
1
that the trajectories are centred around the translated oval. the human and, thus, the direction of the vortex field as
The term x ensures that the solutions spiral into oval orbits conveniently and comfortably as possible. In particular, the
ff
with a counterclockwise rotation around the obstacle. The opinion value z governs the passage preference, which,
term x provides feedback to pull the solutions towards the depending on whether z is greater or less than 0, will result
fb
limit cycle: it acts repulsively when inside the oval (ρ>0), in either a left or right passage. In the context of potential
and attractively when outside the oval (ρ<0). fields,thispreferenceistranslatedintoachoiceofdirection,Algorithm1:Robot’sHeadingAngleθComputation
Initialise robot’s attention and opinion z, u
Set parameters for oval shape and opinion dynamics
Set initial robot and human states: x , x , θ, θ
r h h
Set goal positions: x , x
rg hg
while robot hasn’t reached the goal do
Calculate relative heading of the human η ;
h
if cos(η )≤0.5 // Obstacle outside
h
the robot’s field of view then
Reset z and u to their neutral values;
else
Update η ;
h
end
Update robot’s opinion and attention z, u;
if z ≥0 then
γ ←−1 // CCW rotation
(a) (b)
else
γ ←1 // CW rotation Fig. 3. Human-robot passing simulation: human and robot trajectories
end towards their targets (stars). The lines change from solid to dashed when
therobotentersthelimitcycle,i.e.whenitsattentionlevelstartstorise.
Calculate attractive force F toward goal;
att
Calculate repulsive force F from the human;
rep
Define the oval limit cycle ρ;
if ρ>0 // Inside the obstacle then view,indicatedbytherelativeheadingη h,therobotresetsits
Compute feedback term x ; attentionandopiniontoneutralvalues.Otherwise,itupdates
fb
Compute feedforward term x ff; η h and adjusts its opinion and attention accordingly based
else on human’s position. The robot’s opinion z determines how
x fb ←[0;0]; it should rotate around the human. The attractive force F att
x ff ←[0;0]; towards the goal and the vortex repulsive force F rep of the
end robot from the human are then computed. The repulsive
F ←γ·x +α·x ; force is guided by the oval limit cycle ρ, which shapes
rep ff fb
Calculate resultant angular velocity: the robot’s trajectory around obstacles. When the robot is
ω ←arctan2(F yatt +F yrep, F xatt +F xrep)−θ; insidethelimitcycle,feedbackx fb andfeedforwardx ff terms
Update robot’s heading angle θ; are computed to refine the movement, while, if the robot
Update robot’s and human’s position x , x ; is outside the limit cycle, these terms are minimised. The
r h
end repulsive force F rep is updated dynamically based on z and
u,ensuringthatitstrajectoryisadjustedsmoothlyandsafely.
Finally,therobot’sheadingangleθandpositionareupdated,
ensuring continuous adaptation. This process continues until
which in turn depends on the parameter γ introduced in the robot reaches its goal, dynamically balancing the need
SectionII-B.Thisparameterwillbe-1or1,meaningthatthe for safety, efficiency, and social comfort during navigation.
rotation will be counterclockwise or clockwise, respectively, The algorithm can also be implemented in the multi-agent
if z is greater or less than 0. For more clarity on notation scenario. When there are multiple humans, multiple vortex
and procedure, refer to Figures 1 and 2. fields have to be applied accordingly. Concerning opinion,
The level of attention u can also be used to determine the approach is the same as before, but at any given time,
the intensity of the vortex field, i.e., the repulsive coefficient the robot considers only the closest nearby human.
k rep. As u is directly proportional to the distance between In summary, our proposed approach combines the ro-
the human and the robot, the robot must pay more attention bustness of potential fields and oval limit cycles with the
to the pedestrian as it comes closer. Similarly, the repulsive adaptabilityofopiniondynamics,offeringanovelsolutionto
action increases with proximity, meaning k rep ∝ u. In this enhance the safety and efficiency of autonomous navigation
way,theforcepushingtherobot’strajectorytowardthelimit in complex environments.
cycle depends on the level of attention.
IV. EXPERIMENTSANDRESULTS
The Algorithm 1 describes how our methodology extends
these concepts by integrating nonlinear opinion dynamics In this section, we analyse and interpret the results of the
with potential fields and oval limit cycles. Initially, the proposednavigationtechnique,supportedbybothqualitative
robot’s attention u and opinion z are set, along with pa- andquantitativedatafromsimulationsandexperiments.The
rameters governing the geometry of the oval limit cycle. parameters used for both cases are the following: regarding
Duringnavigation,ifthehumanisoutsidetherobot’sfieldof theformoftheovalshape,b 1 =2.5,ϵ= b b1
2
=0.5,ν =0.5,(a) Nonlinearopiniondynamics (b) Potentialfieldswithovallimitcycles (c) Combinationofthetwomethods
Fig.4. Comparisonbetweenapproaches:redlineforrobottrajectory,bluelineforhumantrajectory,redstarforrobottarget.
TABLEI 2
COMPARISONOFVALIDATIONMETRICSON10TESTS
1
Percentincreaseofthe Averageminimumdistance
robot’spathlength betweentherobotandhuman Y 0
Opiniondynamics 2.9294 0.4408
Potentialfields 5.2035 0.8283
-1
Proposedapproach 4.2949 0.6117
-2
-4 -2 0 2 4
α =0.5,α =5,whileregardingtheparameterscontrolling X
1 2
the opinion dynamics, d = 1.5, α = γ = 100, u = 0,
r r r Fig. 5. Simulation test with oval limit cycle for both agents. The lines
u¯ = 1.5, R = 3, and n = 7. At any given moment, the changefromsolidtodashedwhentheyentertheother’slimitcycle.
r
robot only takes into account the closest human observed
within the oval limit cycle and within an angular range of
(cid:0) −π,π(cid:1)
relative to its heading. preference. The results clearly show that the robot can adapt
3 3
itsnavigationstrategyeveniftheopinionbeforegettingvery
A. Simulation results
close to the human is zero.
Webeginbyexaminingsomesimplescenariostoillustrate
In order to compare our approach with those proposed
how the sense of rotation is influenced by the opinion dy-
in [8] and [14] and demonstrate its convenience, all three
namics and to highlight the adaptive nature of our approach.
were tested in a scenario with the same parameters and
Specifically, we conduct simulations for the three following
agents’states.FromFigure4,itcanbeseenthatthemethod
scenarios, two of which are shown in Figure 3:
based purely on nonlinear opinion dynamics generates a
• The robot forms the opinion that the human is going trajectory that is efficient in terms of path length, but that
right (or rather, to his left): in this case, the opinion does not respect the psychological comfort of the human,
value z is positive, resulting in a counterclockwise as the overrun occurs very close to him/her. The approach
rotation (γ = −1). The robot dynamically adjusts its based on potential fields and limit cycles instead generates a
path to navigate around the human from the right (see trajectory that is longer than necessary in this specific case,
Figure 3a). astherobot’stargetistoitsright.Finally,thecombinationof
• The robot moves directly towards the human: if the the two methods allows the human to be overcome at an ac-
human is directly in front of it, the robot defaults ceptable distance and in a smooth manner, even choosing to
to a counterclockwise rotation (γ = −1) in order to circumnavigate it in the most reasonable way. The goodness
effectivelyavoidtheobstacle.Inthisscenario,therobot of the trajectories generated by our algorithm is evaluated
has to form a strong opinion about the direction to take in terms of percentage increase of the robot’s path length
to ensure a decisive and safe manoeuvre around the and average minimum distance between robot and human.
human, even if his position does not allow a precise TableIshowstheaverageresultsobtainedbytestingthethree
preference to be formed. approaches in 10 different randomly generated scenarios,
• The robot forms the opinion that the human is going butalwayspotentiallyleadingtocollisions.Thiscomparison
left (or rather, to his right): here, the opinion value z is also shows that the absence of limit cycles often generates
negative, leading to a clockwise rotation (γ = 1). The efficient but uncomfortable trajectories, as it does not leave
robotadaptsbymovingaroundthehumanfromtheleft enough private space for the human. The use of limit cycles
(see Figure 3b). alone without regard to the opinion takes into account the
In each simulation, we observe how the robot’s path is safety distance, but often generates excessively long paths.
influencedbytheopinionvaluez,whichdictatesthepassing Merging the two approaches finally allows a compromise0.5
0.5 0.5
0
0 0
-0.5
Y
-0.5
Y Y-0.5
-1 Robot
-1 -1.5 -1 Human
-2 -1 0 1 2 3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3 -2 -1 0 1 2 3
X X X
(a) (b) (c) (d)
Fig.6. TheFriWalkassistiverobotusedinourexperiments(a).Trajectoriesobtainedfromthreereal-timeexperiments(b-d).
between reliability and efficiency. robot approach each other. The human’s behaviour can vary
In the scenarios described above, the vortex field is only between cooperative and unaware of the robot’s presence.
appliedaroundthehuman,whopsychologicallyandsocially Regardless of the human’s actions, the robot consistently
needs her/his private space to be respected by the robot. demonstrates the ability to form opinions in real time and
But consider, for example, a situation where there are two navigateefficiently,ensuringsmoothinteractions.Theresults
humans guided by assistive robots. In this case, there is a closely match those from the simulations, confirming the
humanpresenceonbothsides,andthesafetyofbothindivid- effectiveness of the proposed algorithm.
uals depends on their respective assistive robots. Therefore, To further challenge the algorithm, two additional exper-
it makes sense to apply a limit cycle around each agent. iments introduce erratic human behaviour. Figure 6c shows
In this scenario, the opinion value still remain crucial for a human crossing the robot’s path transversely, potentially
adjusting the passing strategy as the agents approach each obstructing its desired path to the goal. By anticipating the
other. Indeed, when the two collide, one forms an opinion human’s movement and considering the oval shape of the
z 1 abouttheotherandthelatter’sopinionz 2 isinfluencedby limit cycle, the robot decides to turn to pass behind the
that of the former. This means that the opinions of the two human, thus avoiding any interference. This demonstrates
follow the same course. The reason for this choice is that the robot’s ability to anticipate conflicts and adjust its path
in a collision the vortex fields must have the same rotation intelligently. Figure 6d explores a scenario where the robot
direction in order to avoid each other, otherwise they would encounters an indecisive human who frequently changes
collide. In other words, if z 1 > 0, then z 2 also has to be direction. Initially, the robot makes small adjustments, mir-
greater than 0, so that the value γ relative to both limit roring the human’s unpredictability. As they get closer, the
cycles is 1. Additionally, the safety distance is dynamically robot’s attention level increases and it becomes more deci-
regulated according to the attention level. The simulation sive, reflecting its increased focus on avoiding a collision.
shown in Figure 5 demonstrates the enhanced capability of Once past the human, the robot quickly realigns itself to
our method to maintain safe and efficient navigation when its original path. These experiments validate the robustness
two robots are involved. of the algorithm in real-world conditions, confirming the
reliability of the simulation results and demonstrating the
B. Experimental setup and results
robot’spotentialforsafe,efficientoperationinenvironments
Theexperimentalvalidationoftheproposedapproachwas with human interaction.
carried out using the FriWalk shown in Figure 6a in an
indoor laboratory setting at the University of Trento. The
V. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK
vehicleisequippedwithelectricDCmotorsthatmanagethe
steering angle of the front wheels. The robot was tracked In this paper we present a robust framework for socially-
using an OptiTrack system comprising 8 cameras, covering aware robot navigation. By combining nonlinear opinion
an area of approximately 5m × 5m. We then positioned dynamicswithadvancedpotentialfieldsandlimitcycletech-
retroreflective markers on both the robot and the human to niques, we achieve reliable, efficient and socially acceptable
allowtheOptiTracksystemtolocalisethem[25].AROSin- navigation and overcome the limitations of the methods
terface facilitated communication, enabling the transmission takenindividually.Ourmethodsensurethatrobotscanmove
of control signals to the robot actuators and the reception of proactively adapting to human presence, avoiding collisions
localisation data. For each experiment, multiple trials of the due to the vortex field in the limit cycle. The use of opinion
samemissionwereperformed,withvariationsinthegeneral dynamics makes it possible to avoid deadlock situations by
behaviour of the human experimenter. always circumventing the obstacle in the most convenient
Thetestsperformednotonlyreplicatethesimulationcon- waypossible.Inthefuture,weintendtodeepenourapproach
ditions, but also introduce additional challenges to evaluate inordertorecognisehumangroups,improveadaptabilityand
robot’s adaptability. In all cases, a fixed target position for sensitivity to changes in the context and handle more com-
the robot was set at the point (2,0), providing a consis- plex scenarios involving more agents. Another key objective
tent reference for its decision making process. Figure 6b is for the robot not only to adapt as it navigates through
illustrates an example of a scenario where a human and a shared spaces, but also to signal its intentions effectively.This would allow humans to form opinions about robots’ [22] B.H.BaghiandG.Dudek,“Sampleefficientsocialnavigationusing
behaviour and adjust their actions accordingly. inverse reinforcement learning,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2106.10318,
2021.
REFERENCES [23] A. Bizyaeva, A. Franci, and N. E. Leonard, “Nonlinear opinion
dynamics with tunable sensitivity,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
[1] S. M. LaValle and J. J. Kuffner Jr, “Randomized kinodynamic plan- Control,vol.68,no.3,pp.1415–1430,2023.
ning,” The international journal of robotics research, vol. 20, no. 5, [24] A. Benzerrouk, L. Adouane, and P. Martinet, “Dynamic obstacle
pp.378–400,2001. avoidance strategies using limit cycle for the navigation of multi-
[2] N.MarquardtandS.Greenberg,Proxemicinteractions:Fromtheory robotsystem,”in2012IEEE/RSJIROS’12,4thWorkshoponPlanning,
topractice. Morgan&ClaypoolPublishers,2015. PerceptionandNavigationforIntelligentVehicles,2012.
[3] A.Vega-Magro,L.Manso,P.Bustos,P.Nu´n˜ez,andD.G.Macharet, [25] NaturalPoint.Motioncapturesystems-OptiTrackwebpage.[Online].
“Sociallyacceptablerobotnavigationovergroupsofpeople,”in2017
Available:https://optitrack.com.[Accessed:06-Sep-2024].
26thIEEEInternationalSymposiumonRobotandHumanInteractive
Communication(RO-MAN),2017,pp.1182–1187.
[4] P.Falqueto,A.Antonucci,L.Palopoli,andD.Fontanelli,“Humanising
robot-assistednavigation,”IntelligentServiceRobotics,vol.17,no.2,
pp.155–165,2024.
[5] C.Mavrogiannis,F.Baldini,A.Wang,D.Zhao,P.Trautman,A.Stein-
feld,andJ.Oh,“Corechallengesofsocialrobotnavigation:Asurvey,”
ACMTransactionsonHuman-RobotInteraction,vol.12,no.3,pp.1–
39,2023.
[6] R. Mirsky, X. Xiao, J. Hart, and P. Stone, “Conflict avoidance in
socialnavigation—asurvey,”J.Hum.-RobotInteract.,vol.13,no.1,
mar2024.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3647983
[7] O.Khatib,“Real-timeobstacleavoidanceformanipulatorsandmobile
robots,”Theinternationaljournalofroboticsresearch,vol.5,no.1,
pp.90–98,1986.
[8] M. Boldrer, M. Andreetto, S. Divan, L. Palopoli, and D. Fontanelli,
“Socially-aware reactive obstacle avoidance strategy based on limit
cycle,”IEEERoboticsandAutomationLetters,vol.5,no.2,pp.3251–
3258,2020.
[9] J.vandenBerg,M.Lin,andD.Manocha,“Reciprocalvelocityobsta-
clesforreal-timemulti-agentnavigation,”in2008IEEEInternational
ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,2008,pp.1928–1935.
[10] G.Ferrer,A.Garrell,andA.Sanfeliu,“Social-awarerobotnavigation
in urban environments,” in 2013 European Conference on Mobile
Robots,2013,pp.331–336.
[11] D.HelbingandP.Molnar,“Socialforcemodelforpedestriandynam-
ics,”PhysicalreviewE,vol.51,no.5,p.4282,1995.
[12] F. Farina, D. Fontanelli, A. Garulli, A. Giannitrapani, and D. Prat-
tichizzo,“Walkingahead:Theheadedsocialforcemodel,”PloSone,
vol.12,no.1,p.e0169734,2017.
[13] X.-T.TruongandT.D.Ngo,“Towardsociallyawarerobotnavigation
in dynamic and crowded environments: A proactive social motion
model,”IEEETransactionsonAutomationScienceandEngineering,
vol.14,no.4,pp.1743–1760,2017.
[14] C. Cathcart, M. Santos, S. Park, and N. E. Leonard, “Proactive
opinion-driven robot navigation around human movers,” in 2023
IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems
(IROS),2023,pp.4052–4058.
[15] T.J.Stastny,G.A.Garcia,andS.S.Keshmiri,“Collisionandobstacle
avoidanceinunmannedaerialsystemsusingmorphingpotentialfield
navigation and nonlinear model predictive control,” Journal of dy-
namicsystems,measurement,andcontrol,vol.137,no.1,p.014503,
2015.
[16] S. M. LaValle, Planning algorithms. Cambridge university press,
2006.
[17] S.Silva,D.Paillacho,N.Verdezoto,andJ.D.Herna´ndez,“Towards
online socially acceptable robot navigation,” in 2022 IEEE 18th
International Conference on Automation Science and Engineering
(CASE),2022,pp.707–714.
[18] W.Chi,H.Kono,Y.Tamura,A.Yamashita,H.Asama,andM.Q.-H.
Meng, “A human-friendly robot navigation algorithm using the risk-
rrt approach,” in 2016 IEEE International Conference on Real-time
ComputingandRobotics(RCAR),2016,pp.227–232.
[19] L.Liu,D.Dugas,G.Cesari,R.Siegwart,andR.Dube´,“Robotnav-
igationincrowdedenvironmentsusingdeepreinforcementlearning,”
in2020IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsand
Systems(IROS),2020,pp.5671–5677.
[20] L. Sun, J. Zhai, and W. Qin, “Crowd navigation in an unknown and
dynamic environment based on deep reinforcement learning,” IEEE
Access,vol.7,pp.109544–109554,2019.
[21] H. Kretzschmar, M. Spies, C. Sprunk, and W. Burgard, “Socially
compliantmobilerobotnavigationviainversereinforcementlearning,”
The International Journal of Robotics Research, vol. 35, no. 11, pp.
1289–1307,2016.