A Cloud Resources Portfolio Optimization Business
Model - From Theory to Practice
Valentin Haag Maximilian Kiessler Benedikt Pittl Erich Schikuta
Faculty of Computer Science Faculty of Computer Science Faculty of Computer Science Faculty of Computer Science
University of Vienna University of Vienna University of Vienna University of Vienna
Vienna, Austria Vienna, Austria Vienna, Austria Vienna, Austria
valentin.haag94@gmail.com m.kiessler@hotmail.com benedikt.pittl@univie.ac.at erich.schikuta@univie.ac.at
Abstract—Cloud resources have become increasingly important, their applications, even across various providers, is of great
with many businesses using cloud solutions to supplement or interest in the market. While most larger CSPs offer some
outright replace their existing IT infrastructure. However, as
functionalities and services that claim to help prevent over-
there is a plethora of providers with varying products, services,
provisioning, like AWS Lambda and Fargate, it is ultimately
andmarkets,ithasbecomeincreasinglymorechallengingtokeep
track of the best solutions for each application. Cloud service not in the provider’s best interest to reduce the costs for the
intermediaries aim to alleviate this problem by offering services customer.Forthesamereason,offeringcross-platformsupport
that help users meet their requirements. should not be expected of them either.
This paper aims to lay the groundwork for developing a cloud One way to better leverage the opportunities of the cloud
portfolio management platform and its business model, defined
market and make the market more accessible is the use of
via a business model canvas. Furthermore, a prototype of a
cloud intermediaries between the CSPs and the customer.
platform is developed offering a cloud portfolio optimization
service, using two algorithms developed in previous research Given that, this paper aims to tackle two main research
to create suitable and well-utilized allocations for a customer’s questions:
applications.
IndexTerms—CloudEconomics,PortfolioOptimization,Business • Under what kind of business model could such an in-
termediary operate? To answer this question, a detailed
Model
proposalanddescriptionofaviablebusinessmodelfora
I. INTRODUCTION cloud resource intermediary will be presented. Interme-
diaries in a similar fashion have been put forward, but as
Over the past years, the cloud resource market has been one
farastheauthors’bestknowledge,noconclusivebusiness
of the fastest-growing IT segments. The biggest providers,
model exists on how these intermediaries could operate.
Amazon Web Services (AWS), Microsoft Azure, and Google
• How could such a platform be implemented? The other
Cloud, have seen annual sales increases of over 20% for
goal of this work is the design and implementation of a
severalyears.JustAWSitselfreportedarevenueof80Billion
cloud resource intermediary.
US dollars for the year 2022, and the entire cloud market
achievedrevenueof545.8Billiondollarsworldwidewith22% Thus, the paper is structured as follows: The next section II
growthcomparedto2021[1].Thislargeandexpandingmarket givesthereaderaliteraturesurveyonthetargetresearcharea.
hasresultednotonlyinagrowingcloudserviceprovider(from Section III focuses on cloud portfolio optimization theory,
here on, often referred to as CSPs) market but also in several and two respective algorithms, a genetic and a greedy one,
methodsofdeliveryofcloudresourcestothecustomer. are described and their performance evaluated. In section IV,
we propose our proposal of a business model for a cloud
As mentioned by Pittl [2], one big challenge facing both
portfoliomanagementplatform,consistingoftheninebuilding
industryandacademiaisfindingacost-effectivesolutionwhen
blocks defined by the business model canvas framework of
buying cloud capacities. Pittls’ study concludes that almost
Osterwalder [3]. Based on the business model description,
all observed resource requests were oversized and offered
we present the implementation of our respective prototype
significant cost reduction potential, which lies not only in
in section V. The following section VI presents our appli-
reducingtheamountofresourcesboughtbutalsointheircom-
cation’s user experience (UX) evaluation. Finally, section VII
position. Depending on the planning period of the operations
summarises the paper’s findings, including what future work
tobeperformed,adifferentmixofprocurementfromdifferent
to expand upon the topic.
market spaces is optimal. The author suggests tackling this
problem via a cloud resource trading intermediary. II. STATEOFTHEART
Offering a service that aids businesses in managing their The cloud market currently consists of many cloud service
cloud portfolio and proposing efficient allocations to run providers, each featuring various ways and markets for cus-
4202
rpA
61
]CD.sc[
1v14601.4042:viXratomers to access their products. There is no single space revenues.
from which all suppliers can be accessed. The market is an • The block Key Activities defines the activities a company
oligopoly, dominated by the most prominent three players, must perform to be successful. They are necessary to
AmazonCloudServices(AWS),MicrosoftAzure,andGoogle createvalueandearnrevenue,andtheycandifferwidely
Cloud, according to [4]. In the course of this work, we focus depending on the company.
onAWS,thelargestcloudserviceprovidertoday,whichoffers • Keypartnershipsarethesuppliersandpartnersabusiness
three different resource markets with varying pricing models, model includes to make it work.
which are as follows: • The last block Cost Structure of the Canvas deals with
all operating costs of the business model.
• On-demand marketplace: For maximum flexibility and
easy scalability with no advance notice, instances bought As many cloud providers are on the market nowadays, the
on this market are handled in the classic pay-per-use question arises: What makes such a company and its business
model, where customers can purchase computing power model successful? An analysis of the business model char-
on-demand and by time period. acteristics revealed three different types of business models,
• Saving plans marketplace: This model offers significant withdifferingvaluecreation,proposition,anddeliverythatall
price reductions (e.g., up to 72% cheaper) for the cus- providers could be divided into [6]:
tomer in exchange for a long-term commitment (e.g., 1-
or 3-year plans) to a certain amount of usage. • Newcomer:Thistypedescribesnewcomerstothemarket
• Spot marketplace: This market allows customers to ben- that adapt already existing cloud strategies or form co-
efit from the varying loads that AWS experiences on its operations with already established cloud companies.
services. Amazon EC2 offers instances of their currently Their value proposition focuses much on individual cus-
unusedcapacitywithevengreaterdiscountsofupto90% tomization, often resulting in higher initial costs. The
reduced prices compared to the on-demand market. newcomer’s main customer segment is niche markets,
which they reach through traditional channels, such as
The definition of a business model has not only been one of
printmediaandpersonalcontact.Aone-timechargegen-
theearliestfocusesofresearch,butalsooneofthemosthotly
erates revenue, which supplementary services or partner
debated.Almosteverypaperconcerningthistopichasdefined
revenue models later generate. This cloud provider has
its own take on this task, and to this day, there is no general
to deal with a crowded market and stand out by having
agreement on a universally accepted definition. We follow
a well-developed market entry strategy and a defined
the definition of [3], where a business model describes the
targetmarket.Ontheotherhand,theyhavetheadvantage
rationaleofhowanorganizationcreates,delivers,andcaptures
of working flexibly and developing a specialized cloud
value.
service instead of focusing on commodity services.
Similar to the definition of the term, there is also a wide • Experiencedplayer:Companiesofthistypemainlywork
arrayofframeworksdescribingtheelementsabusinessmodel with their existing know-how, offering a plethora of soft-
comprises.ThepaperwillfocusontheBusinessModelCanvas ware and consultancy services. The services offered are
fromOsterwalderandPigneur[3],oneofthemostestablished standardized and provided via a public cloud with high-
and widely used frameworks today. This framework proposes security standards, resulting in excellent scalability and
to describe any business model with nine building blocks, possibilitiesfortimeandcostreductions.Theexperienced
which can also be grouped into four areas of a business: players target both the mass and individual markets and
customers, offer, infrastructure, and financial viability. They use support systems and online communities to reach
showcase how a company intends to make money and are as their customer base. Subscription-based services usually
follows [5], [3]: accountforthebiggestsourceofrevenue.Whileprofiting
from an economy of scale and a good understanding of
• The Customer Segment block describes the groups a their technology, they must be careful that good CRM,
company tries to offer its products to. branding, and marketing strategies compensate for less
• The Value Proposition describes the reason why a cus- direct customer contact and lower trust levels.
tomer chooses to work with one business over others • Specialised provider: Providers of this type stand out
• Channels describe the way a company reaches its cus- by expanding the usual cloud services on a vertical
tomer segment to make its proposition of value. level, adding services such as data processing, adminis-
• The different kinds of relationships companies can have tration, marketplace, and migration services. Their target
withtheircustomersaredescribedintheblockCustomer customer segment is branch-specific and may include
Relationships. the public sector. Firms following this business model
• The block Revenue Streams deals with the income a often implement a usage-based revenue model. The spe-
company receives from its customers. cialized providers have the advantage of a high-quality
• The Key Resources block describes the resources that and innovative model that, in combination with good
allow the company to operate its business and earn security and customer orientation, results in high levelsof trust and loyalty by their customers. While not easily TABLEI
imitated, the model does not support high scalability and NOTATIONFORPROBLEMFORMULATION
needs constant innovation to satisfy the customers’ ever-
Parameter Description
developing needs.
I Asetofselectedcloudinstances(hosts)
Actual cloud broker implementations on the market are still A Asetofapplications
T Asetoftimeslotsforwhichtooptimize
sparse,whilethehighnumberofcloudserviceofferingsmakes
xait Variabledenotingassignmentsofapplicationstoinstances
it hard to find the right service as a customer. Brokerage Sa Thestartingtimeofapplicationa
can be several services the intermediary offers the cloud Fa Thefinishingtimeofapplicationa
customer, such as decision support or enhancing the delivery
Ua Indicatesifapplicationaispreemptible
µa Theexpectedresourcedemandofapplicationa
of services. The benefits for the customer are lower costs σa Thestd.deviationoftheresourcedemandofapplicationa
and the ability to seamlessly switch between different cloud Ri Theresourcecapacityofinstancei
providers [7].
Ci Thecostofinstanceiforonetimeslot
Bi Thefirstavailabletimeslotofaninstance
To gain a deeper understanding of the cloud intermediary
Ei Thelastavailabletimeslotofaninstance
Oi Indicatesifinstanceiissuitablefornon-preemptibleapps
market, Elhabbash et al. [7] presents a systematic survey of Dit Aggregatedresourcedemandofinstanceiattimet
cloud brokerage literature, looking into the motivation for Qmin Thedesiredqualityofservice
designing a cloud broker and its functionality.
While a plethora of research has been conducted in the field
resource demand, not defined by a fixed value, but via a
of cloud intermediaries, the number of implementations on
probabilistic model using a normal distribution. This idea of
the market is limited. This situation, in conjunction with the
using probability-based problem formulation was also used
fact that the services provided can vary wildly, has resulted
in further research; for example, Martinovic et al. combined
in a lack of research concerning the business models of cloud
it with a stochastic bin-packing approach to finding efficient
brokers so far. Nevertheless, the work of Filiopoulou at al. [8]
server allocations [13]. One additional approach proposed
gives an overview of benefits, common pricing models, and
for optimizing virtual machine placement to reduce energy
an evaluation of cloud brokers. It is concluded that brokers
consumption in data centers is using a genetic algorithm, as
assistcompaniesindevelopingthemselvesandcreatingamore
was done by Wu et al. [14]. Another interesting concept to be
competitive environment for providers while earning revenues
regardedistheonebyDeCauweretal.,whichintroducedthe
themselves.
idea of a temporal component to server allocation schemes
while using deterministic resource demands. This additional
III. PORTFOLIOOPTIMIZATIONMODEL
dimension better reflects real computational needs, where
In this section, we will present a synopsis of the findings
applications often do not run forever but with a specific start
of our previous research work, which encompasses related
and end time [15], [9].
approaches, a formulation of the problem at hand, a short de-
scription of two portfolio optimization algorithms developed, A. Problem formulation
and finally, an evaluation of their performance [9].
Thissectionwilldealwithformulatingtheproblem,whichhas
The main goal of cloud portfolio management is usually to be tackled by the cloud portfolio optimization approaches.
achieving the lowest costs for running a specific set of ap- The notations used for this task are defined in I [9].
plications over (a certain amount of) time. Some research like
First, we define a cloud portfolio as a set of cloud in-
JangjaimonandTzeng[10]andSharmaetal.[11]triedtodeal
stances I, which are used to run a set of applications A
with this problem by creating a checkpointing mechanism or
on them. The main goal of our optimization problem is
by focusing on preemptible servers in combination with con-
to find a cost-efficient allocation of these applications and
ceptstakenfromfinancialmodeling,tomeettherequirements
instances [9].
of applications when using spot instances. Meanwhile, Pittl et
al.[2]tookamorecomprehensiveapproachtocloudportfolio AllapplicationsAhaveaspecificresourcedemand,which,as
management, which resulted in the findings that a more het- proposed in the literature by Hwang and Pedram, have their
erogeneous portfolio tends to be more cost-efficient. Another resourceneedsnotdefinedasafixedvaluebutwithfluctuation
findingofthatpaperwastohighlightthesignificanceofright- taken into account [12]. Therefore, we denote the capacity
sizing,whereserverinstancesshouldbechosentomostclosely requirementsofourapplicationsasanexpecteddemandmean
fit the capacity requirements of the applications the workload µ and with a corresponding standard deviation σ . As our
a a
consists of. Otherwise, an expensive over-provisioning of re- workloadsalsohavevaryingruntimes,eachapplicationsports
sourcescouldbetheresult[9].Regardingright-sizing,Hwang a starting time S and a finishing time F , for which the
a a
and Pedram [12] developed a portfolio-based optimization statement S < F must always be true. To model which
a a
approach with a probabilistic model, which, while created for applications are suitable for spot instances, meaning they can
data center operations, is also applicable to cloud portfolio be interrupted at any time, we use the variable U which can
a
management. Each assigned workload in this model has a either be 0 or 1 [9].4 is the main function to optimize. It minimizes the costs of
(cid:40) the entire portfolio, which consists of the sum of all prizes
1 if a is preemptible
U a =
0 else
(1) incurred by each assigned instance. Hereby, (E i−B i) is the
time an instance is running, multiplied by its costs per time
slot C to arrive at the price the instance will account for.
For modeling instances, each instance I ∈ I has a prede- i
While trying to minimize 4, the following statements have to
termined resource capacity R , representing, for example, the
i be fulfilled [9]:
number of CPUs and RAM of an instance. Furthermore, each
kind of instance has a price per time unit C , where the total
i
cost of any instance is calculated by the price per time slot (cid:88)
s.t. x =1 ∀a∈A,∀t∈[S ,F ] (5)
and the overall up-time. As with applications, each instance ait a a
has a given starting time B and ending time E , with the i∈I
i i (cid:88)
inequation B i < E i again having to be fulfilled at any time. x ait∗U a ≥O i ∀a∈A,∀t∈[S a,F a] (6)
Preemptiblespotinstancesaredenotedbythebinaryparameter i∈I
O i [9]. P(D it <R i)≥Q min ∀i∈I,∀t∈[B i,E i] (7)
x ∈{0,1} (8)
ait
(cid:40) U ∈{0,1} (9)
1 if i is only suitable for preemptible applications a
O =
i O ∈{0,1} (10)
0 else i
(2) Q min ∈[0,1] (11)
To model the summed-up demand of all applications assigned The first constraint 5 asserts that each application has to be
to an instance i∈I, for a specific time slot t∈T, we use the assigned to an instance, while at the same time, each, at any
parameterD it.Aswiththedemandofasingleapplication,the point of the run time of an application, can only be hosted by
aggregated demand is also not a fixed variable but a random one instance. The next constraint 6 states that each host has
variable,whichmeansitcanonlyevaluatetheprobabilitywith to come from a suitable market space, which is necessary to
which an instance stays within the designated capacity limits. guarantee that non-preemptible applications are not assigned
Ourproposedmodelalsodefinesadesiredminimumqualityof to spot instances, which could be interrupted at any time. The
serviceQ min.Anallocationisinvalidiftheprobabilityofthe equation formulated in 7 ensures that for every time slot an
aggregated demand D it staying below the provided capacity instance is running, the probability of the resource demand
of the instance R i does not satisfy the minimum quality of of the applications assigned being within the capacity of said
service Q min for time slot t. This approach also builds upon instance is at least the quality of service Q min. The final four
the model proposed by Hwang and Pedram (2012). Still, it constraints 8to 11 state thatthe auxiliary variables haveto be
hastoconsiderthetemporalcomponentofourmodel,meaning within a valid range from 0 to 1 [9].
thatthecapacityrestrictionshavetobefulfilledforeverytime
B. Optimization approaches
slot an instance is used [9].
Having modeled our cloud portfolio optimization problem
For modeling the formal assignment of applications to in-
in subsection III-A, this section will now present our ap-
stances while considering the temporal restrictions of the
proaches to solving it. As our problem is essentially a multi-
problem, we used the approach postulated by Dell’Amico
dimensional packing problem, it is NP-hard, very complex
et al. [16]. The variable x denotes which hosting instance
to solve, and finding an optimal solution is usually not
an application has been assigned to at a specific time. The
computationally feasible [17]. Therefore, we developed two
resource demands for an application a∈A are considered to
optimization heuristics to find good approximations of an
be 0 for any time slot t∈T if t<S or t>F [9].
a a optimal solution [9].
1) Greedy algorithm: Our first algorithm is called Efficient
(cid:40) Resource Inference for Cloud Hosting (ERICH). It integrates
1 if app a is assigned to instance i at time slot t
x = the approach of the widely known bin packing algorithm first
ait
0 else
fit decreasing (FFD) [18], combining it with the proposed
(3)
portfolio management strategy by Hwang and Pedram [12].
It is executed in the following four stages [9]:
Havingoutlinedthecloudportfoliooptimizationrequirements
and assumptions, we can now present our exact problem • Stage 1: As the first step, the algorithm sorts the pre-
statement.Themainoptimizationgoalistofindtheminimum emptible and non-preemptible applications it receives as
of the following cost function [9]: input by increasing starting dates, with applications that
start earlier being allocated first. Applications with the
(cid:88) same starting date are then sorted by non-increasing
min C ∗(E −B ) (4)
i i i
standard deviation of their resource demand, based on a
i∈Iproposal by Hwang and Pedram, suggesting that reduced
Algorithm 1: Efficient Resource Inference for Cloud
capacity needs can be achieved by grouping workloads
Hosting
with similar resource demand deviation[12]. To ensure
Input: A set of non-preemptible apps A1; A set of
that the algorithm prefers cost-efficient hosts, this step
preemptible apps A2; A set of reserved instance
also includes sorting all received instance types by cost
types RES; A set of on-demand instance types
per time slot for the provided capacity in an increasing
ON; A set of spot instance types SPOT
order [9].
Result: Packing pattern portfolio
• Stage 2: Next, the algorithm tries to allocate all non-
sort applications A1 and A2 by increasing start time and
preemptible applications to reserved instances by using
non-increasing σ
thefirstfitdecreasingapproach.Iteratingthroughallsuch a
sort RES, ON and SPOT by non-increasing C per R
applications,thealgorithmfirsttriestofindasuitablehost i i
and time slot
thatprovidestheneededcapacityovertheentirerun-time
portfolio ← empty allocation variable
intheexistingportfolio.Ifso,theapplicationisassigned
forall a∈A1 do
to the said instance. Otherwise, a new instance covering
assign a to portfolio (FFD) while only considering
the needs of the application is added to the portfolio [9].
RES instances
• Stage 3: While reserved instances offer significant dis- forall i∈ reserved instances from portfolio do
countsincomparisontothoseprocuredontheon-demand tmp_portfolio ← copy of portfolio without
market, the portfolio created in the previous step may instance i
be inefficient due to the requirements for minimum run- forall a∈i do
time in reserved instances. Therefore, step 3 tries to reinsert a into tmp_portfolio (FFD) including
condense the portfolio by removing instances chosen in ON instances
if total cost of tmp_portfolio< total cost of
step 2 and replacing them with on-demand instances. To
portfolio then
achieve this, the algorithm iterates through all instances,
portfolio←tmp_portfolio
creating a new temporary portfolio with one reserved forall a∈A2 do
instance removed at each step. Next, applications from assign a to portfolio without allocating new
this instance are assigned to on-demand instances with instances
thesamefirst-fit-decreasingapproachusedintheprevious gaps← consecutive time slots where a is not yet
step. Should this new allocation allow for a cheaper assigned to portfolio
portfolio, it replaces the old one in the next iteration [9]. forall gap∈gaps do
• Stage4:Thefinalstepofthealgorithmdealswithfinding assign a to portfolio for time slots in gap by
fitting instances for all preemptible applications, which allocating SPOT hosts
can be assigned to multiple hosts during their lifecycle
and can, therefore, be allocated on an individual timeslot
basis. To leverage this, the algorithm will first find Algorithm 2: GEnetic Optimization of Resource Group-
any time steps for a suitable candidate host and assign ings
preemptible apps to these instances for the respective Input: A set of non-preemptible apps A1; A set of
periods.Shouldtherebeanymoreneedfortheworkload preemptible apps A2; A set of reserved instance
to run the apps, the difference is made up by adding new types RES; A set of on-demand instance types
spot instances [9]. ON; A set of spot instance types SPOT
Result: List of packing patterns (portfolios) population
Algorithm 1 describes the steps discussed in pseudocode. population ← use semi-random heuristic to create initial
To check if an application fits into any given instance, the population
equation 7 is used. while termination criteria are not met do
2) Genetic algorithm: Using a genetic algorithm (GA) to parents ← fitness-based selection of individuals
solve a bin-packing problem is not an entirely new idea. Still, from population
it has been proven to work well in dealing with combinatorial offspring ← apply temporal biased crossover for
optimizationproblems[19],[20],[21],[22].GAsarebasedon each tuple in parents
genetic operators that can be adapted to fit a particular prob- offspring ← repair broken chromosomes in
lem,enablingthemtoperformanefficientandtargetedsearch offspring after crossover
in the problem space. Our genetic algorithm has been named offspring ← apply domination mutation operator to
Genetic Optimization of Resource Groupings (GEORG) and random offspring
willbedescribedinthissubsection.Thealgorithmisdescribed offspring ← repair broken chromosomes in
inpseudocodeinalgorithm2,followedbyadescriptionofthe offspring after mutation
algorithm building blocks [9]. population ← fitness-based merge of offspring
and current population
• Encoding scheme. Grouping of items and using bins areessentialforbuildingaGA,accordingtoFalkenauer[20]. be adapted. Application a, hosted by instance i ∈ I for
Their approach of encoding, where each chromosome the time slots [S ,F ], dominates a partition of apps P
t t
consists of an array of bins holding a set of items, is from instance i if the period denoted by [S ,F ] contains
t t
notsuitabletoourproblemwithitstemporalcomponent. all assignments slots of the partition for the respective
That is why we have chosen a temporal group encoding, host. Additionally, the probability of the resource de-
where every chromosome locus represents a certain time mand of the dominating application being higher than
step, while the allele is a set of instances running at a the summed-up capacity requirements of all elements of
certain time. Finally, every host is assigned a set of ap- partition P has to exceed fifty percent. Applying the
plications, which are then allocated to the corresponding mutation operator on an individual results in the removal
instance during this time slot. [9]. of several instances from the portfolio. Each application
• Population initialization. To enable the operations of thatisnowunassignedischeckedagainstcandidatehosts
a GA, like crossover, mutation, and survivor selection, from the portfolio. By creating partitions of applications
to occur, an initial set of individuals (a population) is of size two from the respective candidate instance, we
needed. For our initialization process, a hybrid approach can try to find partitions dominated by the unassigned
waschosentoachievecomparativelyhighfitnessfromthe applications. Should one be found, the application is
startwhilealsoofferinggoodgeneticdiversity.Therefore, swapped with the partition. As these operations may
half of the assignments are done randomly, with the leavebrokenchromosomeswithunassignedapplications,
other half having applications that have been assigned to just like the crossover operator, the insertion heuristic
reduce the number of allocated instances and the overall mentioned previously is used again in order to repair
costs [9]. those corrupted individuals [9].
• Fitness evaluation. This building block of our GA uses • Insertion heuristic. One of the main constraints of our
theequation4,themainfunctiontooptimize,toevaluate problem formulation is equation 5, which requires each
the fitness of each individual [9]. application to be assigned to a fitting instance at any
• Parent selection and crossover. For each new generation time slot of its run time. As previously mentioned,
oftheGA,agroupofindividualsischosenforparentage the crossover and mutation operators may violate said
ofthefollowinggeneration.Theseindividualsarechosen constraint. The insertion heuristic chosen to alleviate this
basedonthefitnessproportionateroulettewheelmethod. problem uses a naive first-fit approach, which chooses
Out of these, there is a crossover applied by pairs of two a candidate instance from the existing chromosome to
parent solutions to create new solutions (offspring). To fit orphaned applications. Should a non-fitting host exist
perform this crossover, a new biased temporal crossover in the portfolio, a new random instance is generated to
operator was built on the concepts proposed by Quiroz- accommodatethecorrespondingapplication.Theelement
Castellanos et al. [21], which aims to encourage the of randomness is used to reduce the risk of converging
passing on well-fitting genetic material to the following on a local optimum by creating additional genetic diver-
generation. Within each gene, which represents a time sity [9].
step, all active instances are sorted by decreasing the • Survivor selection. The process of survivor selection
average capacity utilization rate and cost per time slot. decides which individuals at the end of an iteration will
Using a zip-merging approach, a new partial solution is represent the next generation. This can be achieved in
created from both parent solutions. After removing hosts several ways, with one of the simplest being the selec-
of already assigned applications, the partial solution is tion of the fittest individuals. While more sophisticated
pruned. If any instances violate the constraints outlined methods exist, and simply choosing the best individuals
in the problem formulation, they will be pruned in the could lead to a lack of diversity and converging on
subsequent time steps of the crossover process. Culling local optima, both our crossover and mutation operators
instances from solutions may break some chromosomes, introduce enough randomness, meaning that the fittest
as applications can end up with no or only partial individuals are sufficient for our algorithm.
assignments.Thisissueisaddressedbyemployingabasic • Termination.Fortermination,ourGAcanuseoneofsev-
heuristic to reintroduce any applications that have not eral common stopping criteria, like a maximum number
been completely assigned [9]. of generations, the fitness scores of the individuals of a
• Mutation. This operator is used on freshly produced off- population converging to a certain degree and therefore
spring randomly to introduce new genetic characteristics becoming very similar, or the highest level of fitness of
to individuals and enhance the population’s overall fit- an individual not changing any more with more genera-
ness. The concept of dominance, introduced by Martello tions [24], [9].
and Toth [23], can lead to tighter packing patterns by
C. Evaluation and Results
replacingasubsetofitemswithanitemoflargerorequal
size. This approach has been shown to be incorporable In this section, we will discuss how the previously described
into the mutation operator of a GA [20], [21], though for algorithms were evaluated and the results of this evaluation
usage in this work, the definition of dominance has to to present what kind of optimization results a customer couldexpect from the cloud portfolio optimizer. Further examples 2) Results: Theresultsofourtestsfocusonthreekeycriteria
created in the Cloud Portfolio Manager platform will be forevaluation:speedofexecution,packingdensity,andoverall
presentedinsectionV.Toevaluateouroptimizationheuristics, costs incurred by the resulting portfolio. To avoid side effects
we used synthetic data. The implementation of the algorithms other tasks running on the test machine may have, each
was done in Python 3.9, and the tests were conducted on a algorithmrantentimestogetdataonexecutionspeeds.
PC running a Windows operating system with an Intel Core
As you can see in Figure 1 and Figure 2, the optimization
i7-4770 processor (3.4 GHz base clock, 3.9 GHz turbo) and
approach ERICH offered way faster execution speeds, being
16 GB of DDR3 memory at 1600 MHz [9].
faster by the magnitude of close to 10. It also results in an al-
1) Data set description: With our optimization problem,
moststaticexecutionspeedbybeingdeterministic.Incontrast,
multipledimensionsinfluencethedifficultyofanytestset.As
theoptimizationapproachGEORGisnotonlyslower,butalso
isthecasewithanybinpackingproblem,aprimarycontributor
waymorevolatileintermsofexecutionspeed.Theslowestrun
to this is the number of items to be assigned. Unlike many
can take 2-3 times longer than the fastest one due to genetic
other bin packing problems, our problem must regard the
operators being highly influenced by randomness [9].
temporal component as the primary driver of execution time,
withthenumberofallocationperiodsincreasingthedifficulty.
Therefore, the created test data sets reflect a variety in both
these attributes [9].
TABLEII
SUMMARYOFAPPLICATIONDATASETS
App. Non- Pre. Avg. Std. Avg. Std. Avg. Std.
Set Pre. Res. Res. Res. Res. Alloc. Alloc.
Dem. Dem. Dev. Dev. Periods Periods
apps_1 14.0 6.0 3.2 1.7 0.5 0.5 43.1 33.4
apps_2 59.0 41.0 3.0 2.6 0.5 0.7 63.9 43.9
apps_3 10.0 10.0 3.0 2.0 0.7 0.6 212.2 167.8
apps_4 42.0 58.0 3.1 2.6 0.5 0.6 237.2 171.5
apps_5 7.0 13.0 3.1 2.7 0.6 0.6 2758.5 1996.9
apps_6 41.0 59.0 2.8 2.0 0.5 0.6 2871.7 2055.6
Eventhoughthetestdatausedfortheevaluationwassynthet-
Fig.1. ExecutiontimeERICH
icallycreated,itconsidersrealisticscenarios,includingantici-
patedpricediscountsforspotandreservedinstancescompared
to on-demand instances. This was based on observations done
onthemajorcloudserviceprovidersAWS,GoogleCloud,and
Microsoft Azure. Additionally, for creating our test instances,
the price-to-capacity ratio has been modeled similarly to
offerings observed on the previously mentioned CSPs. The
table II above shows our chosen six sets of applications
withtheirkeyresourcedemandsandallocationcharacteristics,
while the table III describes the three sets of instance types
created for testing, each containing 500 instance types. These
were combined in the following pairings to create six test
cases: case_1 (apps_1, types_1), case_2 (apps_2, types_1),
case_3(apps_3,types_2),case_4(apps_4,types_2),case_5
(apps_5, types_3) and case_6 (apps_6, types_3) [9].
TABLEIII
SUMMARYOFINSTANCETYPEDATASETS
Fig.2. ExecutiontimeGEORG
Inst- Avg. Std. Avg. Std. Avg. Std. Avg. Std.
Our second criterion, the utilization rate, measures the rela-
ance capa- capa- Res. Res. On. On. Spot Spot
type city city Prc. Prc. Prc. Prc. Prc. Prc. tionship between the total expected resource demand of all
set assigned applications across relevant time slots and the abso-
types_1 9.6 8.8 2.3 2.8 3.1 2.2 2.5 2.2 lute capacity provided for that period. Depicted in Figure 3,
types_2 10.3 11.4 2.2 2.4 3.1 2.6 3.1 4.8 it is easy to see that once again ERICH delivers better results
types_3 9.8 9.9 2.4 3.8 3.1 2.4 2.3 1.7
than GEORG. Depending on the test case, the gap can rangefrom minor, like in case 1, to very significant, as in cases 4
and 6 [9].
Fig.5. Costforeachgenerationforsetcase_6usingGEORG
Fig.3. UtilizationcomparisonbetweenERICHandGEORG IV. BUSINESSMODEL
In this section we will first present our business model
Finally, in terms of overall costs of the generated portfolio, of the Cloud Portfolio Manager using the Business Model
ERICH also outperformed the GA by a significant margin, Canvas framework by Osterwalder and Pigneur [3], where
which can be seen in Figure 4. While this may initially lead we describe our model with the help of the nine building
to the conclusion that the GA did not work correctly, this is blocks introduced in section II). Afterwards, we will discuss
untrue.InFigure5,onecanobservethatthecosts,meaningthe how our model can be classified within the context of various
fitnesslevelofthemultiplegenerationsforthedatasetcase_6 classification approaches. Finally, we will compare our model
improve continuously, with each new generation being fitter to contender platforms offering services with some similarity
thanthepreviousone.Theinitialpopulationstartswithahigh to our own.
degreeofgeneticdiversityandimproveswitheachgeneration.
A. The Cloud Portfolio Manager Business Model Can-
After ten generations, which is the duration the test ran, the
vas
average costs have been reduced by more than 50%. As the
initial population of the GA can serve as an example of how 1) Customer Segments: For our customer segment, the sole
an unplanned allocation of resources would look like, it also focus will be on the B2B area, as consumers, so far, have
showsthatbothalgorithmscandelivernotablelowercostsfor little to no reason to purchase cloud resources for personal
a portfolio and, therefore, offer a usable basis to build our use. Within the B2B sector, a big emphasis will be put on the
Cloud Portfolio Manager platform upon [9]. IT sector, ranging from small businesses to large companies,
seeingaslargepartsofthissectormovemoreandmoreoftheir
ITinfrastructureintothecloud.OneexamplewouldbeNetflix,
which, since 2015 has moved its entire IT infrastructure to
AWS [25].
Surprisingly,whenitcomestosmallerbusinesses,assuggested
in a study by Jonas et al. in 2013, start-up companies looking
for cloud solutions prefer the reputation of a cloud provider
over other aspects such as price, security, and reliability [26].
At least at the beginning, a small and not well-known com-
pany could mean targeting this customer segment could be
more challenging than others. This situation also leads us to
conclude that establishing a reputation should be a primary
business goal. Besides this, we can increase our attractiveness
to small businesses and start-ups by offering cloud consulting
and optimization services. These services aim to help cus-
tomers better understand cloud environments and set up and
operate their own cloud portfolios. While it can be expected
Fig.4. Portfoliocomparisonbetweenthetwoalgorithms
that larger companies already have access to this knowledge,the same cannot be said for smaller businesses. Aided by our • Awareness: For the first phase, raising the customer’s
consultancy services, we can also market our optimization awareness of our service, a mixture of online advertise-
service to this customer segment. ment and direct contact with potential customers through
an in-house sales force seems applicable. Furthermore,
One customer segment our business will specifically focus targeted online advertisement, for example, via Google
on within the IT sector is those companies, businesses, and ads1, could be considered an option. While having the
possibly research facilities working with machine learning potential to result in a higher click-through rate, the
algorithms. These are uniquely well-suited to be run on cloud advertiserhastobecarefulnottobetoointrusive,asthis
resources, as their implementations often offer out-of-the-box can result in having the opposite effect. It also appears
preemptibilitylikePyTorchandGoogleTensorFlow[27],[28]. that targeted advertising does not work well with every
Combining machine learning algorithms, resource-intensive demographic [30]. After the first customers have been
applications, and our optimization approach, delivering the acquired, it can also be reasonably expected that word-
bestresultsforpreemptibleapplications,makesthemaperfect of-mouthbetweendifferentbusinessescouldraisefurther
match.Ourvalueproposition,whichwillbedetailedwithinits awareness levels for the company. Another option to
own building block, is well suited to reduce one of the great reach potential customers is trade fairs focusing on the
pains of implementing machine learning solutions, the lack of IT sector.
processingpower,byofferingcheaperaccesstocomputational • Evaluation: Our website is the primary channel used for
resources. evaluation and the center of the operation. It provides
example calculations, which showcase the potential cost
While the previously described customer segment will be reductions offered by the service, gives an overview of
our primary focus, other sectors also offer a wide range of the pricing structure, and offers guidance on how to
potential customers. Even in 2017, Mohit et al. suggested that set up an account. Later, customer success stories, a
over 90% of organizations were either already adopting cloud widely adopted practice among online businesses today,
infrastructure or planning to do so within the next one to will be showcased on the website. These stories further
three years [29]. Therefore, our cloud resource optimization highlight tangible implementations of our service and
approach’s potential market is large and diverse. provide credibility to our claims of assisting customers
2) Value Proposition: Our primary value proposition, a cost in optimizing their cloud portfolio.
reduction for their cloud portfolio, is unlike many other busi- • Purchase: Regarding purchasing our products, many on-
nessmodels,targetingallcustomersegments.Itcanbeapplied linepaymentservicessuchasPayPal,AmazonPayments,
to both existing portfolios and first-time cloud deployments, and Credit cards are available and can be provided with
aslongasthecustomerisroughlyawareoftheirapplication’s relative ease. Besides directly integrating single payment
computational needs and run-time. A portfolio can be set up options, companies such as Stripe2 offer a single API
in two ways: First, directly via interacting with the platform that enables the user to choose from a range of standard
via its website. Alternatively, outside initial registration, most online payment options.
interactions with the platform can also be done via API, • Delivery: The delivery of the optimization service to the
allowing customers to integrate our service within their own customer can also be achieved through the platform’s
systems and automate the process of creating portfolios and direct channel, either by direct customer interaction on
creating allocations. thewebsiteorviaAPIcall.Asfortheconsultancysideof
the business, we expect delivery to be done via personal
The previously mentioned cost reduction is achieved by a interaction, both physical and online, depending on the
combinationofchoosingthecheapestinstancesfromtheright customer’s preferences.
marketplace and reducing their idle time through continuous • After sales: The Cloud Portfolio Manager will first focus
monitoring of the needs of the applications. The resulting on providing post-purchase support to customers through
benefit for the customer entails the direct cost reduction our website. Here, the user can overview his portfolios,
itself and offers easier access to the complex world of cloud optimizations, subscriptions, and general account infor-
computing, which could be especially useful for small and mation. A FAQ page can also help answer general ques-
medium-sized businesses. For these clients in particular, we tions.Directsupportthroughapersonalcustomersupport
can extend our value proposition by offering a consultancy force should also be implemented for more complex
service for customers who still need the know-how required cases.
totakeadvantageofcloudsolutions.Saidservicewouldfocus
4) Customer Relationships: When it comes to the methods
on the basics of cloudification, such as which applications are
of interacting with the customer base, the Cloud Portfolio
viable for being put into the cloud, the creation of portfolios,
Manager will focus on two areas: For the majority of inter-
and first-time deployment.
actions, such as setting up an account, creating and managing
3) Channels: Listed here, we will address the channels used
throughout the five phases of customer interaction through 1https://ads.google.com/intl/de_at/home/
which we aim to reach our customers: 2https://stripe.com/en-gb-at/paymentsa portfolio, an automated service based on our website will fee. In this case, a part of the cost reduction achieved by
be used. Complementing these services is a sales- and CRM- the Cloud Portfolio Manager would be taken as our revenue.
(Customer Relationship Management) force, which can be The significant flaw with this idea, though, is that our system
contacted personally via channels such as e-mail, phone, or does not aim to directly access and manage the customer’s
video calls. This enables a more personal relationship with cloud instances. This would result in customers needing to
the customer and answers complicated and personal questions accurately and honestly report their current cloud expenses
regarding single customers, which cannot be served easily and their achieved cost reductions, which lends itself to be
via an automated service. This additional service is available abused way too easily.
to the customer during the whole interaction, from pre-sale
Finally, we propose that subscription fees are the revenue
evaluation until the purchase is completed. Another important
stream best suited to our business model. They tackle several
aspect of this building block is the interaction between the
disadvantages mentioned in the previously discussed systems,
consultancyforceandthecustomers.Asforofferingaconsul-
suchasfittingwellwithacontinuouslyrunningservice,unlike
tation service, direct human interaction is preferable, as each
pay-per-use transaction fees and a low entry barrier compared
customerisassignedandmainlyinteractswithoneconsultant.
to a one-time charge. The subscription fee, due in a monthly
This can be over various channels, but due to the close
interval, could either be based upon a system with different
nature of the relationship, it will result in more face-to-face
levels of subscriptions, offering support to differing sizes of
interactions than the other services of our business. A study
cloud portfolios and varying levels of customer support, or
byRoyetal.suggeststhatdirectinteractionwiththecustomer
directly scaling with the size of the optimized cloud portfo-
is also preferable, as service experience is valued even higher
lios.
than the actual service quality in B2B services [31].
5) Revenue Streams: Regarding revenue streams, a plethora As for revenue streams concerning the consultancy side of
of options are available at first glance. However, as we state the business model, three monetization variants are possible.
in this section, most of them are not readily applicable to First, a classic hourly fee would most suit customers needing
our platform for one reason or another, leaving us with one only a more minor assistance contingent. Another variant
very widely used revenue stream as our primary source of would be offering package deals with a fixed price, such
revenue. as offering to help set up the first cloud portfolio for a
customer. Finally, higher-level subscription models for the
The first option we want to discuss is advertisement. While
cloud portfolio optimizer platform could include a certain
it is the main revenue stream of many large online platforms
amount of consultancy services for free.
such as YouTube and Facebook, these are mass media B2C
6) Key Resources: As for the differing categories of key
operations with millions or even billions of users, where each
resources, the following can be said: When it comes to
user only generates a relatively small amount of revenue
physical key resources, there is little to be mentioned here.
through displayed advertisements. For our platform, which
While server resources are necessary to host the platform, the
offers a specialized service to business customers, advertise-
hardware required is highly interchangeable and easy to come
ments would mainly discourage users and possibly damage
by.Furthermore,itcouldbemoreadvantageoustocompletely
the brand reputation [32].
forgo physical servers and host the platform itself on a cloud
server.
Next, we have considered the option of transaction fees. This
could be implemented on a usage-based model, where the Financial key resources may also not play a huge role in
customer would pay a certain amount for each optimization starting off. Of course, financial resources such as cash or
based on the portfolio size. Another implementation could credit will be needed to set up the business, but due to its
be a one-time transaction enabling unlimited access to the nature,thesewillbeofasmallvolume.Onepossibleoptionto
CloudPortfolioManager.Bothoptionsarenotoptimalforour gain access to financial resources to start the business would
product. The usage-based model does not lend itself well to a be to apply for one of the many tech start-up sponsorships
productthatismeantforcontinuousoptimization.Thiswould availableinAustria.Themostcriticalkeyresourcesarewithin
either lead to a need to frequently pay for a new allocation or the intellectual resource category, consisting of the portfolio
preventcustomersfromgettingthefullbenefitofanapproach management platform and, in particular, the optimization
that is meant to adapt to changing demands in their portfolio. algorithms, which are at the heart of the operation and are
The one-time charge option faces another drawback, making needed to realize all of the other components of the business
it unfeasible. Seeing as our portfolio manager is intended as a model.
continuousservice,thisone-timechargewouldhavetoaccount
Finally, when it comes to human key resources, the follow-
foralongservicetime,whichinturnwouldincreasetheprice
ing groups can be expected to be part of those: Especially
a level, which would turn it into a severe deterrent for new
for development and improvements to the platform, further
customersthatarenotentirelyconvincedofthebenefitsofthe
full-stack developers could be needed. Furthermore, a small
product yet.
team of cloud consultants would be responsible for providing
Another alternative would be a system based on a brokerage customers with know-how on cloud solutions. Besides that, agroupofemployeeshelpingwithsalesandCRM-relatedtopics
should be employed as well.
7) Key Activities: The most important key activity of the
business is the operation and maintenance of the Cloud Port-
folio Manager platform. In this capacity, the platform offers
the customer an automated service. After creating an account
and logging in, customers can create, delete, and change
their cloud portfolios. Besides a simple interface to directly
manipulate a portfolio, the main feature for management is
the possibility to upload load profiles based upon which an
optimized portfolio of instances is calculated and displayed to
the customer. The load profiles can be uploaded manually on
the website and through a REST API.
In addition to the service provided by the platform, the other
main activity is problem-solving for the customer by offering
our consultancy service. This mainly entails sharing cloud- Fig.6. BusinessModelCanvas[3]ofCloudPortfolioManager
relatedknow-howandaidingthecustomerwithplanning,cre-
ating,andmonitoringtheirowncloudsolutionsandmigrating
their existing applications. B. Model Classification
8) Key Partnerships: Within this building block, the most
prevalentpartnershipsarethevariousCSPsforwhichtheplat- Having described the Cloud Portfolio Managers business
form offers portfolio optimization. While actively managing model, we will now discuss how our model can be clas-
the customer’s portfolio is not part of the business plan so sified within various classification systems developed in the
far, it is crucial to the platform’s functionality to access the literature. Besides the system offered by Timmers [33],
instances and their respective pricing offered by the various we will also apply the classifications of Osterwalder and
providers. Luckily, all major CSPs provide APIs that give Pigneur [3].
access to live data on the current availability and pricing of 1) ClassificationaccordingtoTimmers: Manyauthorsworked
their offered instances. on classifications for e-business models like the classification
made by Timmers [33], which, despite the age of the paper,
stillapplieswelltotoday’se-businessmodels.Theclassesare
If the business grows beyond a small scale, it would be
theE-shop,E-procurement,E-auction,E-mall,third-partymar-
possible for certain activities, such as customer support or
ketplace, virtual communities, value-chain service provider,
cloud consulting, to be outsourced to external partners, which
value-chain integrator, collaboration platform and information
would turn these into key partnerships as well.
broker, trust, and other services. These different models are
9) Cost Structure: The cost structure of the business model
all aligned along two criteria: functional integration, from a
is intended to lean towards being value-driven, focusing on
single function to multiple, and their degree of innovation
creating value for the customer. As the business operates
from lower to higher. Within the classification system of
online with a web platform at its center, scaling should be
Timmers [33], both of our business models’ primary services
achievablerelativelyeasily.Whileanincreaseinthecustomer
put the platform into the information broker model. Those
base will require additional staff for CRM and consulting,
focus on providing information by analyzing or finding data
the platform performance for handling a certain amount of
thatcanbenefitthecustomer’soperations,whichisthecasefor
customerscanbescaledalmostinfinitelyandwithamediocre
both our optimization algorithms and our cloud consultancy
but easily projectable impact on costs.
operations. Aligning our model along the two axes Timmers’
system uses, we will first find a high degree of innovation
In contrast to the platform’s operating costs, which should be with our cloud portfolio optimization, being one of the first
manageable,thesamecannotbesaidaboutitsinitialcreation, ever to offer this kind of service and cloud consultancy being
whichcanbeexpectedtobeoneofthesignificantcostfactors a service that has only emerged in the past few years. Placing
in starting the business. Once the platform is in operation, the ourbusinessalongthefunctionalintegrationaxis,wefindthat
majorcostfactorswillbethepersonnelrequiredfortheCRM, with two main functions, it falls towards the lower end of this
consulting operations, and resources spent on updating and spectrum. Both these placements fit well with the information
expandingtheplatform.Furthercoststhathavetobetakeninto broker classification, as seen in the Figure 7.
account come from actions taken towards the acquisition of 2) Classification according to Osterwalder and Pigneur:
customers,especiallythosementionedintheawarenesssection Now we will classify our model according to the patterns of
of the "channels" building block. Osterwalder and Pigneur [3]:appealing to potential customers.
C. Business Model Contenders
There are only a few business models similar to our ap-
proach.
1) spot.io: First, we will look at the platform spot.io3, which
offers a range of tools for customers to analyze, manage
and optimize their cloud portfolios. Two of their products
provide functionality similar to our cloud portfolio optimiza-
tion approach. Elasticgroup uses AI predictions to automate
infrastructure scaling with the help of spot instances fully.
On the other hand, Eco tries to optimize the customer’s
Fig. 7. Classification of Cloud Portfolio Manager within internet business cloud portfolio by finding and off-loading unused Reserved
models, figure from B. Wall et al., 2007, Production Planning and Control, Instances and Saving Plans. Furthermore, in a similar fashion
page248[34]
to our platform, spot.io also offers consulting options to their
customers, though limited to their highest subscription plan.
Sooverall,regardingthevalueproposition,thisfirmissimilar
• In the case of the "Unbundling" pattern, our business to our business model.
model falls within the product innovation category, with 2) Densify: Next up is the platform Densify4, which offers
a relatively new service on the market and only a a cloud management and optimization service with a similar
few small players present in it so far. The consultancy value proposition to our platform. There is a contrast to our
aspect of our business model could be seen more as platformregardingrevenuestreamandpricingmodel.Densify
a customer relationship management business, meaning charges the customer for each managed instance per year,
that, to prevent this service from conflicting with our with the price depending on the number of instances. Besides
cloudoptimizationservice,separatingthemintodifferent the high prices and seemingly not offering solutions for a
entities like business units may be necessary. portfolioofunder1000instances,Densifydoesnotseemtobe
• Next, considering the so-called "Long Tail", we would incentivized to optimize a customer’s portfolio to need fewer
argue that our model does not adhere to this pattern. Our instances, as they charge per instance.
business focuses on optimizing portfolios consisting of 3) Terraform: Thefinalcloudoptimizationplatformdiscussed
widespread cloud instances that are sold frequently, not is Terraform5. It allows users to express their computational
makingthemnicheproducts.Wealsodonotofferawide infrastructure needs in their own semi-structured language,
range of niche products, only a few services. which then can be deployed to a range of resource providers
• On the other hand, at first glance, it can be argued that like AWS or Google Cloud. The value proposition is to
our product is a "Multi-Sided Platform" of some kind, as simplifyandenableinfrastructuremanagementacrossmultiple
itbringstogethertwointerdependentgroups,andwithout cloud providers. While there is also the capability of easy
the presence of CSPs, our platform could not exist. On scalability of resource needs, there does not seem to be
theotherhand,whilecustomersoptimizingtheirportfolio any optimization of the cloud portfolio. Therefore, this plat-
are profiting from our service, the same cannot be said form’s value proposition does not directly compete with our
for the CSPs themselves, as they rather stand to lose Cloud Portfolio Manager but could work in a complementary
extra revenue generated by unused but paid-for instances way.
running idle. Therefore, as the "Multi-Sided Platform"
pattern should be of value for all involved groups, we V. PORTFOLIOMANAGERPROTOTYPE
argue that our model does not conform to this pattern.
This section will present the prototype of our Cloud Portfolio
• The same cannot be said for the "Free" pattern, as our Manager. It will present an overview of the various pages and
business model will include a small part of our services
showcasethevariousfunctionalitiesoftheapplication.
free of charge. While there will be various levels of
subscription that will cost a monthly fee, there will also A. Login, Registration and Landing Page
be a free trial functionality, offering limited access to the
Starting of, the user is presented with the login page, as seen
service to lure in potential customers. This approach has
in Figure 8, where the user can enter their e-mail address
been labeled as "Freemium".
and password to access the website. In case a new customer
• The final pattern to take into account is the "Open"
does not have an account yet, the Register button leads to
business model. While the "inside-out" approach is not
the registration page as seen in Figure 9, allowing for a new
planned to be part of our business model, the "outside
in" idea could potentially be explored in the future by
3https://spot.io/
integrating external cloud frameworks into the cloud 4https://www.densify.com/
optimization platform, which can make the product more 5https://www.terraform.io/account to be created by entering a valid e-mail address, a load instances provided by CSP APIs. The list on this page
username, and a password. givesanoverviewofeachinstance’smainattributes:provider,
name, market space, capacity, and price. Furthermore, a filter
function allows users to simplify their search for instances.
For example, as shown in Figure 10, the search does not
include Google Cloud instances but instances from all market
spaces, with a capacity of 5 or higher and a price of up to
1000$.
Fig.8. LoginPage
Fig.10. Instancespage
C. Apps and Portfolios Page
Next up, the Apps and portfolios page enables the user to
manage two of the main components of the Cloud Portfolio
Platform. As seen in Figure 11, the left side lists the user’s
applications and details like mean resource demand, demand
variance, preemtibility, and starting and finishing time. On
the right side of the page is a list of the user’s portfolio,
including details like which providers should be considered
for any possible allocation, a minimum quality of service,
the number of apps in the portfolio, and a list of which
applications exactly the portfolio consists of. Finally, it also
statestheportfolio’sversion,whichisincrementedeverytime
a portfolio or one of its applications is changed. It is used
Fig.9. Registrationpage to track which portfolio version a specific allocation has been
calculated for. This enables the user to spot if any of their
Loggingintothewebsitewiththecorrectcredentialsbringsthe
allocationsareoutdatedorifanyspecificationsorthemakeup
customer to the landing page displaying the platform’s logo
of the underlying portfolio have changed.
and listing its creators. This page and all others besides the
loginandregistrationalsofeatureanavbarforeasynavigation To create a new application or portfolio, two green buttons
between the various pages. depict a plus sign on each side of the page. These open the
respectiveapplicationandportfolioforms,asseeninFigure12
B. Instances Page
andFigure13.Tocreateanapplication,theuserhastofillout
This view can be navigated to through the Providers and the application form, including a unique name, mean resource
instances tab in the navbar and contains information about demand, demand variance, a checkbox for preemtibility, and
available instances from the various providers. For our pro- finally, the starting and finishing time chosen via a date-
totype, we chose a range of instances from the four biggest time picker. Should the user wish to create a portfolio, the
CSPs: AWS, Google Cloud, Microsoft Azure, and Alibaba. portfolioformrequiresauniquenameandaminimumquality
They all give good examples of what is available on the of service, which gives a percentage of time the apps in the
market. This could be adapted for future development to portfolio are required to run. The portfolio version, describedFig.11. Appsandportfoliospageoverview
previously, cannot be changed manually by the user. The
portfolio form also requires the user to choose at least one
CSP to be considered for allocations and which apps should
makeuptheportfolio.Toensuresuitableinputsforbothforms,
they also feature various checks, giving instant feedback to
invalid inputs, such as an application’s finishing time before Fig.13. PortfolioForm
its starting time.
partofandincrementtheportfolio’sversion.Togivefeedback
on operations performed on this page, creating, updating, and
deletingapplicationsandportfolioswillresultinashortpopup
denoting a successful operation or, should any errors occur,
give the user notice that there has been an error.
D. Allocations Page
ThistabfocusesontheprimaryfeatureoftheCloudPortfolio
Manager: creating allocations for cloud portfolios. The user
has a dropdown menu at the top of the page, which lists their
created portfolios. Choosing a portfolio shows its details on
the side, and all already existing allocations for this portfolio
are below. Every allocation has an overview stating which
algorithm was used, which portfolio version it was made for,
its total costs, and the mean overall utilization achieved with
thisallocation.Asallocationscantakeawhiletobecalculated,
especially in the case of using the GEORG algorithm, there
is also a field stating if the allocation is already completed.
Below the general stats are two fields, which can be extended
Fig.12. ApplicationForm
by clicking on them. The first contains a complete list of
all instances used for this allocation and some statistics like
Theusercanupdateeachapplicationandportfoliobyclicking
capacity, price, and the beginning and end of the instance’s
the yellow button, which displays a pen icon for every appli-
run time. The second field contains more detailed statistics
cation and portfolio. This will open up the respective form
about the allocation, such as separate statistics for reserved,
already filled out by the app’s or portfolio’s data. For ease
on-demand, and spot instances. Each allocation can also be
of creating several applications with similar characteristics
deleted by clicking the red button with a trashcan icon in the
without having to fill out the entire form every time again,
header section of each entry. On the right side of the alloca-
applications also feature a blue copy button, which will open
tions list, this page also features some data visualization with
the application form filled out with the characteristics of the
graphs comparing the price, utilization overall, and utilization
chosen application and the suffix "_copy" added to its name.
split by instance type for each allocation as bar charts.
Furthermore,clickingtheredbuttondisplayingatrashcanicon
will delete the application or portfolio of choice. Deleting an Tocreateanewallocation,the"NewAllocation"buttonopens
application will also remove it from any portfolios it may be a form where the user can choose which algorithm should beFig.14. Allocationspageoverview
used. In the case of using ERICH, that is all that is required
to do, as there is no parameterization possible. Otherwise,
when selecting GEORG, various options for configuring the
genetic algorithm are available. Examples of this would be
the size of the population, the number of generations, and the
mutation rate. Should the user want to look into this topic
sparingly, there is a default value for each. Otherwise, this
enables experimentation with this algorithm, which can lead
tovaryingresults.Theusershouldbeawarethatthiswillalso
impact performance; for example, a very high population size
ismoreresource-intensiveforthesystemtheplatformrunson.
As the calculation of the allocations is run asynchronously,
there is also a "Refresh" button on this page, which reloads
the allocation data from the backend.
VI. USEREXPERIENCEEVALUATION
After the presentation of our prototype, this section will
provide a brief evaluation of the user experience (UX). It is
crucialforanyplatformtargetingsuccessinthepublicmarket Fig.15. FormforcreatinganewGEORGallocation
to possess a convincing user interface. To this end, we will
discuss the usability heuristics developed by Nielsen et al.
and, based upon these same heuristics, present a brief survey • Match between the system and the real world: This
on the quality of our user interface [35], [36]. refers to a design that communicates by using words and
concepts that a user recognizes instead of internal terms.
A. Usability Heuristics A design that follows this heuristic enables intuitive use
Heuristics are an approach to finding not perfect but adequate of the interface without needing to learn new words or
solutions to a problem, such as the optimization approaches concepts.
we developed in section III. This methodology can also be • User control and freedom: As users like to try various
applied to evaluate the quality of user interfaces. One of the actions and mistakenly perform others, there should al-
most commonly used and widely known usability heuristics ways be an obvious way to go back a step and cancel
is those developed by Nielsen in the 1990s. He proposed ten anyaction.Itpreventsusersfromgettingstuckandgives
general principles for designing user interfaces, which are the them the confidence to try any action within a system
following [35], [36], [37]: freely.
• Consistency and standards: An interface should be con-
• Visibility of system status: This heuristic describes the sistent to offer a good user experience. It refers not only
ability of design to always communicate to the user to consistency within the product you offer but also to
about what is going on within the system in an easily similar products a customer could be accustomed to and
understandableandimmediatemanner.Ausermustknow have developed expectations from.
what the previous interactions resulted in and understand • Error prevention: This refers to designing an interface
which steps can succeed. in a way that helps to prevent the occurrence of errors.Fig.17. Detailsforanallocationwithstatisticsandinstances
that can be executed in various ways.
• Aesthetic and minimalist design: The design of interface
elements should prioritize essential information required
for their functionality. Additional irrelevant or rarely
needed information competes with relevant elements for
visibility.
• Help users recognize, diagnose, and recover from errors:
If errors occur, the system should inform the user using
plain language, providing an accurate description and,
when possible, a suggested solution. Technical terms,
such as error codes and unusual visual design for error
Fig. 16. Graphs for comparison between a GEORG and ERICH allocation
messages, should be avoided.
foranexampleportfolio
• Help and documentation: While in the best case, a
system does not need any further explanation, it may be
necessarytoofferdocumentationtocompletesometasks.
Errors can be categorized into slips and mistakes. Slips
Saiddocumentationshouldbeconcise,easilysearchable,
are unconscious errors caused by inattentiveness and can
and consist of concrete steps to be carried out.
be combated by setting helpful constraints and defaults.
On the other hand, mistakes happen consciously and
B. Methodology
result from the design not properly communicating the
We will evaluate the Cloud Portfolio Optimizer frontend
modeltotheuser.Theycanbealleviatedbyenablingthe
design based on these heuristics. This will consist of five
undoing of errors and reasonable warnings.
testersgoingthroughasetoftasksonourplatformandfilling
• Recognition rather than recall: As users have limited
outaquestionnaireafterward.Whilethenumberoftestersmay
short-term memory, a good design does not rely on the
seem relatively low, Nielsen et al. mention in their work that
recall of elements, actions, and options but encourages
in contrast to one tester often missing a lot of problems, three
recognition.Additionalinformationisneededandshould
to five aggregated evaluations offer good results [35].
be easily accessible if required.
• Flexibility and efficiency of use: This heuristic provides Fortheevaluationprocess,eachtesterisexpectedtocomplete
experienced users with possibilities to speed up inter-
the following list of tasks:
actions that inexperienced users may not need, e.g.,
keyboard shortcuts. These allow for flexible processes • Create a new account and log into it.Visibilityofsystemstatus 3.8
• Navigate to the ’about methods’ page and skim over the
Matchbetweenthesystemandtherealworld 3.4
description.
Usercontrolandfreedom 4.4
• Gototheinstancespage,lookattheinstancesdisplayed, Consistencyandstandards 4.0
and use the available filters. Errorprevention 3.0
Recognitionratherthanrecall 4.0
• Navigate to the applications and portfolios page, create Flexibilityandefficiencyofuse 3.8
four new applications, update one of them, copy another, Aestheticandminimalistdesign 4.6
and finally delete one. Helpusersrecognize,diagnose,andrecoverfromerrors 3.4
Helpanddocumentation 3.4
• Create two portfolios, update one, and delete one.
TABLEIV
• Finally, proceed to the allocations page and create one TABLEOFAVERAGEASSESSMENTFOREACHHEURISTIC
allocation for each optimization approach.
• Log out from the platform, which returns the user to the
sign-in page.
To sum up, the testers rated the platform positively regarding
most heuristics and provided helpful feedback for improve-
Havingcompletedthetasksabove,thetesterswillbeaskedto
completeaquestionnairebasedonNielsen´sheuristics.Itwas ment. The suggested feedback concerning minor changes has
already been applied, while others inform future ways of
created using Google Forms6), and asked the user to rate the
improving the platform, such as adding a user guide.
platforminregardstohowwellitadherestoeachofthedesign
heuristics on a scale from 1 to 5, with 5 representing the best
VII. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK
possible adherence. Furthermore, the testers were questioned
This paper focuses on cloud portfolio management platforms
onwhethertheyfoundanyissuesorhadsuggestionsregarding
and related business models. Cloud portfolio management
each heuristic. To gauge the testers’ expertise in regards to IT
is primarily concerned with finding cost-efficient allocations
in general and the topic of cloud markets, the survey also
for cloud resources. Having discussed the necessary concepts
contains a self-assessment of these topics.
around the work built, we proposed our business model
for a Cloud Portfolio Manager. With the business model in
C. Results
place, we implemented a prototype of the Cloud portfolio
The questionnaire results gave helpful feedback on the design manager [38], incorporating two optimization algorithms that
of the user interface and pointed out a couple of errors had been developed [39].
that were overlooked in development. Five testers completed
As the cloud computing market has been on a meteoric rise
the survey as described in subsection VI-B. Regarding IT-
over the past years and is still expanding, the topic of cloud
related experience, two testers reported no background in IT,
portfolio management will likely keep or expand its relevance
one mentioned having educational knowledge, and two stated
in the coming years. Future work would see the prototype
having work-related IT experience. The testers’ knowledge
developed into a fully functional public platform operating
about the cloud market was somewhat limited, with three
with our business model or a modification of it. Furthermore,
testersstatingtheirunderstandingtobecursoryandtwohaving
the platform’s offered services could be extended into various
no knowledge about the topic.
monitoring functionalities and direct control of portfolios
Overall,theplatformwasperceivedasadheringtomostheuris- via the platform. Further work will improve the existing
ticsprettywell,withsomeachievingbetterresultsthanothers. optimization algorithms and create new ones. In addition to
Thebest-ratedheuristicswerethoseof"aestheticandminimal- tighter packing, these could, for example, elaborate on the
istdesign"aswellas"usercontrolandfreedom,"achievingan resource constraints considered, such as network capabilities
average of 4.6 and 4.4 points, respectively. The heuristics of and storage. Finally, further research will build upon the
"consistency and standards" and "recognition and standards" business model presented in this thesis. Thus, we work on
alsoscoredwell,averaging4.0 points.Allotherheuristicsgot integratingthepresentedapproachintoourworkonautomatic
an average of 3.4 or 3.8, with the notable exception of "error and dynamic resource (re-)negotiation and contracting of re-
prevention" only scoring 3.0 on average. The complete list of sources between providers and customers [40].
average scoring can be seen in Table IV.
REFERENCES
These results point towards the platform having an aesthetic
[1] S. O. Services, “Annual revenue of amazon web services (aws)
and mostly easy-to-use design, with room for improvement from 2013 to 2022,” https://www.statista.com/statistics/233725/
in error prevention and handling, as well as documentation development-of-amazon-web-services-revenue/,accessed:2023-10-09.
and help. All testers, except for one, who provided no useful [2] B.Pittl,W.Mach,andE.Schikuta,“Cost-evaluationofcloudportfolios:
feedback by rating several heuristics poorly without offering An empirical case study,” in Proceedings of the 9th International
Conference on Cloud Computing and Services Science (CLOSER).
any comments, also reported issues they encountered and
SciTePress,2019,pp.132–143.
provided suggestions for improvement.
[3] A.OsterwalderandY.Pigneur,Businessmodelgeneration:ahandbook
forvisionaries,gamechangers,andchallengers. JohnWiley&Sons,
6https://docs.google.com/forms/u/0 2010,vol.1.[4] M. Law, “Technology biggest cloud providers [22] K. Kang, I. Moon, and H. Wang, “A hybrid genetic algorithm with a
2023,” https://technologymagazine.com/top10/ new packing strategy for the three-dimensional bin packing problem,”
top-10-biggest-cloud-providers-in-the-world-in-2023, 2023, Accessed: AppliedMathematicsandComputation,vol.219,no.3,pp.1287–1299,
16.06.2023. 2012.
[5] E. Fielt, “Conceptualising business models: Definitions, frameworks [23] S. Martello and P. Toth, “Lower bounds and reduction procedures for
and classifications,” Journal of Business Models, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. thebinpackingproblem,”Discreteappliedmathematics,vol.28,no.1,
85–105,2013.[Online].Available:https://eprints.qut.edu.au/75316/ pp.59–70,1990.
[6] S. Labes, N. Hanner, and R. Zarnekow, “Successful business model [24] M. Safe, J. Carballido, I. Ponzoni, and N. Brignole, “On stopping
typesofcloudproviders,”Business&InformationSystemsEngineering, criteria for genetic algorithms,” in Brazilian Symposium on Artificial
vol.59,no.4,pp.223–233,2017. Intelligence. Springer,2004,pp.405–413.
[25] A. W. S. (AWS), “Solutions,” 2017. [Online]. Available: https:
[7] A. Elhabbash, F. Samreen, J. Hadley, and Y. Elkhatib, “Cloud
brokerage: A systematic survey,” ACM Comput. Surv., vol. 51, no. 6, //aws.amazon.com/solutions/case-studies/netflix-kinesis-data-streams/
Jan. 2019. [Online]. Available: https://doi-org.uaccess.univie.ac.at/10. [26] J.Repschlaeger,K.Erek,andR.Zarnekow,“Cloudcomputingadoption:
1145/3274657 anempiricalstudyofcustomerpreferencesamongstart-upcompanies,”
Electronicmarkets,vol.23,no.2,pp.115–148,2013.
[8] E. Filiopoulou, P. Mitropoulou, C. Michalakelis, and M. Nikolaidou,
“The rise of cloud brokerage: Business model, profit making and cost [27] P. Foundation, “Pytorch Checkpoints,” https://pytorch.org/tutorials/
savings,” in Economics of Grids, Clouds, Systems, and Services, J. Á. recipes/recipes/saving_and_loading_a_general_checkpoint.html, 2023,
Bañares,K.Tserpes,andJ.Altmann,Eds. Cham:SpringerInternational Accessed:12.05.2023.
Publishing,2017,pp.19–32.
[28] TensorFlow, “Tensorflow Checkpoints,” https://www.tensorflow.org/
[9] M.Kiessler,V.Haag,B.Pittl,andE.Schikuta,“Optimizationheuristics guide/checkpoint,2023,Accessed:12.05.2023.
forcost-efficientlong-termcloudportfolioallocations,”inInternational
Conference on Information Integration and Web. Springer, 2022, pp. [29] M. Agarwal and G. M. S. Srivastava, “Cloud computing: A paradigm
309–323. shift in the way of computing.” International Journal of Modern
Education&ComputerScience,vol.9,no.12,2017.
[10] I. Jangjaimon and N.-F. Tzeng, “Effective cost reduction for elastic
[30] S. C. Boerman, S. Kruikemeier, and F. J. Z. Borgesius, “Online
clouds under spot instance pricing through adaptive checkpointing,”
behavioral advertising: A literature review and research agenda,”
IEEETransactionsonComputers,vol.64,no.2,pp.396–409,2013.
Journal of Advertising, vol. 46, no. 3, pp. 363–376, 2017. [Online].
[11] P. Sharma, D. Irwin, and P. Shenoy, “Portfolio-driven resource man- Available:https://doi.org/10.1080/00913367.2017.1339368
agement for transient cloud servers,” Proceedings of the ACM on
[31] S. Roy, S. S., and S. Bhatia, “Service quality versus service
Measurement and Analysis of Computing Systems, vol. 1, no. 1, pp.
experience: An empirical examination of the consequential effects in
1–23,2017.
b2b services,” Industrial Marketing Management, vol. 82, pp. 52–
[12] I.HwangandM.Pedram,“Portfoliotheory-basedresourceassignment 69, 2019. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
in a cloud computing system,” in 2012 IEEE Fifth International Con- article/pii/S0019850117301463
ferenceonCloudComputing. IEEE,2012,pp.582–589.
[32] M. Eurich, A. Giessmann, T. Mettler, and K. Stanoevska-Slabeva,
“Revenue streams of cloud-based platforms: Current state and future
[13] J.Martinovic,M.Hähnel,W.Dargie,andG.Scheithauer,“Astochastic
directions.”inAMCIS,2011.
binpackingapproachforserverconsolidationwithconflicts,”inOper-
ationsResearchProceedings2019. Springer,2020,pp.159–165. [33] P.Timmers,“Businessmodelsforelectronicmarkets,”Electronicmar-
kets,vol.8,no.2,pp.3–8,1998.
[14] G. Wu, M. Tang, Y.-C. Tian, and W. Li, “Energy-efficient virtual ma-
chineplacementindatacentersbygeneticalgorithm,”inInternational [34] B.Wall,H.Jagdev,andJ.Browne,“Areviewofebusinessanddigital
conferenceonneuralinformationprocessing. Springer,2012,pp.315– business—applications, models and trends,” Production Planning and
323. Control,vol.18,no.3,pp.239–260,2007.
[15] M.DeCauwer,D.Mehta,andB.O’Sullivan,“Thetemporalbinpacking [35] J. Nielsen and R. Molich, “Heuristic evaluation of user interfaces,” in
problem: an application to workload management in data centres,” ProceedingsoftheSIGCHIconferenceonHumanfactorsincomputing
in 2016 IEEE 28th International Conference on Tools with Artificial systems,1990,pp.249–256.
Intelligence(ICTAI). IEEE,2016,pp.157–164.
[36] J.Nielsen,“Enhancingtheexplanatorypowerofusabilityheuristics,”in
[16] M.Dell’Amico,F.Furini,andM.Iori,“Abranch-and-pricealgorithmfor ProceedingsoftheSIGCHIconferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing
thetemporalbinpackingproblem,”Computers&OperationsResearch, Systems,1994,pp.152–158.
vol.114,p.104825,2020.
[37] “Docker,” https://www.nngroup.com/articles/ten-usability-heuristics/,
[17] C. Chekuri and S. Khanna, “On multidimensional packing problems,” 2024,Accessed:01.02.2024.
SIAMjournaloncomputing,vol.33,no.4,pp.837–851,2004.
[38] V.Haag,“Acloudportfoliomanager-anovelbusinessmodel,”Master’s
[18] E. C. man Jr, M. Garey, and D. Johnson, “Approximation algorithms thesis,UniversityofVienna,2024.
for bin packing: A survey,” Approximation algorithms for NP-hard
[39] M. Kiessler, “A cloud portfolio manager - optimization strategies for
problems,pp.46–93,1996.
efficient resource allocations,” Master’s thesis, University of Vienna,
2022.
[19] C. Reeves, “Hybrid genetic algorithms for bin-packing and related
problems,”AnnalsofOperationsResearch,vol.63,no.3,pp.371–396, [40] W. Mach and E. Schikuta, “A generic negotiation and re-negotiation
1996. frameworkforconsumer-providercontractingofwebservices,”inPro-
ceedingsofthe14thInternationalConferenceonInformationIntegration
[20] E. Falkenauer, “A hybrid grouping genetic algorithm for bin packing,”
andWeb-basedApplications&Services,2012,pp.348–351.
Journalofheuristics,vol.2,no.1,pp.5–30,1996.
[21] M. Quiroz-Castellanos, L. Cruz-Reyes, J. Torres-Jimenez, C. Gómez,
H.J.F.Huacuja,andA.C.Alvim,“Agroupinggeneticalgorithmwith
controlled gene transmission for the bin packing problem,” Computers
&OperationsResearch,vol.55,pp.52–64,2015.