1
Driver Fatigue Prediction using Randomly Activated
Neural Networks for Smart Ridesharing Platforms
Sree Pooja Akula, Mukund Telukunta, Venkata Sriram Siddhardh Nadendla
Department of Computer Science,
Missouri University of Science and Technology, Rolla, MO, USA.
Email: {sacqx, mt3qb, nadendla}@umsystem.edu
Abstract—Drivers in ridesharing platforms exhibit cognitive passengers are provided with wait-location recommendation
atrophy and fatigue as they accept ride offers along the day, to reduce the trip-cost [4] and plan ride suggestions [5] to
whichcanhaveasignificantimpactontheoverallefficiencyofthe
improve their experience. On the other hand, drivers are
ridesharingplatform.Incontrasttothecurrentliteraturewhich
provided with ride choices, along with incentives if/when
focuses primarily on modeling and learning driver’s preferences
acrossdifferentrideoffers,thispaperproposesanovelDynamic passenger’s future activity is predicted in a location that has
Discounted Satisficing (DDS) heuristic to model and predict very few drivers. The success of such recommendations relies
driver’s sequential ride decisions during a given shift. Based on heavilyontheaccuracyofnetworkstateinformation(NSI)[6],
DDS heuristic, a novel stochastic neural network with random
[7]availableattheplatform.Forexample,Altshuleretal.pre-
activations is proposed to model DDS heuristic and predict the
dicted spatio-temporal utilization of ridesharing services from final decision made by a given driver. The presence of random
activations in the network necessitated the development of a passengeractivitymodelsextractedfromNSI[8].[9]extracted
noveltrainingalgorithmcalledSampling-BasedBackPropagation NSI from GPS data and identified the passenger’s demand
Through Time (SBPTT), where gradients are computed for hot area and proposed a taxi station optimization model by
independentinstancesofneuralnetworks(obtainedviasampling
analyzing the time series distribution dynamic characteristics
thedistributionofactivationthreshold)andaggregatedtoupdate
ofpassenger’stemporalvariationincertainlandusetypesand
the network parameters. Using both simulation experiments as
well as on real Chicago taxi dataset, this paper demonstrates taxi driver’s searching behavior in connection with different
the improved performance of the proposed approach, when activity spaces for different lengths of observation period.
compared to state-of-the-art methods. However, all of the aforementioned works rely on NSI,
Index Terms—Ridesharing, Human Decision Models, Stochas- and do not capture the attributes related to driver’s behavior.
tic Neural Networks Macadam in [10] emphasizes the importance of including
human characteristics in models of driver control behavior
to accurately predict the performance of the driver-vehicle
I. INTRODUCTION
system. Macadam identified physical limitations and unique
Ridesharing platform is a cyber-physical-human system attributes of human drivers and presented driver models com-
where available taxi drivers are matched to ride-seeking pas- monly used for prediction. A natural surrogate to driver’s
sengers by the platform, based on spatio-temporal dynamics cognitive atrophy due to fatigue is their stopping task (a.k.a.
of diverse factors such as traffic congestion, ride availability the total number of rides completed by the driver). Therefore,
and revenue. In traditional taxi services, drivers are expected predictingdriver’sstoppingtaskcangreatlyhelpinimproving
to serve passengers who are assigned to them by the platform theperformanceofridesharingplatforms.However,tothebest
without any choice. On the other hand, modern ridesharing of our knowledge, there is little work on cognitive atrophy
platforms (e.g. Uber and Lyft) match drivers with passengers prediction from driver’s ride productivity on a ridesharing
and allow drivers to either accept/reject the match offer, thus platform. Devaguptapu in [11] predicts the stopping task
preserving the decision autonomy at both types of agents of an agent during sequential decision-making using Dis-
[1], [2]. However, if the ridesharing platform can predict the counted Satisficing (DS) heuristic where the agent’s threshold
stopping decision made by every driver prior to that actual discounts over time. However, the model was found to be
event, then ride requests can be optimized so as to maximize inaccurate when people exhibit DS models with varying, yet
the average revenue of the platform. However, little work is dependent parameters across days.
available on the prediction of driver’s stopping decision (i.e. The main contributions of this paper are three-fold. Firstly,
finaltaskperformedduringagivenday),especiallywhenthey this paper proposes a novel decision heuristic called dynamic
exhibit behavioral deviations from expected utility maximiza- discounted satisficing (DDS) which captures the dynamics
tion (EUM) behavior [3]. Therefore, this paper focuses on the of satisficing threshold. Secondly, this paper proposes novel
prediction of driver’s stopping decision to help improve the neural network architectures with random activations that
performance of ridesharing platforms. are designed to mimic the DDS heuristic. Thirdly, a novel
Practical ridesharing platforms offer diverse recommenda- learning algorithm called sampling-based backpropagation
tions to both passengers as well as drivers. For example, through time (S-BPTT) is also developed to train the pro-
4202
rpA
61
]GL.sc[
1v48601.4042:viXra2
posedstochasticneuralnetworkstoaccuratelypredictdriver’s S DS DDS Utility
cognitive atrophy via learning the DDS model parameters in DAY1 DAY2
a data-driven manner. The proposed approach is validated on 20 20
simulation experiments and on Chicago taxi dataset [12].
Theremainderofthepaperisorganizedasfollows.Section
Utility
15 15
I
s
aI
a
ntm
i ds
eo
fi
td
c
ae
i in
ll es
g
d,dr
a
ili nv lude sr tj’ rus asc
tt
io
i
vfig een
s
ei xt ti ahv mee pa nt ler eeo .dp Inh fy
o
Sru
es
cs ui tn
ic
og
h
nd
a
Iy
Im
In ,a
o
tm
hd
eeic
l
ad
a
rcli os hc
n
io
tg
eu cwn tut ie
t
rd
h
e
Accumulated
10
5
10
5
of the proposed model and a novel Sampling-based Back tdstdds ts tdds tds ts
Propagation Through Time (SBPTT) training algorithm are 1 2 3 4 5 1 2 3 4 5
Tasks Tasks
deliberated upon. Following this, Section IV elucidates the
Fig. 1: Illustrative Example of Three Different Decision-
assumptions regarding model parameters for simulation ex-
Making Models over 5 Tasks.
periments, as well as the preprocessing steps undertaken for
the real-world dataset. The discussion on validation results is
contained within Section V. Finally, Section VI outlines our
future research.
B. Illustrative Example
II. MODELINGDRIVER’SCOGNITIVEATROPHY Consider an illustrative example of a ride-sharing platform,
whereadriverhasthesamesetoffivetaxiridesfortwodays.
A. Dynamic Discounted Satisficing
Let the corresponding utilities obtained by the driver be given
Consider a ridesharing platform, where a driver serves a
as U =[6,4,2,0,9], for d∈{1,2} and t∈{1,··· ,5}. Let
totalofT ridesondthday.Letu denotetheutilityobtained d,t
d d,k the driver’s DDS model parameters be initialized as λ =15,
by the driver upon completing the kth ride on dth day. The 0
β =0.9, a =0.8, a =0.2, b =0.8, and b =0.2. In the
totalaccumulatedutilityofthedriveraftercompletingT rides 0 1 2 1 2
d case of Satisficing (S) model, the threshold remains constant
on day d is defined as
atλ =15forbothdaysacrossalltasks.Asaresult,S yields
s
(cid:88)t the same stopping task as t
s
= 5 for both days, as shown in
U = u (1)
d,Td d,k Figure 1 (Left). On the contrary, assume that the Discounted
k=1 Satisficing (DS) model has the threshold and the discounting
Henceforth,forsimplicity,ignorethesubscriptT inU and
d d,Td factor defined as λ
ds
=15 and β
ds
=0.9 respectively. Due to
denote the total utility accumulated by the driver on day d as
the static nature of DS across days, the stopping task t =3
ds
U .Thedriver’sboundedrationalityismodeledusingdynamic
d remainsthesameforbothdays,justasobservedinthecaseof
discountedsatisficing(DDS)whichmodelstwodifferenttypes
S model.However,intheproposedDDSmodel,thethreshold
ofdynamicswithinthesatisficingthreshold:(i)theattritionof
anddiscountingfactorvariesdynamicallyacrossdaysbasedon
threshold within a given day due to increasing weariness over
Equations(3)and(4).Therefore,thethresholdanddiscounting
time,and(ii)theevolutionoftheinitialtargetandfatiguerate
factor on Day-1 are λ =15 and β =0.9 respectively,
dds1 dds1
across days. Then, DDS can be formally defined as:
which results in a stopping task of t = 3, while the
dds
Definition 1. A driver is said to exhibit dynamic dis- threshold and discounting factor on Day-2 are λ dds2 = 16.2
counted satisficing heuristic, if there exists four real numbers and β dds2 = 0.73 respectively, thus resulting in a stopping
a 1,a 2,b 1,b 2 ∈ R, one positive real number λ ∈ R +, one task of t dds =2, as shown in Figure 1. In other words, since
bounded real number β ∈ (0,1], and two arrays of random the taxi driver earned more than threshold on Day-1, he/she
numbers ϵ ∼N(0,1) and η ∼N(0,1) for d∈N, such that will more motivated on Day-2. However, with the increase in
d d
his/her final ride count t∗ is given by driver’s fatigue, the threshold will decrease steeply over Day-
(cid:40) t (cid:41) 2.Asaresult,thetaxidrivertendstostopservingridesearlier
t∗ =minimize t∈T | U =(cid:88) u ≥βt−1·λ (2) than Day-1.
d d,t d,k d d
Note that the S and DS models yield the same stopping
k=1
times for both days, when the utility of the driver remains
where the dynamics of initial target λ and the discounting
d
constant. However, the proposed DDS model produces a
factor β are respectively given by
d
different stopping times for each day, due to the changing
(cid:16) (cid:17)
λ d =P [0,∞] a 1·λ d−1+a 2·U d−1+ϵ d , (3) threshold and discounting factor. The dynamic nature of the
DDS model is consistent with the behavior of ridesharing
and
(cid:16) (cid:17) drivers, especially as their wealth and attrition simultaneously
β
d
=P
[0,1]
b 1·β d−1+b 2·e−Td−1 +η
d
. (4)
increases across days in most cases.
where P (x) denotes the projection operator that projects the
S
input argument x onto the set S, i.e. C. Need for DDS Model
 x , if x≤x ≜infS, Satisficing (S) and Discounted Satisficing (DS) are con-
 L L
sidered as different decision-making models that incorporate
P (x)= x, if x∈S, (5)
S the concept of satisficing, i.e., a minimum acceptable level of
x
, if x≥x ≜supS. utility. However, these decision-making models differ in their
U L3
Fig. 3: Task Decision Maker Architecture
Fig. 2: Model Architecture
assumptionsonhowthethresholdisappliedandupdatedover
time.TheconceptofsatisficingwasfirstintroducedbySimon
in [13], [14], where it is defined as an agent’s decision to
stopchoosingfromthealternativeswhenthetotalaccumulated
utility goes beyond a specific threshold. However, satisficing
assumes that the threshold constructed by an agent remains
constantthroughoutthedecision-makingprocess.Specifically,
the objective of the agent is to achieve an accumulated utility
that is at least as good as their threshold, but are indifferent
towardstheoptimaloutcome.Devaguptapuetal.[11]predicts
the stopping time of an agent based on discounted satisficing
heuristic, where the agent’s threshold gets discounted with
Fig. 4: Dynamic Threshold Architecture
time. In other words, the agent is assumed to experience
discontent as well as discounts their threshold with time,
making the agent satisfied much earlier than intended.
Therefore, this paper proposes a novel decision heuristic
known as Dynamic Discounted Satisficing (DDS) which cap-
turesthedynamicsofthesatisficingthreshold.Specifically,the
proposed approach allows to capture the change in an agent’s
discontent/motivation as they approach towards the end of the
task over the course of a day. This paper strongly believes
that humans do not always make optimal decisions, but rather
aim for satisfactory outcomes given limited information and
cognitive resources. The DDS model incorporates temporal
dynamics by modeling how the driver’s initial target and
fatigue rate evolve over time. This is important because real-
Fig. 5: Dynamic Threshold Architecture
world decision-making often involves adapting to changing
circumstances and learning from past experiences.The DDS A. Architecture Design
model is flexible and can be adapted to different contexts. In
The objective of the Task Decision Maker is to predict the
this paper, we model the driver’s bounded rationality using
probability that the driver decides to either continue working
DDS model and predict how many ride requests a driver will
or stop working for the day. Let x denote the probability of
d,t
accept on a given day. DDS can improve planning, designing thedriverchoosingtoacceptthetth riderequestondayd.As
and optimizing ridesharing platforms so as to promote more
per Definition 1, the driver continues to accept ride requests
favorable driver behavior.
as long as the difference between the discounted threshold
βt−1·λ and the accumulated utility U up to task t on day
III. MODELINGDDSUSINGNEURALNETWORKS d d d,t
d is non-negative. In other words, given the driver’s utility
This paper employs the dynamic discounted satisficing acrossttasksandthedynamicallyupdatedparameters,λ ,β ,
d d
model based on the combination of classical statistical mod- the probability x is defined as follows.
d,t
eling techniques and data-driven systems as discussed by
Shlezinger et al. in [15]. As shown in Figure 2, the dynamic (cid:34) (cid:88)t (cid:35)
x =σ βt−1·λ − u (6)
discounted satisficing heuristic is modelled as a sequential d,t d d d,k
decision-making strategy employed by a driver, incorporating k=1
two vital components: (i) the task decision maker and (ii) the If x ≥0.5, the driver will continue to work, otherwise, the
d,t
parameter update network. driver will stop working on the tasks for the day.4
Algorithm1Sampling-basedBackPropagationThroughTime is calculated. Then, the gradients of the loss with respect
1: Inputs: Uˆ D×T,x∗ D×T,ϵ∼N(0,1),η ∼N(0,1) to the network parameters are computed for each random
sample, and are averaged across all the random samples.
2: Initialize: Finally, the model parameters w are updated using simple
Model parameters w =[a ,a ,b ,b ]
1 2 1 2 gradient descent with a learning rate α, and this process is
Learning rate α=0.01
repeated for all time steps d until the model converges to a
∂L
Initial gradient =0 satisfactorylevelofaccuracyonthetrainingdata.Notably,by
∂w
incorporating randomness through ϵ and η , we account for
3: for d=D to 1 do r r
the randomness in human behavior, potentially enhancing the
4: for r =1 to R do
overall performance of the model.
5: Predicted output: xˆ d,r =f(Uˆ d×T,x∗ D×T,ϵ r,η r)
6: Loss: L d,r =L(xˆ d,r,x∗ D×T)
∂L IV. EXPERIMENTDESIGN
d,r
7: Loss gradients:
∂w One of the main challenges with validating the proposed
8: end for
R method on real datasets is our inability to observe cognitive
9: Empiricalmeanoflossgradients:
∂L
=
1 (cid:88)∂L
d,r parameters such as the discounting factor β and the thresh-
∂w R ∂w
old λ. Therefore, the proposed method is validated on both
r=1
∂L
simulated experiments as well as real-world datasets. The
10: Gradient descent update: w ←w−α
∂w main goal of the simulation experiments is to validate if
11: end for
the proposed neural network tracks the dynamics within the
dynamicdiscountedsatisficingmodel.Subsequently,thesame
method is also validated on a real dataset when the DDS
On the other hand, the Parameter Update Network updates
model parameters are unobservable. Both these experiments
λ and β as shown in Equation (4) and (3). The initial
d d are discussed in detail in the remainder of this section.
threshold λ , is a positive real number, which depends on the
d
previous day λ , the total accumulated utility of the driver
d−1
up to the previous day U , and ϵ with a standard normal A. Simulation Experiment
d−1 d
distribution ϵ ∼ N(0,1), as shown in Figure 4. The neural
d Asequenceofride-requestsreceivedbyasingledriverwith
network model used is a noisy perceptron, which introduces DDS model parameters λ =70, β =0.87 is simulated over
0 0
randomness into the model. The dynamics of the parameter a period of N = 500 days in this experiment. The corre-
update network are updated, where a 1 and a 2 are the model sponding ride utilities Uˆ are randomly generated from
D×T
parameters. The model uses the rectified linear unit (ReLU) an exponential distribution with scale = 10. The exponential
activationfunction,whichmapsinputvaluestotheset[0,∞).
distribution is a suitable choice for modeling the driver’s
Thediscountingbehaviorofthedriverovertimeisdetermined
utilities because it is a continuous probability distribution that
by the discounting factor β , where β ∈(0,1]. The value of
d d is commonly used to model the events in a Poisson process.
β on day d, as shown in Figure 5, depends on the previous
d In the context of our example, the exponential distribution
day’s discounting factor, β , the stopping task of the driver
d−1 captures the randomness and unpredictability of the driver’s
on the previous day, T , and η with a standard normal
d−1 d utility from each ride. Assuming that the driver accepts the
distribution, η ∼ N(0,1). The neural network model used
d ride request at the start of each day, his/her sequence of ride-
is a noisy perceptron, where η d introduces randomness into acceptance decisions y∗ are simulated according to the
D×T
themodel.Thedynamicsoftheparameterupdatenetworkare
stated DDS model. Note that the rider decision at any given
updated,whereb 1andb 2arethemodelparameters.Themodel instantisabinaryvariable,whichtakesthevalue1ifthedriver
uses the sigmoid activation function,which maps input values accepts a ride-request, or takes the value of 0 otherwise.
to the set [0,1).
B. Chicago Taxi Dataset and Preprocessing
B. Training Algorithm and Performance Metrics
Our theoretical findings are also validated on a real-world
In order to effectively train our neural networks on sequen- dataset,theChicagoTaxidataset,thatisobtainedfromtheCity
tial data, a novel approach called Sampling-based Backprop- of Chicago’s Open Data Portal [12]. This dataset consists in-
agation Through Time (SBPTT), inspired by the conventional formationregardingtheindividualtaxitripsservedinChicago
Backpropagation Through Time (BPTT) algorithm [16], is including taxi ID, trip start and end timestamps, trip duration,
proposed. The SBPTT algorithm (Algorithm 1) takes Uˆ tripdistances,triptotalfare,andpaymenttype.Forthisstudy,
D×T
as an input sequence and generates a prediction sequence the input attributes are limited to trip start timestamp, trip end
xˆ . As shown in Algorithm 1, the forward propagation is timestamp, and trip total fare. Here, the attribute trip total
d,r
performed to compute the predicted output xˆ for each fare indicates the amount received by a driver for a specific
d,r
randomsamplerbypassingtheinputsequenceUˆ through taxi trip. In other words, the utility of the taxi driver can
d×T
the network, incorporating random variables ϵ and η sam- be defined as the total amount received for all trips served
r r
pled from a normal distribution. Subsequently, the loss L in a day. Therefore, the utility of a taxi driver is computed
d,r
between the predicted output xˆ and the true output x∗ by summing up the trip total fares he/she received for each
d,r D×T5
(a) R=1 (b) R=8 (c) R=32
Fig. 6: Error in Estimating λ and β Mode Parameters across 20 Epochs.
d d
day. Furthermore, a sample of 10 different taxi drivers is is observed as the number of random samples increase from
selectedrandomly.Theresultantdatasetispartitionedintotwo R=1 to R=8,32, as shown in Figure 6c.
sub-datasets, (i) input dataset, which contains the computed On the hand, Figure 7 demonstrates the accuracy of the
trip total fares for each day, denoted as Uˆ , and (ii) proposed model in comparison with the DS model. It can be
D×T
expected output dataset, that contains the same values labeled observedthattheDDSalgorithmoutperformstheDSmodelby
as expected output, denoted as y∗ . The input dataset is almost25%intermsoftrainingaccuracy,asshownintheFig-
D×T
padded with the average of all trip total fares to fill the ure7a.Moreover,thetrainingaccuracyfortheDDSalgorithm
rest, and the expected output dataset is encoded into binary increases with the number of random samples R = 1,8,32.
format, where trip total fare values are replaced with 1 and Similar results are also observed in testing phase as well,
the remaining with 0. where the test accuracy increases with the number of random
Theproposedmodelwastrainedonthepreprocesseddataset samples,asshowninFigure7b.Inaddition,Figure??depicts
with 40-60% train-test splits. The random variables ϵ and η the BCE loss incurred while training the simulated data using
d d
are sampled from normal distribution allowing the model to the proposed algorithm DDS. Specifically, DDS demonstrated
effectivelyaccountfortheinherentvariabilityandrandomness less loss when compared to the DS model, regardless of
inhumanbehavior,therebyenhancingtheoverallperformance the number of random samples considered. However, on the
and generalization capabilities. The stochastic nature of the contrary, the loss incurred with R=1 random sample is less
model enables it to effectively capture uncertainties and vari- than the loss with R=8,32 random samples both in training
ations in the data, making it well-suited for predicting the as well as testing phase.
stopping time of taxi drivers in the City of Chicago based
on the total amount they received (utility) for each trip. On B. Results on Chicago Taxi Dataset
the other hand, the model parameters w = [a 1,a 2,b 1,b 2] are Figure 8 shows the accuracy of the proposed model on
updated using the gradient descent algorithm with a learning Chicago Taxi dataset for different number of random samples
rate of α = 0.01. Finally, the Discounted Satisficing (DS) R=1,8,32.TheproposedDDSmodelattained78%accuracy
modelproposedbyDevaguptapuetal.in[11]wasalsotrained with R = 32 samples over 10 epochs, while the accuracy
on the same preprocessed dataset containing 10 drivers. The of the DS model [11] is around 65% for the same training
performance of our proposed model SBPTT is compared with dataset, as shown in Figure 8a. Moreover, the accuracy of the
the DS model in terms of binary cross-entropy loss (BCE) as DDS model increases with the number of random samples.
well as accuracy. Similar results can also be observed in testing phase as
depicted in Figure 8b. In addition, the Figures 9a and 9b
V. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION demonstrates the average λ and β values of 10 drivers for
different random sample sizes R, where it can be implied
A. Simulation Results
that as R increases the average λ and β values become more
The convergence of the threshold λ and the discounting stable.Thisstabilityintheparameterssuggeststhatthemodel
d
factor β is first validated, given that these model parameters becomesmorerobustandlesssensitivetothespecifictraining
d
are observable in the simulation setting. Figure 6 illustrates data it is exposed to. In summary, the results demonstrate
that the error in λ and β converges to zero over 20 epochs that increasing the value of R has a positive impact on both
d d
for all random sample sizes R = 1,8,32. More specifically, the loss and accuracy of the model. The trend of decreasing
the proposed model only needs 8 epochs in estimating the lossandincreasingaccuracywithhighervaluesofRindicates
model parameters, λ and β, precisely. This can be attributed that the model’s performance improves as it learns from more
to the fact that the dynamic thresholds of the driver with diverse training data. These findings suggest that increasing
higher values of β generally deteriorate at a much slower the number of samples, as represented by the parameter R,
d
rate, thereby revealing about the model parameters in their can lead to better model performance and improved accuracy
choices. Moreover, a slight improvement in convergence rate in predicting the target output. Furthermore, we show that6
(a) Results on Training Data (b) Results on Test Data
Fig. 7: Accuracy of the Proposed Model on Simulated Dataset in Comparison with DS Model.
(a) Results on Training Data (b) Results on Test Data
Fig. 8: Accuracy of the Proposed Model on Chicago Taxi Dataset in Comparison with DS Model.
(a) Average λ for 10 drivers across Epochs (b) Average β for 10 drivers across Epochs
Fig. 9: Average λ and β across epochs
Dynamic Discounted Satisficing model has higher accuracy trip they make. Our model achieved an accuracy of 35%
inpredictingthestoppingdecisionofadriverwhencompared and outperformed a baseline model [11] that predicted a
with Discounted Satisficing model. constant value as the stopping time. In the future, we can
improve the model’s performance by incorporating additional
VI. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK features such as weather data, traffic congestion data, and the
taxi driver’s demographics. Additionally, we can evaluate the
In this study, we developed a custom neural network
model’s performance on a more datasets to further validate its
model to predict the stopping time of taxi drivers in the
effectiveness in predicting the stopping time of taxi drivers.
City of Chicago based on the total amount paid for each7
REFERENCES
[1] A´. Aguilera-Garc´ıa, J. Gomez, G. Vela´zquez, and J. M. Vassallo,
“Ridesourcingvs.traditionaltaxiservices:Understandingusers’choices
andpreferencesinspain,”TransportationResearchPartA:Policyand
Practice,vol.155,pp.161–178,2022.
[2] M. Vega-Gonzalo, A´. Aguilera-Garc´ıa, J. Gomez, and J. M. Vassallo,
“Traditionaltaxi,e-hailingorride-hailing?agsemapproachtoexploring
serviceadoptionpatterns,”Transportation,pp.1–40,2023.
[3] R. C. Green and S. Srivastava, “Expected utility maximization and
demandbehavior,”JournalofEconomicTheory,vol.38,no.2,pp.313–
323,1986.
[4] C. Dai, “Ridesharing recommendation: Whether and where should i
wait?,” in Web-Age Information Management: 17th International Con-
ference, WAIM 2016, Nanchang, China, June 3-5, 2016, Proceedings,
PartI17,pp.151–163,Springer,2016.
[5] M.K.Svangren,M.B.Skov,andJ.Kjeldskov,“Passengertripplanning
usingride-sharingservices,”inProceedingsofthe2018CHIConference
onHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,pp.1–12,2018.
[6] P. Shu, Y. Sun, Y. Zhao, and G. Xu, “Spatial-temporal taxi demand
predictionusinglstm-cnn,”in2020IEEE16thInternationalConference
onAutomationScienceandEngineering(CASE),pp.1226–1230,IEEE,
2020.
[7] J. Zhang, H. Chen, and Y. Fang, “Taxiint: Predicting the taxi flow at
urbantraffichotspotsusinggraphconvolutionalnetworksandthetrajec-
torydata,”JournalofElectricalandComputerEngineering,vol.2021,
pp.1–9,2021.
[8] T.Altshuler,Y.Altshuler,R.Katoshevski,andY.Shiftan,“Modelingand
prediction of ride-sharing utilization dynamics,” Journal of Advanced
Transportation,vol.2019,pp.1–18,2019.
[9] X. Hu, S. An, and J. Wang, “Taxi driver’s operation behavior and
passengers’ demand analysis based on gps data,” Journal of advanced
transportation,vol.2018,2018.
[10] C. C. Macadam, “Understanding and modeling the human driver,”
Vehiclesystemdynamics,vol.40,no.1-3,pp.101–134,2003.
[11] M. Devaguptapu, On Predicting Stopping Time of Human Sequential
Decision-Making using Discounted Datisficing Heuristic. Missouri
UniversityofScienceandTechnology,2020.
[12] C.o.Chicago,“Taxitrips:Cityofchicago:Dataportal,”Mar2023.
[13] J.G.M.H.A.Simon,Organizations. 1958.
[14] H.A.Simon,“Modelsofman;socialandrational.,”1957.
[15] N.Shlezinger,J.Whang,Y.C.Eldar,andA.G.Dimakis,“Model-based
deeplearning,”ProceedingsoftheIEEE,2023.
[16] P.J.Werbos,“BackpropagationThroughTime:WhatItDoesandHow
To Do It,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 78, no. 10, pp. 1550–1560,
1990.