1
NeRF Solves Undersampled MRI Reconstruction
Tae Jun Jang1,2 and Chang Min Hyun3,˚
1School of Mathematics and Computing (Computational Science and Engineering), Yonsei University, Seoul, KR.
2AI Vision Group, Samsung Medison, Seoul, KR.
3Department of Radiology, Perelman School of Medicine, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, US.
Abstract—Thisarticlepresentsanovelundersampledmagnetic information obtainable from the standard reconstruction with
resonance imaging (MRI) technique that leverages the concept a minimal or more sampling in the sense of Nyquist.
of Neural Radiance Field (NeRF). With radial undersampling, Recently,extensivedata-drivenapproacheswithdeeplearn-
thecorrespondingimagingproblemcanbereformulatedintoan
ing have been proposed for undersampled MRI reconstruction
imagemodelingtaskfromsparse-viewrendereddata;therefore,a
highdimensionalMRimageisobtainablefromundersampledk- [7], [8], [9]. These methods have been showing the powerful
spacedatabytakingadvantageofimplicitneuralrepresentation. and promising performance in various tasks such as brain and
A multi-layer perceptron, which is designed to output an image kneeMRimaging.Theyattempttolearnandtakeadvantageof
intensityfromaspatialcoordinate,learnstheMRphysics-driven
prior knowledge associated with desired MR images through
rendering relation between given measurement data and desired
exploring common inter-training-data relationship under a su-
image.Effectiveundersamplingstrategiesforhigh-qualityneural
representationareinvestigated.Theproposedmethodservestwo pervised, unsupervised, or whatever learning framework [10].
benefits:(i)Thelearningisbasedfullyonsingleundersampledk- Forinstance,apaper[11]leveragedtheU-shapedfullyconvo-
spacedata,notabunchofmeasureddataandtargetimagesets.It lutionalneuralnetworktorealizeanall-encompassingrelation
canbeusedpotentiallyfordiagnosticMRimaging,suchasfetal
betweendatadistributionsinwhichaliasedandcorresponding
MRI, where data acquisition is relatively rare or limited against
high-qualityMRimageslie,respectively.AreconstructedMR
diversityofclinicalimageswhileundersampledreconstructionis
highlydemanded.(ii)AreconstructedMRimageisascan-specific image is based on the learned group knowledge rather than
representationhighlyadaptivetothegivenk-spacemeasurement. beinghighlyadaptivetoagivenmeasurement.Thedata-driven
Numerous experiments validate the feasibility and capability of approachesseeminglyprovidetheguaranteedeffectivenessfor
the proposed approach.
samples on or nearby a data distribution similar to a training
IndexTerms—fastMRI;acceleratedMRI;undersampledMRI dataset[10].Thepracticalperformanceisinevitablyinfluenced
reconstruction; implicit neural representation; neural radiance by the quality, quantity, and diversity of training data.
field.
Thisstudyseekstoinvestigateandsuggestanovelapproach
for data-driven undersampled MRI reconstruction that meets
I. INTRODUCTION thefollowings:(i)highperformanceandrobustnessregardless
Undersampledmagneticresonanceimaging(MRI)hasbeen ofabunchoftrainingsamplesfordesiredMRimagesand(ii)
gainingagreatattentiontoexpandourcapabilityofproducing strongadaptivenesstoaspecifick-spacemeasurement.Thanks
cross-sectional MR images with high spatial resolution from torecentlyemergedNeuralRadianceField(NeRF)techniques
optimizeddataacquisition.Ithasbeenparticularlyanticipated [12],[13],[14],[15],itbecomesenabletoaccuratelyrepresent
toshortenalongscantime[1],[2],[3],whichcancontributeto image rendering in an arbitrary view-point, which implicitly
various clinical outcomes such as the increased satisfaction of requires to realize an underlying image model, from rendered
subjectsthroughaminimizeddurationtimeinauncomfortable data in sparse view-points even. With radial undersampling,
narrow bow of MRI machine and the decreased occurrence of the corresponding MR imaging problem can be reformulated
motionartifactsinducedbydeliberateorinevitablemovements into an image modeling task from sparse-view rendered data;
of subject. Specifically, the undersampled MRI delves into a therefore, a high-quality MR image can be obtained through
reconstructionwaytominimizetime-consumingk-spacemea- leveraging the concept of NeRF, namely, implicit neural rep-
surements along a phase-encoding direction to the maximum resentationbasedonarenderingrelation.Thisapproachcould
extentpossiblewithoutcompromisingtheoutputimagequality be a great fit for accomplishing the aforementioned desires.
[4]. To be precise, a multi-layer perceptron, designed to output
InstandardMRIreconstruction,samplingk-spacemeasure- an image intensity from a spatial image coordinate, is learned
ments below a certain limit, determined by Nyquist criterion byminimizingarenderinglossderivedfromthephysicalrela-
[5], induces image artifacts known as aliasing [6], which can tion between radially undersampled k-space data and desired
seriouslydowngradethequalityofresultantMRimage.Akey MRimage.Thelearningisbasedfullyonsinglek-spacedata,
ofundersampledMRIreconstructionisthenhowtoovercome not a bunch of measured data and target image sets. The
such artifacts while preserving or, hopefully, restoring image networkattemptstorealizeandtakeadvantageofinter-relation
of image intensity over pixels, namely, intra-relation inside a
*Correspondingauthor(e-mail:chang.minhyun@pennmedicine.upenn.edu). MR image. This is in contrast to existing approaches learning
Theauthorsdeclarethattheyhavenoknowncompetingfinancialinterests
and utilizing inter-relation over MR images. A reconstructed
or personal relationships that could have appeared to influence the work
reportedinthispaper. MR image is then a scan-specific representation that is highly
4202
beF
02
]VI.ssee[
1v62231.2042:viXra2
RenderingLoss
Backpropagation
󰀂C[ {χϑv }](r,ϕ) −Pr,ϕ󰀂2
2
󰁛r,ϕ
C[ {χϑ v}](r,ϕ)
x2
r
|ΦR
|
|ΦR
|
ξ2
ω
v χϑ ϕ
F ω−1
ϕ ∈ΦR
x1 ξ1
PEL(v)
r r
ϕ ϕ
Position P eo ns ci ot dio in na gl reprN ese eu nr ta al tion X(x)=
v
χϑ vφ v,δ(x) C[ {χϑ v}](r,ϕ) {P r,ϕ} radU ian ld ker -ss pam acp ele dd ata
󰁛 (r,ϕ)
Fig.1. ImplicitneuralrepresentationforundersampledMRIreconstructionwithradialsampling.
adaptive to the specific k-space measurement. discussedlater.Fig.1illustratesaschematicdescriptionofthe
Effectiveundersamplingstrategiesareinvestigatedforhigh- proposed method.
qualityneuralrepresentation.Wetrytoprovidesomerationale
somewhat explaining the effective sampling as well as empir- A. Inverse problem for undersampled MRI reconstruction
ical examinations. Let X : R2 Ñ R be a nuclear spin density distribution of
Numerousexperimentswereconductedtovalidatethefeasi- 2D human body to be scanned. We assume that X can be
bilityandcapabilityoftheproposedreconstructionmethodby expressed as
ÿ
using a publicly open fastMRI dataset [16]. In our empirical
Xpxq“ X ϕ pxq for xPR2, (1)
experiments, a high-quality MR image could be reconstructed v v,δ
vPV
from undersampled k-space data even with high acceleration
where V is a set of indices defined by
factors. The proposed methods is likely to not only improve " *
the image quality but also preserve uncommon anatomical V“∆ pv ,v qPZˆZ:0ăv ď V ,i“1,2 , (2)
information that tends to be far from shared patterns over MR 1 2 i δ
images. We compared five undersampling strategies: uniform, andϕ isakernelfunctiondependingonvandδ.Here, V is
limited, random, stratified, and golden-angle samplings. The v,δ δ
assumedtobeanevennumber.Thedistributionofcoefficients,
uniform, stratified, and golden-angle tend to provide the bet-
tX u, corresponds to a MR image, whose spatial resolution
v
ter performance than the random and limited under a fixed
andpixeldimensionareassociatedwithδ andV,respectively.
acceleration factor.
OnecanuseakerneloflinearinterpolationfortX u,Gaussian
v
The proposed approach, in fact, is motivated to potentially
kernel, or a square-shaped kernel function given by
tackleachallengeinpracticaldiagnosticMRimaginginwhich $ ˇ ˇ
ˇ ˇ
d oa ft ca lia nc icq au lis imiti ao gn esis wr he il la eti uv ne dly err sa ar me po lr edli rm ecit oe nd sta rg ua ci tn ios nt id siv he igrs hi lt yy
ϕ
v,δpxq“&
%
δ1
2
if ˇ ˇpx i` V 2q´pv i´ 1 2qδˇ ˇď 2δ ,i“1,2
.
demanded.InfetalMRI,forexample,theundersampledrecon- 0 otherwise
(3)
structioncanbebeneficial,sinceoneofmajorhurdlesisfetus-
An inverse problem for MRI reconstruction is to recover
induced motion artifacts because of the long scan time [17].
tX u from measured k-space data. With radial sampling, a
Unfortunately, however, existing data-driven methods might v
measured dataset can be expressed as tK u, where K is
notbeverypowerfulasinotherMRIapplications.Itisbecause ω,φ ω,φ
given by
fetal MRI is typically utilized as a second-level examination
K “F rXspωΘ q (4)
tool followed by ultrasound imaging [18]; thereby, gathering ω,φ x φ
fetal MRI data for training may not be flexible in contrast to for some ω P r´ 1 , 1 q and φ P r0,πq. Here, F is the 2D
2δ 2δ x
tremendousimagevariantfactorssuchasfetalmovement,fetal Fourier transform with respect to x defined by
ˆ
position, gestational age, and etc. In this regard, the proposed
method can be viewed as an evolution towards providing an F xrfspξq“∆ fpxqexpp´2πix¨ξqdx for ξ PR2, (5)
effective solution in this kind of restricted clinical situations, “ R2‰
notintendingthesuperiorityinall-typeimagingenvironments. Θ φ “ cosφ,sinφ , and 1 δ is the minimum interval length
for securing spatial information up to the image resolution δ.
In standard reconstruction, tK u is sampled such that the
ω,φ
II. METHOD
Nyquist criterion meets, which can be roughly viewed as [6]:
ˆ ˙
For ease of explanation, we restrict ourselves to a 2D MR V 2
|tK u|Ç|V|“ , (6)
imaging task. A general 3D reconstruction scheme would be ω,φ δ3
where |¨| denotes the set cardinality. Specifically, considering wheresisalengthalongaray,I isarayintensity,ϵisalight
a uniform sampling with respect to ω given by source, and τ is an extinction coefficient that can be regarded
" ? * as the image intensity, i.e., τ “X. A solution for (14) can be
1 1 1 1 2V 1
ω P ´ ,´ ` ? ,¨¨¨ ,´ `p ´1q? , expressed as the following form:
2δ 2δ 2V 2δ δ 2V ˆ
(7)
I “I expp´ Xpxqδpx¨Θ ´rqdrq
the criterion (6) yields the following condition: 0 φ
ˆ R ˆ
r
V
` ϵ prqexpp´ Xpxqδpx¨Θ ´r˜qdr˜qdr, (15)
N Ç ? , (8) φ φ
φ 2δ R ´8
where N is the number of radial samples. We here mention where I 0 is an initial intensity. A rendering relation is defined
φ
that ?1 in(7)isasufficientsamplingresolutionforsecuring by ˆ ˙
2V I
the pixel dimension of tX u, i.e., V. CrXspr,φq“∆ ´log . (16)
v δ I
In this regard, undersampled MRI reconstruction seeks to 0
recover tX vu while considerably violating the condition (8), Assuming ϵ φ “0 (no external source), we then obtain
ˆ
i.e., minimizing N as possible. A practical motivation comes
ρ
from that, in a typical radial sampling set-up, the number of CrXspr,φq“ Xpxqδpx¨Θ ´rqdx“P . (17)
φ r,φ
φ-directionalmeasurementsisproportionaltoatotalscantime R2
[19], [20]. By reason of (1), we finally have
The associated inverse problem is given by
CrtX uspr,φq“P , (18)
v r,φ
“Recover tX u from tK u”, (9)
v ω,φ where
ˆˆ ˙
ÿ
where ω is given by (7) and φ is of N angles sampled from
u[0 n, dπ e) rsw amith pliN
ngφ
oă
f
φ?V
i2
sδ. onF eor ofex oa pm tiop nle s, :φ the following uniform CrtX vuspr,φq“∆ vPVX v R2ϕ v,δpxqδpx¨Θ φ´rqdx .
(19)
" Z? ^ Z? ^ *
As a consequence, (13) is equivalent to
2δ 2δ
φPΦR “∆ 0,Rπ ,2Rπ ,¨¨¨¨¨¨ , (10)
uni V V “Recover tX u from tCrtX uspr,φqu”. (20)
v v
whereRą1denotesaundersampling(oracceleration)factor
and t¨u denotes the floor operation. C. Implicit neural representation for undersampled MRI re-
construction
B. Reformulation into an image modeling task from sparse- To solve (20), we define a complex-valued neural network
view rendered data χϑ :VÑC,whereϑrepresentsasetoflearnableparameters.
We transform K into a new data form, P , as follows: A network output is given by
ω,φ r,φ
P r,φ “∆ F ω´1rK ω,φsprq, (11) χϑ v “∆ χϑpvq“MLPϑpv,PELpvqq, (21)
where F´1 is the 1D inverse Fourier transform with respect where MLPϑ is a multi-layer perceptron that generates two
ω
toω.TheFourierslicetheoremprovidesthefollowingrelation real values in the last layer and then assigns one as a real part
between P and X [21]: For some r and φ, and the other as complex, and PEL is a positional encoding
r,φ
ˆ [22] given by
“ ‰
P r,φ “ K ω,φexpp2πiωrqdω PELpvq“∆ PELpv q,PELpv q . (22)
ˆR ˆ 1 2
“ p Xpxqexpp2πix¨ωΘ φqdφqexpp2πiωrqdω Here, L is some positive constant and PELpv iq is defined by
ˆR R2
PELpv q“∆ rcosp20πv q,sinp20πv q,
i i i
“ Xpxqδpx¨Θ ´rqdx. (12)
R2 φ cosp21πv iq,sinp21πv iq,
Accordingly, the reconstruction problem (9) can be rewritten . . . .
. , .
as
“Recover tX vu from tP r,φu”. (13) cosp2L´1πv iq,sinp2L´1πv iqsPR2L. (23)
The reconstruction problem (13) can be equivalently viewed ThepositionalencodingPEL isatechniquethatcanfacilitate
as an image modeling task from sparse-view rendered data, to learn high frequency details of pixel intensity distribution
which allows us to leverage the idea of NeRF. [22].
Ageneralimagerenderingrelationcomesfromtheradiative The network χϑ is trained such that the rendering relation
transfer equation given by (17) is maximized as follows:
ÿÿ
dI ϑ“argmin }P ´Crtχϑuspr,φq}2, (24)
“ϵpsq´τpsqIpsq, (14) r,φ v 2
ds ϑ φ r4
where }¨} represents the Euclidean norm. the following estimator can be derived: Let φ denote a j-th
2 j
In practice, for ease of computation and training, Crtχϑus component of ΦR. For φPΦ1 ´ΦR,
v uni
is computed as follows:
|Pesti´P |ď max |LP ´P |“|LP ´P |
ÿ
ˆˆ ˙ r,φ r,φ
φPΦ1
r,φ r,φ r,φ‹ r,φ‹
uni
Crtχϑ vuspr,φq“ vPVχϑ
v
˜
R2ϕ v,δpxqδpx ¸¨Θ φ´rqdx ď ďC|LP
r,φ‹
m´ aL xP
r,φj‹
|φ|` ´|P
φr,φ‹
´
|
fP
orr,φ soj‹
m| eď CC
r
ą|φ
‹
0,´φ
j (‹
2|
9)
ÿ ÿ r j j`1 r
jPt1,¨¨¨,|ΦR|´1u
« χϑ ϕ px q∆ with x ¨Θ “r
v v,δ j j j φ wherej isanindexsuchthatφ PΦR isthenearestpointto
˜vPV j ¸ ‹ j‹
ÿ ÿ φ ‹ P Φ1 uni. Here, P re ,s φti is some reasonable approximation for
“ p χϑ vϕ v,δpx jqq∆
j
P r,φandLP r,φisalinearinterpolationusingtpφ,P r,φqu φPΦR.
˜ j vPV ¸ In consequence, we obtain
ÿ
« χτpv q∆ , (25) ΦR uni “argmin max |φ j ´φ j`1|. (30)
j j ΦR jPt1,¨¨¨,|ΦR|´1u
j
This explains that undersampling designs with the maximum
where x is a j-th position sampled from a line x¨Θ “ r, length between samples as small as possible can be effective.
j φ
∆ “∆ }x ´x }istheℓ2distancebetweenadjacentsamples, The uniform undersampling ΦR is one of good options.
j j`1 j uni
and v j is a relative (real-valued) voxel index corresponding In turn, we discuss a benefit of radial sampling. If X P
to x j. The last part of (25) can be understood as a neural L2pR2q, F xX lies on L2pR2q in the sense of distribution [6].
network-based approximation for the continuous distribution Here, L2pR2q denotes the Lebesgue space defined by
X [23]. This can reduce the complexity associated with the
L2pR2q“∆ t f :R2 ÑC | }f} ă8 u, (31)
kernelfunction.Thereconstructionimageisheregivenbythe L2
absolute value of tχ vu where ˆ
In addition, P r,φ is computed as follows: For a fixed φ, }f}2 “∆ |fpxq|2dx. (32)
L2
R2
P «pP q and P “∆ F´1rK s, (26)
rj,φ φ j φ disc φ Ontheotherhand,ifX PL2pR2q,P liesonHtpr0,πqˆRq
r,φ
for any 0 ă t ď 1 [24], [25] and hence satisfies (28). Here,
w anh der Fe ´P 1φ i“
s
thrP er d1 i,φ sc, rP etr e2,φ 1D,¨¨ in¨ vs, erK seφ Fo“ urr iK erω t1 r, aφ n, sK foω r2 m,φ ., H¨¨ e¨ res,
,
Htpr0,πqˆRq de2 notes the fractional Sobolev space defined
disc by
r and ω represent j-th samples with respect to r and ω, re-
j j
spectively.Furtherdetailsfortrainingandnetworkarchitecture Htpr0,πqˆRq“∆ t p:r0,πqˆRÑC | }p} ă8 u, (33)
Ht
are described in Appendix A.
Weherementionthereasonwhythenetworkχϑisdesigned where
ˆ ˆ
ascomplex-valued.InpracticalMRimaging,variousphysical π
}p}2 “∆ |ppr,φq|2drdφ
and computational factors like noise, magnetic susceptibility, Ht
0ˆ R¨
and numerical error can generate complex-valued fluctuations π |ppr,φq´ppr1,φq|2
on P in (24). ` dr1drdφ. (34)
r,φ
0 RˆR
|r´r1|1`2t
Accordingly, P possesses a higher regularity (smoothness)
r,φ
D. Sampling strategy than F xX; therefore, the estimation (27) with the high regu-
larity may be more beneficial than general k-space estimation
This subsection examines an effective undersampling strat-
with Cartesian or other sampling strategies [26].
egyforhigh-qualityimplicitneuralrepresentation.Therecon-
ExperimentalexaminationwouldbeprovidedinSectionIII.
structionproblem(13)canbeequivalentlyviewedas,forsome
Rą1,
E. Generalization to 3D MR imaging
“Estimate tP r,φu φPΦ1 ´ΦR from tP r,φu φPΦR”, (27) Thissubsectiongeneralizesourreconstructionframeworkto
uni
3D MR imaging. The following observation provides a base
where ΦR Ă Φ1 uni, R|ΦR| « |Φ1 uni|, and components of ΦR for 3D generalization.
are assumed to be in ascending order. In this perspective, we
Observation. LetX :R3 ÑRbea3Ddistributionofnuclear
attempttodiscussthefollowingtwoquestions:(i)whatchoice
spindensity.Forw PR,φPr0,πq,andζ Pr0,πs,weassume
of ΦR is advantageous to high-quality neural representation 2
that measured 3D k-space data is given by
and (ii) what benefit is of radial undersampling, compared to
others like Cartesian undersampling. K “F rXspωΘ q, (35)
ω,φ,ζ x φ,ζ
Assuming that P satisfies the Lipschitz property, i.e., for “ ‰
r,φ
where Θ “ cosφcosζ,sinφcosζ,sinζ . We define P by
φ‰φ1, φ,ζ
ˆ
D M
r
ą0 such that |P r,φ´P r,φ1|ďM r|φ´φ1|, (28) P r,φ,ζ “∆ Xpxqδpx¨Θ φ,ζ ´rqdx. (36)
R5
(a) Reference (b) IFFT (c) CS (d) SL (e) INK (f) Ours
Fig.2. Comparisonstudy:ReconstructionresultsinfourdifferentscansbyusingIFFT,CS,SL,INK,andourmethod.
TABLEI
QUANTITATIVEEVALUATIONRESULTSFORCOMPARISONSTUDY.
Metric IFFT CS SL INK Ours
SSIM(Ò) 0.573˘0.069 0.521˘0.046 0.823˘0.026 0.798˘0.052 0.904˘0.030
PSNR(Ò) 28.41˘1.395 25.59˘1.034 27.92˘2.811 28.74˘2.667 30.16˘2.966
The following relation then holds: and MR volume pairs, whose 2D slice dimension is given by
320ˆ320. We simulated the radial undersampling acquisition
F´1rK sprq“P . (37)
ω ω,φ,ζ r,φ,ζ (4)throughnon-uniformfastFouriertransformation(NUFFT)
The proof can be completed via similar arguments in (12) to a zero-padded image to the size of 452ˆ452.
(3D Fourier slice theorem). See [27], [28] for more details. Throughout this section, we followed the convention [29]
The observation above provides a rendering relationship for for the number of fully sampled angles (spokes), given by
Y ]
3D imaging equivalent to (17). As discussed in Section II-C, π
Nfull “∆ ˆ320 “502, (38)
an implicit neural representation can be then learned through φ 2
minimizing the 3D rendering relation over undersampled data and for the number of radial directional samples, given by
with respect to either φ or ζ, or both. Alternatively, the axial Y ? ]
extension of the 2D imaging framework can be a simple way. N ω “∆ 2ˆ320 “452. (39)
It might be related to practically feasible MR pulse sequence
designs. For some radial undersampling with N φ ă N φfull, we define
the acceleration factor R by
III. RESULT Nfull
R“∆ φ ą1. (40)
A. Experimental set-up N φ
In order to evaluate the proposed method, extensive exper- Forexample,R“10meansthatN “50andN “452,i.e.,
φ ω
iments were designed and conducted using a public fastMRI approximate 10 percent spokes were used for reconstruction
dataset [16] for brain and knee. We obtained 3D k-space data in terms of Nfull.
φ
1tcejbuS
2tcejbuS
3tcejbuS
4tcejbuS6
For experiments in Section III-B and III-C, the angles of R=1 R=4 R=8 R=12
N spokes are determined by the golden-angle sampling (46) IFFT IFFT IFFT
φ
with R “ 8 (62 spokes). In Section III-D, we introduce and
describefivedifferentsamplingschemesincludingthegolden-
angle and provide their comparison.
Asaquantitativemetric,wecomputedthestructuralsimilar-
ity index map (SSIM) and peak signal-to-noise ratio (PSNR),
whicharedefinedasfollows:FortwoimagestX uandtY u,
v v
p2m m `c qp2σ `c q
SSIMpX,Yq“∆ X Y 1 XY 2 , (41) Ours Ours Ours
pm2 `m2 `c qpσ2 `σ2 `c q
X Y 1 X Y 2
and
max X2
v
PSNRpX,Yq“∆ 10log ÿ vPV , (42)
10 pX ´Y q2
v v
vPV
where m and σ2 represent the mean and variance of tX u,
X X v
σ denotes the covariance between tX u and tY u, and c
XY v v 1
and c are constants defined by c “ 0.01ˆp264 ´1q and
2 1
c “ 0.03ˆp264 ´1q. In this work, all quantitative values
2
were evaluated by taking an average over 30 test data from
non-overlapped subjects.
All experiments were conducted in a computer system with
two Intel Xeon CPUs E5-2630 v4 and four NVIDIA GeForce
GTX 3080ti GPUs.
B. Comparison study
This subsection validates the effectiveness of the proposed
method and exhibits qualitative and quantitative comparison
results to other reconstruction approaches such as inverse fast
Fouriertransformwithzerofilling(IFFT),compressedsensing
with total variation penalty (CS), supervised learning using
TransUNet [30] (SL) and k-space interpolation using neural
representation [31] (INK).
In Fig. 2 and Table I, qualitative and quantitative compar-
isons are provided. The proposed method demonstrated the
superiorperformanceratherthanIFFT,CS,andINK,whileSL
was comparable. As far as we have implemented, the neural
representation in k-space appears to be less effective in terms
ofaccuracyandstability.Theintensitydistributionoverpixels
in the image domain is strongly correlated even simply in a Fig. 3. Qualitative and quantitative results for acceleration factor analysis.
neighborhood region. However, it is complicatedly entangled ThetopfigureshowsreconstructionresultsforIFFTandtheproposedmethod
when R“4,8,12. Three graphs below present SSIM, PSNR, and training
in the k-space domain and fairly irrelevant in a local region,
timeresults.
which might cause the increased training complexity, learning
instability,performancedegradation,andetc.ComparedtoSL,
It should be mentioned that the comparison with SL is not
theproposedreconstructionappearstokeepanatomicaldetails.
fair. We note that the reconstruction approaches other than
Itmaybeaconsequenceofthehighadaptivenesstothegiven
SL do not require any training data. The use of the larger
data. We further elaborate and discuss this in Section IV.
number of training data can further improve the performance
Here, CS was implemented using the open-source package,
ofSLandevencanleadittooutperformtheproposedmethod.
named as SigPy [32]. We trained TransUNet using supervised
Mostimportantly,however,ourmethodisbasedonlyonsingle
learning with 532 paired data, whose input is an aliased MR
k-space data.
image and label is the corresponding image reconstructed
from full sampling. For INK, a multi-layer perceptron (21)
C. Acceleration factor analysis
was trained, which inputs a image coordinate and outputs a
twodimensionalvectorrepresentingacomplex-valuedk-space Thissubsectionexaminestheeffectivenessofthenumberof
intensity. The network was trained by using observed k-space spokestothereconstructionaccuracyoftheproposedmethod.
dataandthenusedtointerpolateunsampledvaluesink-space. Qualitative and quantitative evaluation results are provided in7
(a) Reference (b) Uniform (c) Limited (d) Random (e) Stratified (f) Golden-angle
Fig.4. Qualitativeresultsforsamplingstudy.Thetopfiguresin(b)-(f)presentradialundersampledk-spacedataforsamplingmethods.Themiddlefigures
showthecorrespondingreconstructionresultsbytheproposedmethod.Thebottomfiguresarezoomedimages.
TABLEII
QUANTITATIVEEVALUATIONRESULTSFORSAMPLINGSTUDY.
Uniform Limited Random Stratified Golden-angle
SSIM(Ò) 0.892˘0.028 0.667˘0.084 0.875˘0.028 0.881˘0.043 0.904˘0.030
PSNR(Ò) 28.93˘3.459 21.73˘1.967 27.49˘2.835 29.05˘2.971 30.16˘2.966
Fig.3.Inthisexperiment,thegolden-anglesampling(46)was as follows:
" *
used.
π pN ´1qπ
We observed reconstruction results by gradually increasing ΦR “ 0, ,¨¨¨ , φ Ăr0,πq, (43)
uni N N
R from 2 to 12. As R is increased (i.e., N is decreased), the " φ φ *
φ π pN ´1qπ
reconstructionabilitybecomes,ofcourse,weakened.However, ΦR “ 0, ,¨¨¨ , φ Ăr0,π{2q. (44)
lim 2N 2N
the results were constantly superior than those from IFFT in φ φ
both qualitative and quantitative perspectives. Notably, even We remark that the limited chooses angles within the limited
for a high acceleration factor of R“12 (41 spokes), the pro- interval r0,πq. The random selects 62 spokes by randomly
2
posedmethodprovidedahigh-qualityMRimage.Meanwhile, picking angles in r0,πq, which can be expressed as
R is associated with the training time of MLPϑ in (21), since
acquired samplesare inputted fortraining. In otherwords, the ΦR ran “tr 1,r 2¨¨¨ ,r NφuĂr0,πq. (45)
largerR,theshorterthetrainingtime,asshowninthebottom
The golden-angle [33] is given by
graphofFig.3.Notethattheinferencetimeisindependentto " ˆ ˙ *
R,onlyaffectedbytheimageresolutiontobereconstructed.In pn´1qπ
ΦR “ mod ,π :n“1,¨¨¨ ,N Ăr0,πq,
our case, the inference time was 0.61 seconds approximately gold GR φ
for any R. (46)
?
When taking account of the compromise among the recon- where GR stands for the golden ratio given by 1` 5. The
2
struction quality, training time, and scan acceleration, R “ 8 stratified is similar to the uniform sampling, whereas there is
(62spokes)mayberegardedasanempiricallyoptimalchoice. perturbation in sampling intervals. It can be expressed as
" *
ΦR “
r
1
,π`r
2,¨¨¨
,pN φ´1qπ`r
Nφ Ăr0,πq,
str N N N
D. Sampling study φ φ φ
(47)
Thissubsectioninvestigatesthedependencyoftheproposed where each r is randomly picked number in r0,πq as in (45).
i
methodonundersamplingstrategies.Wehereexaminedthere- Fig.4andTableIIdemonstratesqualitativeandquantitative
construction performance by varying undersampling schemes. comparison results. The golden-angle was the empirical best,
In a fixed acceleration factor of R “ 8 (N φ “ 62), uniform, complying with reports in conventional radial undersampling
limited, random, stratified, and golden-angle radial sampling MRI [34]. The stratified and uniform were comparable, but
were compared. less effective than the golden-angle sampling. The limited has
Theuniformandlimitedaretouniformlysample62spokes thedensestspokesbetween0and π,butitsresultexhibitedthe
28
IFFT IFFT IFFT
Ours Ours Ours
“ ˘ “ ˘
(a) Reference (b) IFFT (c) SL (d) Ours (a) reference (b) r0,πq (c) 0,π (d) π,π
2 4 2
Fig.5. Resultsforacaseofinvolvedanomaliesandhighaccelerationfactor Fig. 6. Results“obta˘ined from“unifor˘m undersampling in different intervals:
ofR“12(41spokes). (b)r0,πq,(c) 0,π ,and(d) π,π .TheaccelerationfactorwasR“12
2 4 2
(41spokes).
lowest performance. The random further improves the recon-
and tends to less produce fake structures (yellow arrows) that
struction quality, but it does not still surpass the performance
donotexistinthereferenceMRimagein(a).Itappearstobe
of the uniform, stratified, or golden-angle. This observation
because the proposed method finds a highly adaptive solution
agrees with the discussion in Section II-D. We note that angle
to the given measurement, in contrast, SL attempts to find
densities in the golden-angle, stratified, and uniform sampling
common patterns over training data and provides an output in
are more even than in the remaining.
some sense of nonlinear averaging [10], possibly resulting in
the generation of fake structures and the blurring or distortion
IV. CONCLUSIONANDDISCUSSION
of anatomical structures.
Thispaperseekstopaveanewdata-drivenimagingwayfor However, this characteristic can be a double-edged sword.
undersampledMRIreconstructionthatcanpotentiallyprovide Whencomparedtotheexisting,theproposedapproachcanbe
aneffectivesolutioninclinicalapplicationsinwhichgathering less powerful to produce a plausible (MR image-like) output,
dataisrestrictiveinspiteoflargevariabilityoftargetimagesor asmeasurementdataislessinformativeintermsoftargetMR
tracinganatomicalinformationhighlylyingonscanorsubject image. Fig. 6 shows this limitation. Under a fixed and high
iscritical.Toachievethis,theproposedapproachharnessesthe accelerationfactorofR“12(41spokes),threereconstruction
power of NeRF that can accurately infer image rendering in results were compared, which were obtained by the proposed
an arbitrary view even from sparse-view rending information. method with uniform undersampling in the full angle interval
Wedemonstrated,withradialsampling,theundersampledMR (r0,πqin(b))andlimitedintervals(r0,πqin(c)andrπ,πqin
2 4 2
imaging is equivalent to an image modeling from sparse-view (d)).Astheintervalrangeismorelimited,thatis,measurement
rendered data and, therefore, attempted to deal with it by bor- data is less informative, the recovered image becomes worse.
rowing the idea of NeRF: rendering relation-induced implicit In contrast, the conventional approaches like SL can provide
neural representation. One remark is that the representation a more realistic output as the number of training data and the
is, in NeRF, for image rendering implicitly combined with learningcapacitybecome larger, namely,thebetterrealization
an underlying image model, whereas, in ours, for the direct onanunderlyingdatadistributionoverMRimagesisallowed.
realization of the model. Numerous experiments validated the Meanwhile,theotherdifficultyistheinvolvedoptimizationper
feasibilityandcapabilityoftheproposedmethodsuccessfully. each reconstruction task. We expect that these aspects might
We should mention an approach proposed in [35] that does be improved by appropriately integrating both reconstruction
not follow the concept of NeRF but shares the utilization of wayssothatplayingcomplementaryroles.Thisisinourfuture
implicit neural representation. They used a subject-specific research direction.
priori embedding come from a scan record history, whereas
theproposedmethodisnotsubjectedtotheembedding.Since APPENDIXA
ours follows the formulation of NeRF, in addition, efficient NETWORKANDTRAININGDETAILS
strategies developed along with the advance in the NeRF field
Thisappendixprovidesnetworkandtrainingdetails.Forthe
can be simply incorporated.
implementation of the proposed method, we set the parameter
Fig.5highlightstheadvantageoftheproposedmethod.Itis L in the positional encoding in (22) as L “ 20 and used a
an extreme case of involved anomalies and high acceleration
multi-layer perceptron described in Table III. For training, we
factor of R “ 12 (41 spokes). Just only with single radially used learning strategies in the vanilla NeRF [13] and Adam
undersampled k-space data, we can obtain a highly improved
optimizer.Thenumberofstepswasconstantlysetas500.Fig.
imagein(d),comparedtothatofthestandardIFFTreconstruc-
7 shows a convergence history for one case.
tionwithzero-fillingin(b).Inaddition,itiscompetitivetoan
image obtained by the TransUnet with supervised leaning of REFERENCES
532paireddata in(c).Theproposed approachseemstobetter
[1] E. M. Haacke, “Magnetic resonance imaging: physical principles and
capture small variations and uncommon patterns (red boxes) sequencedesign,”1999.9
Fig.7. Convergencehistoryoftheproposedmethodwhenthegolden-anglesubsamplingwithR=8(62spokes)wasused.
TABLEIII IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition,
NETWORKARCHITECTURES 2022,pp.12882–12891.
[13] B.Mildenhall,P.P.Srinivasan,M.Tancik,J.T.Barron,R.Ramamoorthi,
Layer InputDim OutputDim Activation andR.Ng,“Nerf:Representingscenesasneuralradiancefieldsforview
Input 82(=2+20ˆ4) - synthesis,” Communications of the ACM, vol. 65, no. 1, pp. 99–106,
Linear 82 256 sin 2021.
Linear 256 256 sin [14] R. Martin-Brualla, N. Radwan, M. S. Sajjadi, J. T. Barron, A. Doso-
Linear 256 256 sin vitskiy, and D. Duckworth, “Nerf in the wild: Neural radiance fields
Linear 256 256 sin for unconstrained photo collections,” in Proceedings of the IEEE/CVF
Concat 82 338 - Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 2021, pp.
Linear 338 256 sin 7210–7219.
Linear 256 256 sin [15] W. Yang, G. Chen, C. Chen, Z. Chen, and K.-Y. K. Wong, “Ps-
Linear 256 256 sin nerf: Neural inverse rendering for multi-view photometric stereo,” in
Linear 256 2 - European Conference on Computer Vision. Springer, 2022, pp. 266–
Output 2 - 284.
[16] J. Zbontar, F. Knoll, A. Sriram, T. Murrell, Z. Huang, M. J. Muck-
ley, A. Defazio, R. Stern, P. Johnson, M. Bruno et al., “fastmri:
An open dataset and benchmarks for accelerated mri,” arXiv preprint
[2] D. K. Sodickson and W. J. Manning, “Simultaneous acquisition of arXiv:1811.08839,2018.
spatialharmonics(smash):fastimagingwithradiofrequencycoilarrays,” [17] S.N.Saleem,“Fetalmri:Anapproachtopractice:Areview,”Journal
Magneticresonanceinmedicine,vol.38,no.4,pp.591–603,1997. ofadvancedresearch,vol.5,no.5,pp.507–523,2014.
[3] K. P. Pruessmann, M. Weiger, M. B. Scheidegger, and P. Boesiger, [18] L. Manganaro, S. Capuani, M. Gennarini, V. Miceli, R. Ninkova,
“Sense: sensitivity encoding for fast mri,” Magnetic Resonance in I.Balba,N.Galea,A.Cupertino,A.Maiuro,G.Ercolanietal.,“Fetal
Medicine:AnOfficialJournaloftheInternationalSocietyforMagnetic mri: what’s new? a short review,” European Radiology Experimental,
ResonanceinMedicine,vol.42,no.5,pp.952–962,1999. vol.7,no.1,p.41,2023.
[4] C.M.HyunandJ.K.Seo,“Deeplearningforillposedinverseproblems [19] L.Feng,“Golden-angleradialmri:basics,advances,andapplications,”
in medical imaging,” in Deep Learning and Medical Applications. JournalofMagneticResonanceImaging,vol.56,no.1,pp.45–62,2022.
Springer,2023,pp.319–339. [20] C.M.Hyun,K.C.Kim,H.C.Cho,J.K.Choi,andJ.K.Seo,“Framelet
[5] H.Nyquist,“Certaintopicsintelegraphtransmissiontheory,”Transac- pooling aided deep learning network: the method to process high
tions of the American Institute of Electrical Engineers, vol. 47, no. 2, dimensionalmedicaldata,”MachineLearning:ScienceandTechnology,
pp.617–644,1928. vol.1,no.1,p.015009,2020.
[6] J.K.SeoandE.J.Woo,Nonlinearinverseproblemsinimaging. John [21] C. M. Hyun, T. Bayaraa, S. M. Lee, H. Jung, and J. K. Seo, “Deep
Wiley&Sons,2012. learning for dental cone-beam computed tomography,” Deep Learning
[7] Y. Chen, C.-B. Schonlieb, P. Lio, T. Leiner, P. L. Dragotti, G. Wang, andMedicalApplications,pp.101–175,2023.
D.Rueckert,D.Firmin,andG.Yang,“Ai-basedreconstructionforfast [22] M.Tancik,P.Srinivasan,B.Mildenhall,S.Fridovich-Keil,N.Raghavan,
mri—asystematicreviewandmeta-analysis,”ProceedingsoftheIEEE, U.Singhal,R.Ramamoorthi,J.Barron,andR.Ng,“Fourierfeatureslet
vol.110,no.2,pp.224–245,2022. networkslearnhighfrequencyfunctionsinlowdimensionaldomains,”
[8] F. Knoll, T. Murrell, A. Sriram, N. Yakubova, J. Zbontar, M. Rabbat, AdvancesinNeuralInformationProcessingSystems,vol.33,pp.7537–
A. Defazio, M. J. Muckley, D. K. Sodickson, C. L. Zitnick et al., 7547,2020.
“Advancing machine learning for mr image reconstruction with an [23] G.F.Montufar,R.Pascanu,K.Cho,andY.Bengio,“Onthenumberof
open competition: Overview of the 2019 fastmri challenge,” Magnetic linearregionsofdeepneuralnetworks,”Advancesinneuralinformation
resonanceinmedicine,vol.84,no.6,pp.3054–3070,2020. processingsystems,vol.27,2014.
[9] M.J.Muckley,B.Riemenschneider,A.Radmanesh,S.Kim,G.Jeong, [24] C. L. Epstein, Introduction to the mathematics of medical imaging.
J.Ko,Y.Jun,H.Shin,D.Hwang,M.Mostaphaetal.,“Resultsofthe SIAM,2007.
2020fastmrichallengeformachinelearningmrimagereconstruction,” [25] A. Lunardi, Analytic semigroups and optimal regularity in parabolic
IEEEtransactionsonmedicalimaging,vol.40,no.9,pp.2306–2317, problems. SpringerScience&BusinessMedia,2012.
2021. [26] J. Bruna and S. Mallat, “Invariant scattering convolution networks,”
[10] C. M. Hyun, S. H. Baek, M. Lee, S. M. Lee, and J. K. Seo, “Deep IEEEtransactionsonpatternanalysisandmachineintelligence,vol.35,
learning-basedsolvabilityofunderdeterminedinverseproblemsinmed- no.8,pp.1872–1886,2013.
icalimaging,”MedicalImageAnalysis,vol.69,p.101967,2021. [27] F. Natterer, The mathematics of computerized tomography. SIAM,
[11] C.M.Hyun,H.P.Kim,S.M.Lee,S.Lee,andJ.K.Seo,“Deeplearning 2001.
for undersampled mri reconstruction,” Physics in Medicine & Biology, [28] M. Vassholz, B. Koberstein-Schwarz, A. Ruhlandt, M. Krenkel, and
vol.63,no.13,p.135007,2018. T. Salditt, “New x-ray tomography method based on the 3d radon
[12] K. Deng, A. Liu, J.-Y. Zhu, and D. Ramanan, “Depth-supervised transformcompatiblewithanisotropicsources,”PhysicalReviewLetters,
nerf: Fewer views and faster training for free,” in Proceedings of the vol.116,no.8,p.088101,2016.10
[29] S.Zhang,K.T.Block,andJ.Frahm,“Magneticresonanceimagingin
realtime:advancesusingradialflash,”JournalofMagneticResonance
Imaging,vol.31,no.1,pp.101–109,2010.
[30] J.Chen,Y.Lu,Q.Yu,X.Luo,E.Adeli,Y.Wang,L.Lu,A.L.Yuille,and
Y. Zhou, “Transunet: Transformers make strong encoders for medical
imagesegmentation,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2102.04306,2021.
[31] W.Huang,H.B.Li,J.Pan,G.Cruz,D.Rueckert,andK.Hammernik,
“Neural implicit k-space for binning-free non-cartesian cardiac mr
imaging,” in International Conference on Information Processing in
MedicalImaging. Springer,2023,pp.548–560.
[32] F.OngandM.Lustig,“Sigpy:apythonpackageforhighperformance
iterative reconstruction,” in Proceedings of the ISMRM 27th Annual
Meeting,Montreal,Quebec,Canada,vol.4819,no.5,2019.
[33] L.Feng,“Golden-angleradialmri:basics,advances,andapplications,”
JournalofMagneticResonanceImaging,vol.56,no.1,pp.45–62,2022.
[34] S. Winkelmann, T. Schaeffter, T. Koehler, H. Eggers, and O. Doessel,
“An optimal radial profile order based on the golden ratio for time-
resolved mri,” IEEE transactions on medical imaging, vol. 26, no. 1,
pp.68–76,2006.
[35] L. Shen, J. Pauly, and L. Xing, “Nerp: implicit neural representation
learning with prior embedding for sparsely sampled image reconstruc-
tion,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and Learning Systems,
2022.