1
Tactile Weight Rendering: A Review for Researchers
and Developers
Rube´n Mart´ın-Rodr´ıguez1, Alexandre L. Ratschat1,2, Laura Marchal-Crespo1,2, and Yasemin
Vardar1, Member, IEEE
Abstract—Haptic rendering of weight plays an essential role is associated with enhanced motor learning of tasks involving
in naturalistic object interaction in virtual environments. While objects with complex dynamics [4], [10]. It has also been
kinesthetic devices have traditionally been used for this aim shown to have a positive effect on the sense of embodiment
by applying forces on the limbs, tactile interfaces acting on
and ownership in VR [11], which in turn are associated with
the skin have recently offered potential solutions to enhance or
substitute kinesthetic ones. Here, we aim to provide an in-depth better performance [12], [13].
overview and comparison of existing tactile weight rendering Initially, the weight of virtual objects was rendered via
approaches. We categorized these approaches based on their type kinesthetic haptic devices by applying forces to the limbs or
ofstimulationintoasymmetricvibrationandskinstretch,further
fingers using grounded mechanisms [14], [15]. However, some
divided according to the working mechanism of the devices.
of these studies pointed out reduced sensitivity compared to
Then, we compared these approaches using various criteria,
including physical, mechanical, and perceptual characteristics actual weights [14] and that simulated weights were perceived
of the reported devices and their potential applications. We as “too artificial” by the users [16]. In addition to specific
found that asymmetric vibration devices have the smallest form device limitations, the absence of tactile feedback, known to
factor, while skin stretch devices relying on the motion of flat
contribute to the perception of weight [17], [18], might be
surfaces, belts, or tactors present numerous mechanical and
behind these limitations, as suggested by [14]. Psychophysical
perceptual advantages for scenarios requiring more accurate
weight rendering. Finally, we discussed the selection of the studieshaveshownthattheprovisionofkinestheticinformation
proposed categorization of devices and their application scopes, results in less accurate detection of small weights compared
togetherwiththelimitationsandopportunitiesforfutureresearch. to tactile information, as well as lower discrimination between
We hope this study guides the development and use of tactile
masses up to approximately 200g [19], [20]. Furthermore, it
interfaces to achieve a more naturalistic object interaction and
has been shown that the combination of both sensory sources
manipulation in virtual environments.
yieldsbetterdiscriminationanddetectionaccuracythanisolated
stimuli [14], [19], [21]. These results highlight the importance
I. INTRODUCTION of tactile stimulation in weight perception and the need to
provide multisensory haptic information to achieve accurate
Over the last decade, the usage of haptic interfaces has
and compelling weight rendering.
gained considerable attention in various applications, such
Researchers have explored tactile displays for weight render-
as teleoperation [1], virtual reality (VR) training [2], [3],
ing to achieve such a multisensory stimulation or provide
and neurorehabilitation [4]. Haptic interfaces are mechatronic
an alternative to kinesthetic haptic devices. These devices
devicesthatcanmodulatephysicalinteractionbetweenahuman
can display tactile stimulation to simulate weights using a
and their surroundings by displaying kinesthetic cues, i.e.,
variety of approaches. For example, numerous works used
information on the position of and the forces acting on a
asymmetric vibrations through vibration motors to induce a
limb, and tactile cues relating to sensory information from
pulling sensation that can modulate the perceived weight of an
the receptors of the skin [5]. These interfaces can guide
object [22], [23]. Another approach is to reproduce the natural
or restrain the user’s movements and render the physical
skin stretch of the fingerpad upon lifting an object [24], [25].
properties of an object, such as friction, temperature, stiffness,
Arecentreviewby[26]providesabroadoverviewofweight
roughness, and weight [6]. Among these physical properties,
rendering approaches and associated limitations. In this review,
weight is particularly relevant because it mediates the initial
weaimtobuildupontheirworkbypresentingadeeperanalysis
phases of object interaction and the forces applied for grasping
of the weight rendering approaches through tactile stimulation
and lifting objects [7], [8]. Notably, the addition of weight
and comparing relevant tactile interfaces to allow researchers
rendering has been shown to improve the interaction with
and developers to perform an informed selection of the best
virtual objects, e.g., improving the task performance during
approach for their needs. To do so, we reviewed studies on
VR assembly tasks [9] and in teleoperation scenarios [1].
human weight perception and the approaches employed to
Rendering the weight of tangible virtual objects has benefits
render weight through the tactile sense. We complemented the
beyond enhancing performance, e.g., weight haptic rendering
findings of these studies with other relevant articles using
1AllauthorsarewiththeDepartmentofCognitiveRobotics,DelftUniversity the same approaches for related applications—e.g., object
ofTechnology,Delft,TheNetherlands manipulation [25] and mass perception [27]—to gain a better
2A.L. Ratschat and L. Marchal-Crespo are also with the Department of
understandingofthecapabilitiesofeachapproach.Importantly,
RehabilitationMedicine,ErasmusMC,UniversityMedicalCenterRotterdam,
Rotterdam,TheNetherlands with the gathered information, we propose a categorization to
4202
beF
02
]CH.sc[
1v02131.2042:viXra2
comparetheavailabletactileinterfacesforweightrendering.We (PSE), used to indicate the point at which the magnitude of
considered various criteria, including the approaches’ physical a stimulus in a specific condition is perceived to be of equal
properties (i.e., size and mass), mechanical characteristics intensity as that of a reference condition.
(i.e., degrees of freedom, workspace, and maximum rendering Numerous experimental methods can be found in the litera-
force), and perceptual features (i.e., weight and direction turetomeasurethesethresholds,suchasthemethodofconstant
discrimination threshold). We also noted potential applications, stimuli, the method of adjustments, or the method of limits.
determined from insights and recommendations from the Multiple variations arise from them, using adaptive procedures
literature. Then, we discussed our findings in the scope of and other paradigms based on statistics and signal detection
two research questions: A) Which approaches have been used theory. In-depth review and explanation of psychophysical
to render weight through tactile stimulation?; and B) What are methods are provided in [28], [29].
the main advantages and disadvantages of each approach?
Wehopethisreviewcanguidetheuseoftactileinterfacesin
B. Perception of weight & contribution of tactile cues
diverse domains to achieve more accurate and coherent weight
rendering. Doing so could ultimately translate into a more When humans grasp, lift, and hold an object with their
effective integration of tactile stimulation in haptic solutions, hand, the gravity acting on its mass creates a downward force
potentially improving task performance in VR training and (i.e., weight). For a successful lift or hold in the air, this
teleoperation, enhancing motor learning in robot-assisted weight should be stabilized with the friction force between the
rehabilitation, and providing a more naturalistic interaction contacted skin and object, actively controlled by the grip force;
with the Virtual Environment (VE). see Fig. 1 for a schematic of these forces for a precision grasp.
The remaining part of the article is organized as follows. During lifting, humans perceive the object’s weight by
Section II presents the background knowledge of the sensory combininginformationfrommultiplesensorysystems,predom-
mechanisms underlying weight perception, emphasizing the inantlysomatosensoryandvisualones[26].Thesomatosensory
role of tactile information. In Section III, we elaborate system processes tactile cues, perceived through the skin
on existing approaches for rendering the weight of objects receptors, and kinesthetic cues, sensed by the proprioceptors
through tactile stimulation. In Section IV, we present the in muscle spindles or tendon organs. Furthermore, studies
results from the comparison across those approaches based have shown evidence of the interplay between the two, where
on the physical, mechanical, and perceptual characteristics tactile mechanoreceptors responsible for skin stretch also
of the tactile interfaces utilizing them. We then discuss the contribute to kinesthetic cues by conveying information about
review’s findings and the comparison, together with possible joint angles [39], [40]. Even before lifting begins, individuals
opportunities and directions for future research in the field, in gauge an object’s heaviness by scrutinizing its appearance.
Section V. Finally, the outcomes and implications of our study Upontouchandgrasp,theyacquiretactualinformation,suchas
are summarized in Section VI. contact shape, texture, temperature, and friction. During lifting,
they perceive skin deformation, joint positions, and forces
II. BACKGROUND acting on muscles. Integrating all this sensory information by
This section presents background knowledge on measure-
ment methods in weight perception studies, the mechanisms
for weight perception, and the role of cutaneous information
on human weight perception.
A. Measurement of perception
The field of psychophysics governs understanding of the
relationship between physical attributes of stimuli and their F g r ip F g r ip
i t
corresponding perception. Two key concepts relevant to this
review are the measurement of absolute threshold (Detection
Threshold, DT) and difference threshold (Differenz Limen or
DL). The absolute threshold represents the minimal stimulus
intensity required for human perception, while the difference
threshold signifies the amount of change in a stimulus needed
F = mg
for a Just Noticeable Difference (JND) [28], [29]. Notably, the weight
Weber Fraction (WF), which denotes the proportionality of
Fig. 1: Schematic representation of holding an object in the air
stimulus change to its initial magnitude, is another essential
through precision grasp. Here, the object is stabilized between
term. This fraction is defined as c=∆ϕ/ϕ, where ∆ϕ is the
thethumbandindexfinger.Thegravity,g,actingontheobject
change in magnitude and ϕ is the starting magnitude of the
mass, m, creates a downward force, F . This force is
stimulus [30]. Although this value is considered constant, it weight
stabilizedbyfrictionforcesonthethumb,F ,andindex
has been observed to drastically increase as the magnitude of frictiont
fingers, F , controlled by corresponding grip forces,
the stimulus gets closer to the absolute threshold [29]. Another frictioni
F and F .
metric worth mentioning is the Point of Subjective Equality gript gripi
F
noticirf i
F
tnoticirf3
TABLE I: Summary of results from studies that evaluated the effect of physical factors on the perceived heaviness (i.e., weight).
Factor ResponsibleSensorySystem EffectonPerceivedHeaviness
Musclefatigue Kinesthetic Whenfatigued,perceivedheavinessincreasedduetoover-estimation
Biomechanical ofcontractionforcesandincreasedeffort[31].
conditions Flexorsensitivity Kinesthetic Liftedobjectswerefeltheavierwhenthesensorynerveswere
anesthetized[32].
Graspconfiguration&style Kinesthetic,tactile Objectswereperceivedasheavierwhenliftedwithtwofingersvs.
five,withanarrowgripvs.awidegrip,andwithasmallvs.large
contactarea[33].
Liftingmethod Kinesthetic,tactile Weightdiscriminationaccuracywasimprovedwithactiveliftingvs.
reflexiveholding[17].
Volume Kinesthetic,tactile, Smallerobjectswereperceivedasheavierthanlargerobjects[34].
visual
Object
Density Visual Denserlookingobjectswereperceivedheavier[35].
properties
Shape Kinesthetic,tactile, Objectswithmorecompactshapeswereperceivedasheavierthan
visual lesscompactshapeswithsameweightandvolume[36].
Surfaceroughness Tactile Smootherobjectswereperceivedasheavierthanroughones[37].
Temperature Tactile Coldobjectswereperceivedasheavierthanwarmones[38].
the central nervous system forms the basis for estimating an cutaneous cues.
object’s weight [39], [41].
In a subsequent study [44], they recorded afferent responses
Theroleofeachsensoryinformationonperceivedheaviness via microneurography when participants did the same grip-and-
and how they are incorporated have been active research topics lift task, and they found activity in all four skin mechanorecep-
fornearlytwocenturies,datingbacktotheearlypsychophysical torsatdifferentpoints.Fastadaptive(FA)Iunitsweretriggered
experiments conducted by Weber [30]. He observed a signif- during the object gripping and force oscillations during the
icant discrepancy in weight discrimination between actively holding phase. Slow adaptive (SA) I units responded during
lifting objects by hand and passively perceiving them through grippingandshowedcontinuousfiringduringthestaticholding.
cutaneous sensation when the hand was resting on a table. As for the FA II units, they fired upon changes in contact or
He found that active lifting was more than twice as precise, motion.Finally,theSAIIunitsshowedconsiderablesensitivity
and this ability to discriminate masses through voluntary to skin deformation induced both by grip and load forces,
muscle exertion was called “sense of force”. Subsequent indicated by an increased firing rate with force magnitude.
research highlighted the dominance of centrally generated These findings evidenced the contribution of skin receptors,
motorcommandsinweightperception;acomprehensivereview particularly, SA II units, to the sense of weight.
of these studies can be found in [42].
The contribution of tactile cues in weight perception was
While the proprioceptive sense has been consistently shown further proved by Jones and Piateski [18]. They conducted an
to play a crucial role in weight perception, various physical experiment where participants produced forces with different
factors, e.g., biomechanical conditions and object properties, muscle groups of the arm in the presence and absence of
were also found to influence perceived heaviness [26], [42]. tactile stimuli and matched them using the corresponding
For a concise summary of these factors, the relevant sensory muscle group in the other arm, always in the presence of
systems involved, and their impact on perceived heaviness, tactile stimuli. Without tactile stimuli, participants tended to
pleaserefertoTableI.Asindicatedinthistable,usingdifferent underestimate the reference forces for all muscle groups, with
graspconditions—e.g.,widevs.narrow—andliftingmethods— an increased effect of the perceptual detriment as weight
e.g., active vs. reflexive holding—alter the perceived heaviness increased.Similarly,inarecentstudy,Parketal.[45]observed
of objects, underscoring the important contribution of the that a rendered mass at the fingers was perceived to be heavier
tactile sense in weight perception. However, the integration whentactilestimuliwerepresentthanintheconditionwithonly
mechanism of tactile and proprioceptive senses for making kinesthetic feedback. Matsui et al. [21] attempted to measure
heaviness judgments is still an active research topic. the contribution ratios of tactile information and kinesthetic
One of the early investigations into the contribution of information to the perception of forces, obtaining a 16-28%
tactile cues during a grasp-and-lift motion was conducted by contribution of tactile information for a force of 1N, and 37–
Johansson and Westling [43]. The authors measured the grip 55% for a force of 0.3N. However, this study only accounted
forces of participants while manipulating small objects with for kinesthetic information from the finger and the hand since
different weights and surface frictions via pinch grasps. They the rest of the arm was immobilized. The authors also noted
showedthattheparticipants’gripforceschangedproportionally that tactile and kinesthetic stimuli were only partially isolated.
to load forces to overcome forces counteracting the intended Recently, van Beek et al. [19] addressed the limitations of the
manipulation. This balance between the grip and load forces study of Matsui et al. by utilizing a kinesthetic grounded
was adapted based on friction to provide a small safety margin robot to render the applied forces. Users pinch-grasped a
to prevent slips. They also demonstrated through experiments manipulandum attached to the device’s endpoint, under which
with local anesthesia that this adaptation occurred through force sensors were located. For isolating tactile and kinesthetic4
stimuli from each other, a pair of thimbles were worn to study,AmemiyaandMaeda[22]demonstratedthattheirdevice
compress the finger and prevent tactile stimulation, while a could be used to perturb the perceived weight of an object
padded finger rest was used to block kinesthetic information. when aligning the vibration in the direction of gravity. They
The authors conducted multiple experiments to determine the observedthatparticipantsonlyperceivedsignificantdifferences
DT, JND, and PSE under kinesthetic, tactile, and combined in weight when the pulling illusion was directed downwards
stimuliconditionsuponpresentedweights.Theauthorsreported (increased weight) but not upwards (decreased weight). The
that the combined condition yielded the lowest JND and DT, authorsspeculatedthatthestrongadditiveforcepeaksresulting
while the DT for the tactile condition was lower than the from the asymmetric acceleration profile were more saliently
kinesthetic condition. Interestingly, while the provision of feltinthedownwardconditionthanthebriefperiodsofreduced
tactileinformationresultedinlowerJNDs—i.e.,providedmore net force in the upward condition.
reliable information—compared to kinesthetic information for Inspired by these works, Tappeiner et al. [54] investigated
masses below 200g, both information sources were roughly how well this pulling illusion could be perceived in different
equally reliable for larger weights. directions in the horizontal plane. They used the Maglev
Interestingly, while the absence of tactile information de- device [55], a grounded magnetic levitation haptic interface,
creases the ability to discriminate between small weights, the whosepositionwasdrivenwithasinusoidalwaveformwithtwo
presenceoftactilecuesregardingobjectproperties(seeTableI) half-periods of different durations to produce the asymmetric
can also lead to misjudging object weight. This perceptual phe- vibration. This acceleration profile was later referred to as an
nomenon,knownassensorimotormismatchorweightillusions, asymmetric-in-time vibration for presenting a rate of change
isstillbeinginvestigated,anditsunderlyingmechanismsarenot in acceleration more pronounced in one direction than in the
fullyunderstood.Thisphenomenonisgenerallyassociatedwith other. The authors showed that users could guess the direction
sensorimotor memory [46], [47], which is captured by forward of vibrations with an error between 9 and 25 degrees.
and inverse internal models, predicting the motor commands
To utilize the asymmetric vibration approach for weight
necessary to lift an object based on prior expectations of its
rendering in mobile conditions, Rekimoto [56] designed the
weight and estimated uncertainty [48]–[50]. Nonetheless, this
Traxion device, which weighed only 5.2g. This development
perceptual deficiency has been utilized in practical applications
was a substantial improvement over previous solutions, which
for enhancing weight simulation within virtual environments
were much larger and heavier. This device utilized a linear
through tactile interfaces [26].
electromagnetic vibration actuator (Force Reactor L-type,
Alps Alpine, Japan) capable of inducing a pulling sensation
III. TACTILEWEIGHTRENDERINGAPPROACHES with a much smaller size. By driving the actuator with a
Overall, two leading weight rendering approaches through pulse-width modulated (PWM) signal, Rekimoto was able to
tactilestimulationhavebeenproposedintheliterature:inducing achieve a pulling sensation of 0.292N with the device when
illusionary pulling sensations via asymmetric vibrations and held horizontally, perpendicular to gravity. Inspired by this
deformingthefingertipsviaskinstretch.Wefurthercategorized innovation, researchers began exploring the use of alterna-
the latter based on the mechanism that provided skin stretch, tive electromagnetic actuators, such as voice coil and linear
whether through the motion of flat surfaces or belts or tactors resonance actuators, for implementing asymmetric vibrations.
actuated in planar/tangential or 3 DoF translational movements.
A. Asymmetric vibrations
This rendering approach relies on creating an illusionary
pulling sensation that can modulate the perceived heaviness
of an object. This illusion occurs by generating a higher
peak acceleration or acceleration rate in one direction on the
Input current profile for actuator
skin using a vibrotactile actuator, producing a sequence of
A
alternating strong stimuli in one direction and weak stimuli
in the other; see Fig. 2. The weak stimuli in this alternating vibrotac�le
0
patternarenotclearlyperceived,resultinginapullingsensation actuator
that increases the perceived weight of an object if the strong
perceived
-A
stimuli are in the gravity direction [22], [51]. illusionary force Time
One of the first mentions of this effect dates back to
Fig. 2: An illustration of weight rendering through asymmetric
Amemiya et al., who designed a slider-crank mechanism to
vibrations.Avibrotactileactuatormovingontheverticalaxisis
induce a “virtual force vector” [53]. This was achieved by
held between the thumb and index finger. The actuator’s input
oscillating the mass located at the endpoint of the mechanism
current, with negative values causing a downward acceleration,
with a peak acceleration along the major axis of the object
is designed to create an asymmetric acceleration pattern,
much larger in one direction. Such an acceleration profile
stronger in a downward direction, leading to the perception of
would, later on, be referred to as an asymmetric-in-amplitude
an illusionary downward force. The current profile is adapted
vibration, whose amplitude and frequency were shown to
from [52].
influence the intensity of the illusionary effect. In a posterior
tnerruC5
Soon thereafter, Amemiya and Gomi [57] investigated the together with the overall higher accuracy of the combined
intensity of the pulling sensation elicited by asymmetric condition, suggest that asymmetric vibrations and texture
vibrations by employing the same actuator as [56] and a voice feedback could be combined, or in terms of the authors,
coil actuator (Haptuator, Tactile Labs, Canada). Their findings “without mutual interference” [58].
revealed that the pulling illusion was most pronounced when A common limitation pointed out in both aforementioned
thefrequencyoftheasymmetricvibrationsignalcoincidedwith studieswastherelativelysmallstrengthofthepullingsensation
the resonance frequency of the actuator. Another experiment induced by the asymmetric vibrations, despite using the
withinthesamestudyshowedthattheillusionwasmostintense recommended combination of 40Hz signal and actuator of
for the combination of the Haptuator and a driving signal of compatible frequency response by [23], [52], [57], [58]. More
40Hz.Follow-upworkbyCulbertsonetal.[52]carriedoutthe recently, Tanabe et al. [51] provided further guidelines and
dynamic modeling of this actuator and fingerpad to determine observations about the usage of asymmetric vibrations, such
the optimal characteristics of the driving signal. Coinciding as the minimum application time, the time until users develop
with the results from [57], they identified an optimal input perceptual adaptation to vibration, and further emphasis on
signal frequency of 40Hz for eliciting the pulling sensation. designing the setup with a matching signal and actuator. In a
However,theyproposedusingasawtoothstep-rampsignalwith follow-up study, Tanabe and colleagues created a voice-coil
a pulse width ratio of 0.3 to produce more asymmetry in the actuator of their own. They designed the output acceleration
accelerationprofilecomparedtoasquarewavesignal(seeFig.2 profile as a sinusoidal superimposed with its second harmonic
for the proposed signal profile). These optimal configuration with different phase shifts, resulting in various types of
parameters were later used in two studies by [23] and [58] on asymmetries [59]. The novelty introduced by the authors was
the use of asymmetric vibrations for weight rendering. the estimation of the combined fingertip and actuator transfer
OneofthosestudieswasperformedbyChoietal.[23],who function per participant to ensure the accurate realization of
designedGrabity,ahapticdeviceforrenderinggripcontactand the desired acceleration profile. By doing so, the authors
forces, weight, and inertia in a pinch grasp configuration. The observed that the pulling illusion was more strongly perceived
deviceincorporatedweightrenderingcapabilitiesthroughapair when the resulting acceleration profile was asymmetric-in-time,
ofHaptuatorsalignedwiththedirectionofgravityanddrivenby with responses close to the chance rate for asymmetric-in-
the signal proposed by [52]. The researchers demonstrated that amplitude acceleration profiles. This result was further verified
the magnitude of the generated virtual forces can be adjusted for different frequencies in a following study, which also
by manipulating the amplitude of the asymmetric input signal. confirmed that the best frequency for inducing the illusion
Withtheirdevice,theycouldsimulateincreasinganddecreasing was 40Hz [60].
virtual weight variations of up to 0.294N (30g). Notably, they
observed that the perceived magnitude of the variations was
B. Skin stretch
smaller when decreasing the weight than when increasing it,
in line with the results of [22]. The second approach for rendering weight through tactile
Later on, Tanaka et al. [58] presented their DualVib device, stimulation utilizes the deformations of the fingerpad caused
a handheld device designed for rendering a dynamic mass by the tangential load forces during object lifting. This form
moving inside a container, such as a fluid or particles. The of stimulation is widely known as skin stretch. Skin-stretch
authors used asymmetric vibrations to render the forces of the devices for weight rendering can be categorized based on the
moving mass using the actuator and driving signal from [52], mechanism providing skin stretch, whether through the motion
denoted as force feedback. In their design, they strategically of flat surfaces or belts or tactors actuated in planar/tangential
positionedtwoHaptuatorsbeneaththethumbandindexfingers or 3 DoF translational movements. Several studies employing
of the users to enhance the pulling sensation. Additionally, these approaches for weight rendering are discussed in the
two electromagnetic vibration actuators (Haptic Reactors, Alps following paragraphs.
Alpine, Japan) were positioned on the palm for rendering 1) Skinstretchthroughflatsurfacemotion: Onemechanism
the fine vibrations arising from the collisions of the dynamic to provide skin stretch for simulating weight in virtual envi-
mass with the container’s inner surface, denoted as texture ronments is moving a flat surface in contact with the skin;
feedback. This distinction in actuation sites aimed to improve see Fig. 3a for an illustration. Although such methodology
theperceptionqualityofthesetwotypesofvibrationstimuli.In has been used for rendering textures [64] or understanding
their main experiment, participants were asked to distinguish finger deformations [65], Kurita et al. [61] were the first
between combinations of three different rendered materials ones to utilize it for weight rendering. Their one-DoF box-
(textures) through acoustic vibrations and three different shaped device was held in a pinch grasp and worn through a
mass levels rendered through asymmetric vibrations, both in pair of rings attached to the device. The transparent surface
isolation and combined. The participants were only capable of beneath the index fingertip was actuated vertically through a
identifying conditions with an accuracy of 43.6±15.1% for motor.Duringthismotion,acameracapturedthefingercontact
the combined one. A deeper look into the results showed that surface to calculate the fingerpad eccentricity, i.e., deformation.
the combined condition yielded similar mass discrimination The virtual weights were rendered by controlling the position
accuracy to the force-only condition. However, for material of the surface such that the measured fingertip deformation
discrimination, the accuracy of the combined condition was matched the average fingertip eccentricity profiles obtained by
closer to that of the texture-only condition. These results, Mukai et al. [66], who measured the fingertip eccentricity of6
pla�orm
virtual virtual virtual
object object object
index x thumb index
y
x
y
thumb index z yxx F n x yzthumb
index index index
F F
s s F s
tactor tactor
base aperture
(a) (c) (d)
virtual
virtual
object
object
F
n
F
s
index thumb index thumb
(b)
Fig. 3: Illustration of weight rendering approaches through skin stretch. Here, the users grip virtual objects via precision grasp
with their thumb and index fingers by wearing or holding the devices. (a) Skin stretch via flat surface motion. e.g., [61]. The
object weight is simulated by controlling the displacement of the flat surfaces contacted with fingers, creating a shear force
toward gravity. (b) Skin stretch through belt motion, e.g., [24]. When the motors of a belt rotate in opposite directions and
at the same rate, it deforms the corresponding finger only in the normal direction, simulating the normal stress due to grip.
When they rotate in the same direction and rate, they deform the fingerpad only in the tangential direction, simulating the shear
stress based on the desired weight of the virtual object. They can simultaneously deform the fingertip in normal and shear
directions by rotating at different rates. (c) Skin stretch through a tactor actuated in planar/tangential movement, e.g., [62].
Each fingerpad rests on the base of the device and contacts the tactor through an aperture at the center. The displacement of
the tactor creates a shear force, simulating the weight of an object. (d) Skin stretch via a tactor actuated in 3 DoF translational
movement, e.g., [63]. The object weight is simulated by controlling the displacement of a tactor placed on a 3 DoF, kinematic
delta structure, providing both shear and normal stress on the skin.
different participants while holding different weights. It should sensation of grasp contact and grip forces. Conversely, they
be noted that these average deformation profiles were used to produced shear stress when they rotated in the same direction
simulate weights without accounting for differences in skin andrate,simulatingtheweightperception.Theauthorsshowed
properties.Thesystemwasevaluatedinanobjectidentification that inducing various levels of shear stress on the fingerpad
experiment, in which participants grasped and lifted the device. resulted in different perceived weights by the participants. The
On each trial, the device rendered the weight and friction participants, who held the real objects in one hand, tuned the
coefficient of one of a set of real objects, which the user was belt displacements for equivalent virtual weights (i.e., shear
asked to identify afterward. The authors observed that the stress). From this experiment, they obtained a function that
device could render perceivably different levels of weight and represented the relation between generated shear stress and
friction, but the perceived values differed from the intended the real object’s weight. This function, an average gain factor
ones. Participants tended to rate the 100g object heavier than for representing finger stiffness, was later used in follow-up
it was, while the 200g and 300g objects were underestimated. experimentswheretheymeasuredthereflexiveresponseingrip
The authors discussed that such deviations could be attributed forceuponasuddenincreaseinrealandsimulatedweights.The
to the generalization of the deformation profiles, which did not similarmagnitudeoftheresponseinbothconditionsconfirmed
account for individual differences in skin properties. the suitability of the approach for weight rendering.
2) Skin stretch through belt motion: Another way to render Building upon their initial findings, Minamizawa et al. [20]
weight via skin stretch is by utilizing belt motion. One of conductedexperimentsinvestigatingtheinteractionbetweentac-
the first skin stretch devices evaluated within this context was tile and kinesthetic cues for weight rendering. They simulated
the Gravity Grabber, developed by Minamizawa et al. [24], object weight by displaying forces through a grounded kines-
[67]. The device utilized two motors that actuated a fabric thetic device (Force Dimension, Omega 3), whose end effector
belt to deform the fingerpad skin in the vertical (normal) and was attached to the palm, wrist, or forearm via velcro straps.
shear (ulnar-radial) directions, as illustrated in Fig. 3b. When They placed urethane forms between the velcro straps and the
both motors rotated at the same rate in opposite directions, skin to isolate the kinesthetic stimuli. They simultaneously
they induced vertical stress on the fingerpad, replicating the deformed the fingerpad using their belt-based device placed on
x
x e d n i
x
x e d n i
x
x e d n i7
the fingertips. The first experiment aimed at measuring JNDs due to the weight of objects can be simulated by controlling
for reference stimuli between 50g and 400g using tactile cues the displacement amplitude and speed of the tactor towards
alone or in combination with kinesthetic information applied the direction of gravity (Fig. 3c).
at different locations, such as palm, wrist, and forearm. For The earliest skin stretch devices that leveraged tactor
stimuli below 200g, the tactile-only condition provided JND actuation in planar/tangential movement were designed to
valuescomparabletothoseofthecombinedcondition.However, providedirectionalcuesontouchabledeviceconfiguration[72]–
for heavier stimuli, the JND increased largely for the tactile [74]. The studies proposing these designs reported average
condition, indicating a stimulus saturation or a limitation in direction discrimination thresholds between 11◦ [72] and
fingerpad deformation. The location of the kinesthetic stimuli 19◦ [73] depending on the shear displacement amplitude and
did not affect the JND values. A similar result was observed velocity, movement direction, and number of moving tactile
in their second experiment, where the weight discrimination units.Gleesonetal.[74]showedthatfourorthogonaldirections
ability for a simulated object using tactile, kinesthetic (applied (distal, proximal, medial, and lateral) could be discriminated
on the forearm), and combined cues was compared to that with high accuracy for displacements as small as 0.2–0.5mm
of a real object. First, the weight discrimination ability of andvelocitiesof1mm/sgeneratedbyonemovingtactor.They
the participants was measured while holding a cubic object also found that higher moving speeds and larger displacements
attached to a grounded force feedback device (real object caused greater accuracy in direction discrimination. Later, they
condition). JNDs were measured for reference stimuli of 100, showed the feasibility of using this rendering technique in a
200, 300, and 400g. The experiment was then repeated while compact, fingertip-mounted design [75]. The results from these
participants held the same object but the weight was simulated studies confirmed that moving small-sized tactile units could
using tactile, kinesthetic, or combined cues. The JND values be exploited for rendering shear forces, like those occurring
with the combined condition showed a similar trend to those due to the weight of an object, in different directions on the
measuredwithrealobjects,thoughthevalueswereconsistently fingerpad.
slightlyhigherforallweights.TheJNDofthetactilecondition Furthermore, Gleeson et al. [76] proposed guidelines for
was close to that of the combined condition for 100g objects, designing skin stretch devices through tactor motion by testing
while the kinesthetic condition resulted in a JND almost twice tactors in two different textures and three sizes combined with
as large. As the reference weight increased, the JND for the apertures in three sizes in a direction discrimination study.
tactile condition increased substantially, while the kinesthetic They advised using rough-textured tactors to reduce slip and
conditionapproachedthatofthecombinedcondition,matching enhance direction identification accuracy. They found that the
it for the 400g reference stimulus. These results suggest that size of the tactor was insignificant for direction discrimination
combining tactile and kinesthetic cues is particularly relevant accuracy, suggesting that their size could be adaptable based
for rendering lightweight objects. on the application at hand and the finger size. Nevertheless,
Besides the discussed implementation, other belt-based they recommended using a minimum tactor diameter of 7mm
devices in the literature include the hRing, developed by based on the reported user discomfort with smaller tactors.
Pacchierotti et al. [68]. The device is worn on the proximal With regards to the aperture size, small sizes resulted in low
phalanges for compatibility with finger-tracking solutions. The direction discrimination accuracy, probably associated with the
authors demonstrated the device’s capabilities for a pick- lack of stimulation of the skin surrounding the contact point.
and-place task, obtaining overall lower interaction forces, Following the design guidelines and results of Gleeson et
completion time, and increased perceived effectiveness than al.[74],[76],furtherstudiescontinuedtoexploretheprovision
in a visual-only condition. Other multi-cue devices featuring of directional cues with more compact devices [77]. More
belt actuation have also been developed [69], [70]. However, prominently, some studies [78], [79] aimed to render object
these devices have yet to be evaluated within the context of stiffness using tactors actuated in tangential movement. These
weight rendering, particularly for those in which stimulation exemplaryworksusedagraspable(i.e.,stylus-like)skinstretch
is relocated to the proximal phalanges. device with a tactor design following the guidelines from [76].
3) Skin stretch through tactors actuated in planar/tangential They showed that their design could provide perceivable levels
movement: Thedevicesinthiscategorygenerateskindeforma- of stiffness comparable to grounded kinesthetic devices [78]
tions by displacing one or multiple small, high-friction tactile and augment the overall perceived stiffness when used in
units (tactors) tangentially to the fingerpad. In these devices, combination[79].Thesestudiesconvertedthedesiredrendering
the user’s fingerpad rests on the contact base of the touchable, forces into tactor displacements by applying a predefined
graspable, or wearable device [71]. Most designs involve an gain factor, similar to the belt-based devices described in the
aperture on the base, allowing the fingerpad to directly contact previoussection.However,Queketal.[79]foundthatdifferent
the tactor(s), which are mechanically actuated beneath the gain factors resulted in different perceived stiffness levels with
base. The aperture also prevents the fingertip from moving in large intersubject variability. This variability was attributed to
unwanted directions, thus ensuring that tactor displacements large differences in skin properties across participants, along
solely induce skin stretch; see Fig. 3c for an example of a with neural and cognitive factors.
wearabledesign.Unlikebelt-basedsolutions,mosttactor-based Despite their high shear force rendering capability, devices
devices allow the rendering of tangential forces in 2 DoF, utilizing tactors actuated in planar/tangential movement have
potentiallycoveringthewholeplanetangentialtothefingerpad, notbeenusedforweightrenderingapplicationsuntilthedesign
which helps generate directional cues. The skin deformations of the HapTip device [62]. HapTip features tactor actuation in8
the tangential plane of the fingertip in a wearable configuration the tactors in the tangential direction based on a predefined
(similartotheillustrationinFig.3c),anditcanrenderforcesby gain factor (0.2mm/N) found by [82]. They obtained Weber
projecting a weighted sum of gravity and inertial accelerations. Fractions of 0.35 with the skin stretch device and 0.11 with
The authors showed that HapTip could convey basic directions the kinesthetic device, which the authors attributed to a more
(up, right, down, and left) and orientations (horizontal, vertical, “natural” perception of the kinesthetic stimulation. It should
and two diagonals). They also evaluated the weight rendering be highlighted that although the device could render forces in
capabilities of the device by embedding two HapTip devices 3DoFtranslationalmovements,theweightswereonlyrendered
to the two sides of a cube surface to provide tactile feedback by 1 DoF (tangential) movement.
(i.e., shear forces due to tactor displacement) on the thumb
and index finger when the cube was held. In a virtual reality Recently, Schorr et al. [25], [63] designed a compact,
environment, they asked participants to sort virtual cubes wearable device providing skin stretch through 3 DOF tactor
based on their weight by picking and shaking each object. motion (see Fig. 3d) and evaluated its weight rendering
The weights of the virtual objects were arbitrary, had no real capability. They rendered virtual weights by converting the
equivalents, and were adjusted based on the amplitude of the interaction forces in the virtual environment into tangential
tactor displacements, such that their proportions were 1/3, 1, 3, tactor displacements considering a predefined gain factor
and 9. The results showed that the most typical sorting error obtained from Nakazawa et al. [84], and thus, regardless of the
comprised the mistaking of the two heaviest cubes, attributed fingerpad stiffness variability among users. They conducted a
to the saturated actuation of the device. However, the overall weightmagnitudeestimationexperimentusingvirtualobjectsof
positive results, with an average sorting error of 2.2 over 20, differentsizesandweights.Theresultsshowedthatparticipants
where0wastheperfectordering,supportedthesystem’sweight could perceive differences in virtual object weight and that
rendering suitability. theyappliedincreasinggraspforceswhenliftingvirtualobjects
4) Skin stretch through tactors actuated in 3 DoF trans- as rendered mass was increased. The same device was also
lational movement: These devices create skin deformation used in a later study by Suchoski et al. [27] to evaluate the
through a tactor actuated via a 3 DoF (translational) kinematic influence of scaling inertial forces on the perceived weight of
mechanism, such as a delta structure [25]; see Fig. 3d for a virtual object. The authors proposed using a scaling factor
an illustration. This actuation allows the control of the tactor that multiplies the object’s mass and divides the value of the
placedonaplatforminalltranslationaldirectionsand,thus,can gravitational acceleration in the virtual environment. By doing
induce normal and tangential skin deformations. These devices so, the overall weight of the object was preserved while the
have been designed in wearable or graspable configurations mass was increased, as did the inertial forces. They evaluated
and broadly studied for various applications, such as rendering the effect of the scaling factor on weight perception in a
object curvature [80], stiffness [81], and weight. It should be discrimination experiment where participants were asked to
noted that, despite their 3 DoF design, only the tactor motion pick and place two virtual objects: one reference object with
towardsgravity(shearforce)iscontrolledforweightsimulation. 200g mass without scaling and one comparison object ranging
While this situation makes their rendering capability similar to between 50 and 350g with scaling factors of 2 and 3. They
the skin stretch through planar tactor motion, it also enables found that for a reference object of 200g, the average PSEs
simulating contact and grasping forces when the user touches for the objects with scaling factors 2 and 3 were 171.0g and
virtual objects. 150.5g, respectively. These results show that the proposed
One of the earliest examples of this type of device used for method could amplify the perception of the weight of virtual
rendering object properties was designed by Quek et al. [82]. objects without increasing the force output of the device.
The device was based on a delta mechanism; its end effector
was connected to a rectangular tool having one tactor within The work of Leonardis et al. [85], who used a parallel
one aperture on each of its four sides. The users grasped the mechanism device with articulated legs connecting actuators
tool with their thumb, index, and middle finger, hence each to a platform, is relevant for its approach to dealing with
tactor stimulated a different finger. This configuration rendered varyingfingerproperties.Theauthorsperformedper-participant
forces on the fingerpads in both lateral and normal directions fingerpad stiffness characterization with the device to ensure
by moving the end effector, consequently tactors, in horizontal individualizedconversionoftheinteractionforcesintoplatform
andverticaldirections.Theyattachedtheirtactiledisplaytothe displacement, thus minimizing intersubject variability. They
end effector of a widely used kinesthetic haptic device (Force tested their device and approach for pick-and-place object
Dimension, Omega 3). Later, Suchoski et al. [83] used this manipulation. The results showed that participants reduced
device to render the mass of a virtual object when participants theirgraspingforceswhenusingthedevicecomparedtovisual
held the device by their thumb and index fingers in a pinch informationonly,indicativeofabetterestimationoftheobject’s
grasp. They compared the human perception of virtual masses weight.Asignificantdifferenceingripforcesbetweenlightand
rendered via their tactile display and the kinesthetic display. heavy objects indicated the system’s suitability for rendering
They measured the JND for the reference masses of 35, 70, different weight levels. Another experiment involving the lift-
105, and 140 g. The participant’s task was to adjust the mass and-holdofanobjectrestrainedbyavirtualprismaticconstraint
of one block in a virtual environment in increments of 1 g, showed a similar pattern. The grasping and reaction forces
until it was equal to a reference block also being rendered. For generatedbytheprismaticconstraintweresignificantlysmaller
the tactile display, the virtual masses were rendered by moving when using the device than the visual condition.9
IV. COMPARISONOFTACTILEWEIGHTRENDERING is negligible. For belt-based devices, on the other hand, we
APPROACHES indicated that they provide an “unlimited” workspace in the
A. Comparison criteria actuated DoF(s). In the normal and ulnar-radial directions, the
workspace limits of the device depend on the length of the
We compared the five different tactile weight rendering
actuated fabric belt and constraints of the finger deformation.
approaches—i.e., asymmetric vibrations and skin stretch
Therefore,providedsufficientforcebytheactuators,thedevice
through the motion of a flat surface or belt or tactors actuated
can potentially deform skin up until its maximum deformation,
in planar/tangential or 3 DoF translational movements—to
which some articles have measured to be up to 5mm in the
guide the decision-making process for using them. To carry
shear direction [91], or until slippage occurs.
out the comparison, we established different criteria following
Wepresenttheweightdiscriminationthreshold(WDT)asthe
the insights from the literature in the field and other properties
WeberFraction(WF)withthecorrespondingreferenceweights.
listed in reviews on haptic devices and weight rendering, e.g.,
Whenever the value was provided as the JND, we computed
[26], [86], [87].
theWDTbydividingtheJNDbythereferenceweight.Wedid
The first two selected criteria are size and mass and relate
not provide values for asymmetric vibrations and skin stretch
to the physical properties of the devices used for tactile
throughflatsurfacemotionasthosestudieslookingintoweight
weight rendering. These characteristics condition the scope
rendering typically do not investigate discrimination thresholds
of usability of each approach; e.g., smaller systems are easier
but compare two or three weight levels or shifts in perceived
to accommodate, as well as wearables or hand-held devices.
weight [23], [58], [61]. Although these results indicate the
We also included criteria related to the mechanical char-
renderingcapabilityofthedevice,noneofthereviewedstudies
acteristics of these devices, namely the number of actuated
provides a clear metric for the weight discrimination threshold,
DoFs, maximum rendering force, and actuation workspace.
so we considered the value to be unknown.
The number of DoFs indicates the dimensionality in which a
For the direction discrimination threshold (DDT), however,
device can render weight and the possibility of simultaneous
we did not consider belt and surface devices for this criterion
rendering of grip and load forces. For skin stretch devices,
since they are only capable of rendering tangential forces in
the maximum rendering force (i.e., the maximum weight the
a single direction. We provided two types of metrics for the
device can render) is also conditioned by the maximum skin
remaining approaches: the direction detection accuracy and
stretchthatadevicecaninduce.Suchamagnitudecorresponds
the JND, depending on the experimental approach. One result
to its actuation workspace, which is additionally reported for
worth elaborating on is the value provided for asymmetric
this kind of device.
vibrations, obtained from the study of [54]. In the experiment,
Thediscriminationthresholdforweightanddirectionsconsti-
participants were presented with a vibration and were allowed
tutesanothersetofcomparisoncriteriaregardingtheperceptual
to freely indicate its direction. The reported values in the table
features of the devices. Lower discrimination thresholds and
correspondtothemeanofthewithin-subjectstandarddeviation
the capacity to render large rendering forces in a perceivable
when indicating the direction of the vibrations.
manner can translate into a device capable of providing a more
For the potential applications, we consider the target appli-
naturalistic and coherent interaction.
cation of the studies developing and evaluating the devices.
Finally, we added potential applications of the mentioned
Additionally, we also considered the potential applications
devices reported in the literature.
discussed by the corresponding authors for proof-of-concept
and technical studies.
B. Comparison
TableIIsummarizesourcomparisonresultsoftactileweight
V. DISCUSSION
rendering approaches. Here, we report the results using a This review addresses the usage of tactile interfaces for
standard metric for each listed criterion, converting other rendering the weight of virtual objects. These devices can
reported metrics when possible. For the size and the mass, substitute and augment kinesthetic devices to provide a more
we report magnitudes as indicated by the authors of the device, coherent, accurate, and naturalistic sensation of weight. Doing
typically as the length, width, and depth in millimeters, and so can potentially increase manipulation performance in
the mass in grams. For the number of DoFs, we considered teleoperation tasks or improve the efficacy of robot-assisted
the values reported by the authors and otherwise derived them and VR simulators for training and learning motor tasks. We
from the actuation of the system and the kinematic model. first classified the tactile weight rendering approaches found
Wecomputedthemaximumrenderingforcesforasymmetric in the literature within a proposed categorization. Then, we
vibrationdevicesasthemaximumperceivedforceofthepulling compared them across several criteria based on the insights
illusion. Whenever the maximum rendering was reported by of the retrieved studies to provide information to allow the
the authors as the rendered mass, we converted the value to selection of approaches based on developers’ requirements.
force unit, Newton.
A. Whichapproacheshavebeenusedtorenderweightthrough
The workspace, just like the size, is typically listed as
tactile stimulation?
the range in each actuated dimension. However, we did not
evaluate the workspace of asymmetric vibration devices, since Two major groups of approaches have been determined
the actuators vibrate in place and transmit the vibrations to according to the type of stimulus used to render weight: asym-
the device they are attached. Thus, their effective workspace metric vibrations and skin stretch. The asymmetric vibration10
TABLE II: Comparison table of the five presented tactile weight rendering approaches across the selected criteria. Approaches
for which a criterion does not apply have been categorized as “Not applicable.” Approaches for which no study has been
found reporting a specific criterion have been labeled as “Undetermined.” Abbreviations: Degrees of Freedom (DoF), Weight
Discrimination Threshold (WDT), Direction Discrimination Threshold (DDT), Standard Deviation (SD). †Value converted to
selected metric. ‡Value with no conversion to chosen metric.
Asymmetric Flatsurface Belt Tactormotion Tactormotion
Criterion
vibrations motion motion planar/tangential 3DoFtranslational
Size 7.5×35.0×5.0 [56] Undetermined 31.0×28.0×12.0[68] 20.4×35.0×34.1[62] 21.5×48.8×40.2[25]
(mm) 10.0×10.0×35.0[23] 45.9×67.7×18.5[77] 18.0×32.0×32.0[85]
56.0×175.0×27.0[22] 100.0×32.0×28.0[79]
5.1[56] 210[61] 15.3[68] 22.43[62] 31.6[25]
Mass
8.15[23] 16.31[85]
(g)
260[82]
1DoF[23],[52],[58] 1DoF[61] 2DoF[24],[68] 2DoF[62],[75] 3DoF[25],[85]
DoF
2DoF[88] [82],[89]
†0.292[56] Undetermined †3.92[24] 3.4[62] 2.0×2.0×7.5[25]
Maximum
†0.294[23] 2.72×2.73×4.16[85]
rendering
0.43[51] 4.7[90]
force(N)
5.0[89]
Notapplicable Undetermined Unlimited ±2.0[62] 5.0×10.0×10.0[25]
Workspace ±2.5[77] ±7.5×10.0×15.0[85]
(mm) ±2.3[79] ±π,±π,15.0[90]
5 6
5.0×5.0×5.0[82]
†0.1–0.25[20] †0.147&0.154[27]
Undetermined Undetermined Undetermined
WDT (ref.50–300g) (ref.150.5&171.0g)
0.35[83]
(ref.35–140g)
71% †84.7% 69%
8-direction Notapplicable Notapplicable 4-direction 8-direction
DDT accuracy[88] accuracy[62] accuracy[85]
‡9◦–25◦ SD[54] 12.9◦–15.6◦ [72]
23◦–25◦ [73]
Objectexploration Objectmanipulation
Objectexploration Objectexploration Objectexploration
and/ormanipulationin andexplorationin
Potential inVR[22],[23] inVR[61] inVR[62]
VR/AR[24],[68]–[70] VR/AR[25],[27],[85]
applications
Directioncommunication Sensorysubstitiuon Sensorysubstitiuon
[53],[54] inteleoperation[78],[79] inteleoperation[82]
Directioncommunication
[72],[73],[75]
approach can simulate weight by inducing a pulling sensation wearability, further classified by their actuation principle [87].
by actuating a vibration motor with an asymmetric output The approaches presented in this review are classified
acceleration profile. The skin stretch approach is based on similarly to the review by [26], limited to vibrations and
deformingthefingerpadtostimulatetheskinmechanoreceptors skin stretch, which act upon the tactile sense. However, from
and induce the sensation of weight. This approach can rely on the whole group of vibration approaches, the focus has been
theactuationofaflatsurface,belt,ortactorinplanar/tangential directed toward asymmetric vibration systems since they are
or 3 DoF translational movements. Multiple studies have been the only vibration solution that renders a perceivable force
presented evaluating these approaches in grounded, hand-held, or weight sensation rather than a cue proportional to the
and wearable devices in the context of weight rendering. object’s weight. The latter approach, although indicating the
It should be noted that different categorizations of these weight of an object, does not actually render weight and, thus,
approaches can also be performed. For example, Pacchierotti was excluded from this review. The skin stretch approach,
et al. classified haptic devices according to whether they followingasimilarperspectiveto[87],hasbeenfurtherdivided
were worn on the hand or the fingertip [86]. Hand devices according to the actuation or stimulation mechanism of the
were further separated by kinesthetic or vibrotactile feedback, available devices. Such a perspective was followed instead of
while fingertip devices were divided according to the rendered a sensation-based classification, as in [86], because most of
sensation (e.g. normal indentation, lateral skin stretch). Lim et these devices can provide a combination of sensations, such
al. classified weight rendering devices according to the haptic as normal indentation and lateral skin stretch. Additionally,
cueusedbythedevices,namelyforces,skinstretch,vibrations, although some of the devices are inherently wearable, like
weight shifting, and others [26]. Finally, Adilkhanov et al. the ones that rely on belt motion, others can be integrated
classified the devices in their review based on the degree of into all sorts of solutions, like tactor devices, implemented11
in wearable [62] and grounded solutions [82]. Classification of belt devices makes them better suited for augmented and
according to the actuation principle allows for a comparison of virtualrealityapplicationsthatrequirefreehandmovementsand
devicesthatcanbeusedacrossallwearabilityscales,increasing relatively large weights to be rendered. However, the grasping
the scope of application of the results. motion of the object needs to be restrained to a lateral grasp
for the feedback to be effective.
The use of tactors actuated in planar/tangential motion can
B. What are the main advantages and disadvantages of each
compensate for the lack of stimulation in the proximal-distal
approach?
directionofthefingerpad.Asaresult,cues(likeweight)canbe
The comparison performed in the previous section showed conveyedinmultipledirections[54],[72],[73],thussupporting
thateachapproachpresentedseveraladvantagesandlimitations, a wider range of lifting configurations. The main limitation
indicative of better suitability of each approach to specific of this approach resides in the grounding of the outer part of
applicationsorcontexts.Ideally,anexperimentalcomparisonof the fingerpad, which can lead to reduced perceptual acuity, as
theavailabledevicesisneededtodeterminethebestapproachto discussed in the incoming paragraphs. This grounding, on the
each case using different experiments related to the application other hand, allows the rendering of feedback without attaching
of interest. However, as far as we know, no such comparative the finger to the device. For this reason, these devices are most
studies for weight-rendering exist in the literature. studied for teleoperation [79].
Despitetheabsenceofcomparativestudiesprovidingaquan- Thewearableskinstretchdevicesrelyingontactoractuation
titativeandthoroughcomparisonofapproachesperapplication, in 3 DoF translational movements provide an additional level
our results indicate the applications in which each approach of rendering capabilities. The three-DoF actuation of these
can perform best. Asymmetric vibration devices with small devices allows the rendering of forces in three translational
sizes and weights come up as a solution mainly developed and dimensions,enablingtherenderingofweightandnormalforces
suited for handheld devices, for being more straightforward to and simulating contact and non-contact situations in all grasp
integrate into those systems, such as VR controllers. However, configurations. With their reduced discrimination thresholds,
factors like the limited rendered weight and the perceivable these devices present an excellent all-around performance. All
vibratory effect from the actuators limit their versatility [23], thiscomesatthecostofreducedtangentialforcesandabulkier
[58]. Therefore, we anticipate that recent skin stretch devices device compared to the devices relying on tactor actuation in
with small form factors, like the Chasm device [92], can planar/tangential movement. Therefore, the available wearable
potentially replace asymmetric vibration devices due to their skin stretch devices utilizing tactor motion in 3 DoF allow the
larger actuation forces and small size. rendering of weight in virtual reality applications.
Only one study has been found exploring the induction The skin stretch device by Suchoski et al., utilizing tactor
of skin stretch through flat surface motion [61] for weight actuation in 3 DoF translational movements with graspable
rendering. This approach can deform the entire fingerpad in configuration,hasshownthemostlimitedweightdiscrimination
the movement direction, thus potentially inducing a more thresholds among skin stretch devices [83]. Although the
naturalistic sensation. Due to its actuation principle, it can maximum rendering force achieved with this device is large,
potentially generate 2 DoF tangential deformations, offering a themaximumrenderedweightfoundintheliteratureisusually
more versatile solution. The main limitation of this approach, much smaller. The reason for both of these observations, as
and a possible explanation for the reduced number of studies discussed in [83], can be attributed to the local deformation of
exploring it, is the difficulty of immobilizing the finger to the skin in contact with the tactor relative to the surrounding
induce skin stretch upon movement of the surface exclusively. skin, grounded on the aperture. Because a large part of the fin-
Grounding the device at more proximal phalanxes [24], [63] gerpad is grounded in the system’s aperture, the corresponding
or integrating it into hand-worn devices [86] can increase the mechanoreceptors are not stimulated, potentially contributing
usability of this approach and the exploration of its weight to the reduced discrimination accuracy and maximum rendered
rendering capabilities. weight. This observation is backed up by [76], who noticed a
Among skin stretch devices, the ones utilizing belt motion reduction in direction discrimination performance for smaller
present several advantages indicating their suitability for apertures, which constrained a larger area of the skin.
rendering object weight in virtual environments. Belt devices In summary, each weight rendering approach offers distinct
constituteahighlyandstrictlywearablesolutionthathasshown advantages alongside corresponding disadvantages, requiring
good performance at simulating the weight of virtual objects. careful consideration tailored to specific use cases and limita-
In addition to displaying the largest rendered weight observed tions.
acrossallstudiesinthisreview,thesedevicesyieldcomparable
weight discrimination thresholds in the presence and absence
C. Limitations of current approaches and future perspectives
of kinesthetic information for low weights [20]. Their main
limitation is the single degree of actuation in the ulnar-radial Below, we propose future research directions on tactile
direction, which prevents the rendering of weight and inertial weightrenderingbasedonthelimitationsofcurrentapproaches
forces in the proximal-distal direction of the fingerpad. Hence, foundintheliterature.Furtherresearchinthesedirectionscould
theyrestrictthegraspingconfigurationforliftingtheobjectand ultimately increase the performance of these tactile weight
could cause a mismatch of sensory information during object rendering approaches, impacting user experience, immersion,
manipulation. Overall, the wearable and compact form factor and performance during training and teleoperation tasks.12
1) There is a need for comparative studies and standard- stimulation when simulating small weights. We conducted
ization: As mentioned earlier, providing a definitive best an exhaustive literature search and proposed a categorization
tactile weight rendering approach for specific applications of the different approaches followed by a comparison across
is challenging due to the need for more comprehensive several criteria based on the insights of the retrieved studies.
information on particular properties of the reported devices This search distinguished two main approaches: asymmetric
in the literature and comparative studies that experimentally vibrations and skin stretch, induced via the motion of a belt
evaluateandcomparetheexistingdevices.Asitmaynotalways or flat surfaces or tactors actuated in planar/tangential or
be feasible to access these devices, one way to mitigate this 3 DoF translational movements. Based on the comparison,
problem is by standardizing the process, such as developing the asymmetric vibration approach provides some limitations
design and evaluation guidelines, open-source software and that indicate that its use for weight rendering is limited to
hardware for testing, and information-sharing platforms, with applications involving tight size constraints and low-fidelity
a joint effort of experts. rendering. Although each skin stretch device has specific
2) Devices should account for variability in fingertip prop- advantages,thelargemaximumrenderingforceandlowweight
erties: In the studies conducted with skin stretch devices, discrimination threshold, among others, indicate increased
e.g., [61], [79], large intersubject variability was observed suitability of belt and 3D tactor devices for weight rendering.
in the perceived properties of the virtual objects and task The limitations of the solutions and gaps in the literature
performance. One reason for this variability was the use of identified in this review indicate a need for further research to
position control, which relied on a constant scaling factor or determine the optimal way of rendering weight via the tactile
an average fingerpad stiffness to convert the virtual forces into sense. This study aims to motivate and guide the development
displacements,disregardingdifferencesinskinpropertiesacross andusageoftactiledisplaysformoreaccurateweightrendering,
participants. Several studies reported that such differences improving immersion in virtual reality and performance and
in finger mechanical properties and size could cause large learning in training and teleoperation applications.
variabilities in fingertip deformation [93] and resulting tactile
perception [94], [95]. Therefore, these variabilities in skin
properties should be considered for interface design. For skin- REFERENCES
stretch devices, one idea to overcome this problem could be
the development of force-controlled systems, as done by [89], [1] J.G.Wildenbeest,D.A.Abbink,C.J.Heemskerk,F.C.vanderHelm,
andH.Boessenkool,“TheImpactofHapticFeedbackQualityonthe
[96], or per-participant estimations, as in the study of [85]. For
PerformanceofTeleoperatedAssemblyTasks,”IEEETransactionson
asymmetric vibrations, such variabilities could be mitigated by Haptics,vol.6,no.2,pp.242–252,Apr.2013,conferenceName:IEEE
designing the acceleration signal considering the differences TransactionsonHaptics.
[2] G. B. Gal, E. I. Weiss, N. Gafni, and A. Ziv, “Preliminary
in fingertip properties in the dynamic model of finger-actuator
Assessment of Faculty and Student Perception of a Haptic
contact, as proposed by [59]. Virtual Reality Simulator for Training Dental Manual Dexterity,”
3) Devices should allow more diverse grasp configurations: Journal of Dental Education, vol. 75, no. 4, pp. 496–504,
2011, eprint: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1002/j.0022-
Most of the reported devices in this review allow users to
0337.2011.75.4.tb05073.x.[Online].Available:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
interact with virtual objects in a pinch grasp, with the index com/doi/abs/10.1002/j.0022-0337.2011.75.4.tb05073.x
finger and the thumb in opposition. As it is known that the [3] O¨. O¨zen, K. A. Buetler, and L. Marchal-Crespo, “Promoting Motor
Variability During Robotic Assistance Enhances Motor Learning of
numberoffingersusedtoliftanobjectinfluencestheperceived
Dynamic Tasks,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 14, 2021. [Online].
weight [33], more research is needed on developing devices Available:https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins.2020.600059
supportingpowerandmulti-fingergraspandevaluatingexisting [4] ——,“Towardsfunctionalrobotictraining:motorlearningofdynamic
solutions in different exploration and lifting strategies. tasks is enhanced by haptic rendering but hampered by arm
weight support,” Journal of NeuroEngineering and Rehabilitation,
4) Thereisaneedforrealisticrenderingofobjectproperties: vol. 19, no. 1, p. 19, Feb. 2022. [Online]. Available: https:
Most studies in this review evaluated tactile interfaces in //doi.org/10.1186/s12984-022-00993-w
terms of their capability to simulate perceivable weights— [5] K.J.Kuchenbecker,“HapticsandHapticInterfaces,”inEncyclopedia
of Robotics, M. H. Ang, O. Khatib, and B. Siciliano, Eds.
not necessarily counterparts of realistic objects. A closer
Berlin, Heidelberg: Springer, 2018, pp. 1–9. [Online]. Available:
resemblance between virtual and physical objects can increase https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-642-41610-1 19-1
immersion [97] or a better transference of learning in a [6] R.L.Klatzky,D.Pawluk,andA.Peer,“Hapticperceptionofmaterial
propertiesandimplicationsforapplications,”ProceedingsoftheIEEE,
virtual environment to the real world [98]. Hence, realistically
vol.101,no.9,pp.2081–2092,2013.
rendering object properties, such as exact weight, friction, or [7] P. Jenmalm, C. Schmitz, H. Forssberg, and H. H. Ehrsson,
texture, is another exciting future research direction. However, “Lighter or Heavier Than Predicted: Neural Correlates of Corrective
Mechanisms during Erroneously Programmed Lifts,” Journal of
suchamultisensoryaimrequiresatechnologicalleapindevice
Neuroscience, vol. 26, no. 35, pp. 9015–9021, Aug. 2006, publisher:
design and control. Society for Neuroscience Section: Articles. [Online]. Available:
https://www.jneurosci.org/content/26/35/9015
[8] J.R.Flanagan,M.C.Bowman,andR.S.Johansson,“Controlstrategies
VI. CONCLUSIONS in object manipulation tasks,” Current Opinion in Neurobiology,
vol. 16, no. 6, pp. 650–659, Dec. 2006. [Online]. Available:
This study provides an overview and comparison of weight https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0959438806001450
rendering approaches through tactile stimulation as a potential [9] P. Carlson, J. M. Vance, and M. Berg, “An evaluation of asymmetric
interfaces for bimanual virtual assembly with haptics,” Virtual
approach to enhance rendering accuracy when used in con-
Reality, vol. 20, no. 4, pp. 193–201, Nov. 2016. [Online]. Available:
junction with kinesthetic devices or to substitute kinesthetic https://doi.org/10.1007/s10055-016-0290-z13
[10] F. Danion, J. S. Diamond, and J. R. Flanagan, “The role of of the 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
haptic feedback when manipulating nonrigid objects,” Journal Systems, ser. CHI ’17. New York, NY, USA: Association for
of Neurophysiology, vol. 107, no. 1, pp. 433–441, Jan. 2012, ComputingMachinery,May2017,pp.3115–3119.[Online].Available:
publisher: American Physiological Society. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1145/3025453.3025744
https://journals.physiology.org/doi/full/10.1152/jn.00738.2011 [26] W.N.Lim,K.M.Yap,Y.Lee,C.Wee,andC.C.Yen,“ASystematic
[11] A. Kalus, M. Kocur, J. Klein, M. Mayer, and N. Henze, “PumpVR: ReviewofWeightPerceptioninVirtualReality:Techniques,Challenges,
Rendering the Weight of Objects and Avatars through Liquid Mass and Road Ahead,” IEEE Access, vol. 9, pp. 163253–163283, 2021,
TransferinVirtualReality,”inProceedingsofthe2023CHIConference conferenceName:IEEEAccess.
on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’23. New York, [27] J. M. Suchoski, S. Martinez, and A. M. Okamura, “Scaling Inertial
NY,USA:AssociationforComputingMachinery,Apr.2023,pp.1–13. Forces to Alter Weight Perception in Virtual Reality,” in 2018 IEEE
[Online].Available:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3544548.3581172 InternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),May2018,
[12] A. v. d. Berg, B. d. Vries, Z. Breedveld, A. v. Mierlo, M. Tijhuis, pp.484–489,iSSN:2577-087X.
and L. Marchal-Crespo, “Embodiment of virtual feet correlates [28] L.A.JonesandH.Z.Tan,“ApplicationofPsychophysicalTechniques
with motor performance in a target-stepping task: a pilot study,” toHapticResearch,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.6,no.3,pp.
Frontiers in Virtual Reality, vol. 4, 2023. [Online]. Available: 268–284,Jul.2013,conferenceName:IEEETransactionsonHaptics.
https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/frvir.2023.1104638 [29] G. A. Gescheider, Psychophysics: The Fundamentals, 3rd ed. New
[13] I.A.Odermatt,K.A.Buetler,N.Wenk,O.Ozen,J.Penalver-Andres, York:PsychologyPress,May1997.
T.Nef,F.W.Mast,andL.Marchal-Crespo,“Congruencyofinformation [30] E.H.Weber,“Thesenseoftouchandcommonfeeling,1846,”inReadings
rather than body ownership enhances motor performance in highly in the history of psychology, ser. Century psychology series. East
embodied virtual reality,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 15, 2021. Norwalk,CT,US:Appleton-Century-Crofts,1948,pp.194–196.
[Online]. Available: https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnins. [31] P.B.Jones,LarryF.,“Perceptionsofeffortandheavinessduringfatigue
2021.678909 andduringthesize-weightillusion,”Somatosensory&MotorResearch,
[14] C.Giachritsis,R.Wright,andA.Wing,“TheContributionofProprio- vol. 14, no. 3, pp. 189–202, Jan. 1997, publisher: Taylor & Francis
ceptiveandCutaneousCuesinWeightPerception:EarlyEvidencefor eprint: https://doi.org/10.1080/08990229771051. [Online]. Available:
Maximum-LikelihoodIntegration,”inHaptics:GeneratingandPerceiving
https://doi.org/10.1080/08990229771051
TangibleSensations,ser.LectureNotesinComputerScience,A.M.L.
[32] S. C. Gandevia, D. I. McCloskey, and E. K. Potter, “Alterations
Kappers,J.B.F.vanErp,W.M.BergmannTiest,andF.C.T.vander
in perceived heaviness during digital anaesthesia.” The Journal
Helm,Eds. Berlin,Heidelberg:Springer,2010,pp.11–16.
of Physiology, vol. 306, no. 1, pp. 365–375, 1980, eprint:
[15] C.D.Giachritsis,P.Garcia-Robledo,J.Barrio,A.M.Wing,andM.Ferre,
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1113/jphysiol.1980.sp013402.
“Unimanual,bimanualandbilateralweightperceptionofvirtualobjects
[Online]. Available: https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/abs/10.1113/
intheMasterFinger2environment,”in19thInternationalSymposiumin
jphysiol.1980.sp013402
RobotandHumanInteractiveCommunication,Sep.2010,pp.513–519,
[33] J. R. Flanagan and C. A. Bandomir, “Coming to grips with weight
iSSN:1944-9437.
perception: Effects of grasp configuration on perceived heaviness,”
[16] S. Gu¨nther, M. Makhija, F. Mu¨ller, D. Scho¨n, M. Mu¨hlha¨user, and
Perception&Psychophysics,vol.62,no.6,pp.1204–1219,Sep.2000.
M.Funk,“PneumAct:PneumaticKinestheticActuationofBodyJoints
[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03212123
in Virtual Reality Environments,” in Proceedings of the 2019 on
[34] A. Charpentier, “Sur les sensations de poids (note pre´sente´e par m.
DesigningInteractiveSystemsConference,ser.DIS’19. NewYork,NY,
d’arsonval le 3 avril)[on sensations of weight (note presented by mr.
USA:AssociationforComputingMachinery,Jun.2019,pp.227–240.
d’arsonvalonthe3rdofapril)],”ComptesRendusHebdomadairesdes
[Online].Available:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3322276.3322302
Se´ancesetMe´moiresdelaSocie´te´ deBiologie,vol.38,pp.169–170,
[17] E. E. Brodie and H. E. Ross, “Sensorimotor mechanisms in weight
1886.
discrimination,”Perception&Psychophysics,vol.36,no.5,pp.477–481,
[35] H.K.Wolfe,“Someeffectsofsizeonjudgmentsofweight,”Psycholog-
Sep.1984.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03207502
icalReview,vol.5,no.1,pp.25–54,1898,place:USPublisher:The
[18] L. A. Jones and E. Piateski, “Contribution of tactile feedback
MacmillanCompany.
from the hand to the perception of force,” Experimental Brain
[36] F. B. Dresslar, “Studies in the psychology of touch,” The American
Research,vol.168,no.1,pp.298–302,Jan.2006.[Online].Available:
JournalofPsychology,vol.6,no.3,pp.313–368,1894.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-005-0259-8
[37] J. R. Flanagan and A. M. Wing, “Effects of surface texture and
[19] F.E.vanBeek,R.J.King,C.Brown,M.D.Luca,andS.Keller,“Static
grip force on the discrimination of hand-held loads,” Perception &
WeightPerceptionThroughSkinStretchandKinestheticInformation:
Psychophysics, vol. 59, no. 1, pp. 111–118, Jan. 1997. [Online].
DetectionThresholds,JNDs,andPSEs,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,
Available:https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03206853
vol.14,no.1,pp.20–31,Jan.2021,conferenceName:IEEETransactions
onHaptics. [38] E.H.Weber,Tastsinnundgemeingefu¨hl. W.Engelmann,1905,no.149.
[20] K. Minamizawa, D. Prattichizzo, and S. Tachi, “Simplified design of [39] R.S.JohanssonandJ.R.Flanagan,“Codinganduseoftactilesignals
hapticdisplaybyextendingone-pointkinestheticfeedbacktomultipoint from the fingertips in object manipulation tasks,” Nature Reviews
tactile feedback,” in 2010 IEEE Haptics Symposium, Mar. 2010, pp. Neuroscience, vol. 10, no. 5, pp. 345–359, May 2009. [Online].
257–260,iSSN:2324-7355. Available:http://www.nature.com/articles/nrn2621
[21] K.Matsui,S.Okamoto,andY.Yamada,“RelativeContributionRatios [40] B.B.Edin,“Quantitativeanalysisofstaticstrainsensitivityinhuman
ofSkinandProprioceptiveSensationsinPerceptionofForceAppliedto mechanoreceptorsfromhairyskin,”JournalofNeurophysiology,vol.67,
Fingertip,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.7,no.1,pp.78–85,Jan. no. 5, pp. 1105–1113, May 1992, publisher: American Physiological
2014,conferenceName:IEEETransactionsonHaptics. Society.[Online].Available:https://journals.physiology.org/doi/abs/10.
[22] T. Amemiya and T. Maeda, “Asymmetric Oscillation Distorts the 1152/jn.1992.67.5.1105
Perceived Heaviness of Handheld Objects,” IEEE Transactions on [41] P. Jenmalm, S. Dahlstedt, and R. S. Johansson, “Visual and
Haptics, vol. 1, no. 1, pp. 9–18, Jan. 2008, conference Name: IEEE tactile information about object-curvature control fingertip forces
TransactionsonHaptics. and grasp kinematics in human dexterous manipulation,” Journal of
[23] I.Choi,H.Culbertson,M.R.Miller,A.Olwal,andS.Follmer,“Grabity: Neurophysiology,vol.84,no.6,pp.2984–2997,2000,pMID:11110826.
A Wearable Haptic Interface for Simulating Weight and Grasping in [Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.2000.84.6.2984
VirtualReality,”inProceedingsofthe30thAnnualACMSymposiumon [42] L. A. Jones, “Perception of force and weight: Theory and research,”
UserInterfaceSoftwareandTechnology,ser.UIST’17. NewYork,NY, PsychologicalBulletin,vol.100,pp.29–42,1986,place:USPublisher:
USA:AssociationforComputingMachinery,Oct.2017,pp.119–130. AmericanPsychologicalAssociation.
[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3126594.3126599 [43] R. S. Johansson and G. Westling, “Roles of glabrous skin receptors
[24] K. Minamizawa, S. Fukamachi, H. Kajimoto, N. Kawakami, and and sensorimotor memory in automatic control of precision grip
S. Tachi, “Gravity grabber: wearable haptic display to present virtual when lifting rougher or more slippery objects,” Experimental Brain
mass sensation,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 emerging technologies, Research,vol.56,no.3,pp.550–564,Oct.1984.[Online].Available:
ser. SIGGRAPH ’07. New York, NY, USA: Association for https://doi.org/10.1007/BF00237997
Computing Machinery, Aug. 2007, pp. 8–es. [Online]. Available: [44] G. Westling and R. S. Johansson, “Responses in glabrous skin
https://doi.org/10.1145/1278280.1278289 mechanoreceptorsduringprecisiongripinhumans,”ExperimentalBrain
[25] S. B. Schorr and A. M. Okamura, “Fingertip Tactile Devices Research,vol.66,no.1,pp.128–140,Mar.1987.[Online].Available:
for Virtual Object Manipulation and Exploration,” in Proceedings https://doi.org/10.1007/BF0023620914
[45] J. Park, B. Son, I. Han, and W. Lee, “Effect of Cutaneous [62] A. Girard, M. Marchal, F. Gosselin, A. Chabrier, F. Louveau, and
Feedback on the Perception of Virtual Object Weight during A.Le´cuyer,“HapTip:DisplayingHapticShearForcesattheFingertips
Manipulation,” Scientific Reports, vol. 10, no. 1, p. 1357, Jan. 2020, forMulti-FingerInteractioninVirtualEnvironments,”FrontiersinICT,
number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group. [Online]. Available: vol.3,2016.[Online].Available:https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.
https://www.nature.com/articles/s41598-020-58247-5 3389/fict.2016.00006
[46] G. Buckingham, “Getting a grip on heaviness perception: a [63] S.B.SchorrandA.M.Okamura,“Three-DimensionalSkinDeformation
review of weight illusions and their probable causes,” Experimental asForceSubstitution:WearableDeviceDesignandPerformanceDuring
Brain Research, vol. 232, p. 1623–1629, 2014. [Online]. Available: Haptic Exploration of Virtual Environments,” IEEE Transactions on
https://doi.org/10.1007/s00221-014-3926-9 Haptics,vol.10,no.3,pp.418–430,Jul.2017,conferenceName:IEEE
[47] E. J. Saccone, O. Landry, and P. A. Chouinard, “A meta-analysis of TransactionsonHaptics.
the size-weight and material-weight illusions,” Psychonomic Bulletin [64] M. Wiertlewski, J. Lozada, and V. Hayward, “The spatial spectrum
and Review, vol. 26, pp. 1195–1212, 2019. [Online]. Available: of tangential skin displacement can encode tactual texture,” IEEE
https://doi.org/10.3758/s13423-019-01604-x TransactionsonRobotics,vol.27,no.3,pp.461–472,2011.
[48] J. R. Flanagan and A. M. Wing, “The role of internal models in [65] M. Tada and T. Kanade, “An imaging system of incipient slip for
motion planning and control: Evidence from grip force adjustments modellinghowhumanperceivesslipofafingertip,”inThe26thAnnual
during movements of hand-held loads,” Journal of Neuroscience, International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine and
vol. 17, no. 4, pp. 1519–1528, 1997. [Online]. Available: https: BiologySociety,2004,pp.2045–2048.
//www.jneurosci.org/content/17/4/1519 [66] K.Mukai,A.Ikeda,Y.Kurita,M.Tada,K.Maeno,andT.Ogasawara,
[49] M. Kawato, T. Kuroda, H. Imamizu, E. Nakano, S. Miyauchi, and “Systemidentificationofhumangripforcecontrolbasedonslipandforce
T.Yoshioka,“Internalforwardmodelsinthecerebellum:fmristudyon (injapanese),”inProceedingsoftheSICESystemIntegrationSymposium,
grip force and load force coupling,” Progress in Brain Research, vol. 2000,pp.433–436.
142,pp.171–88,2003. [67] K.Minamizawa,H.Kajimoto,N.Kawakami,andS.Tachi,“AWearable
[50] T. E. Milner, D. W. Franklin, H. Imamizu, and M. Kawato, “Central HapticDisplaytoPresenttheGravitySensation-PreliminaryObserva-
representation of dynamics when manipulating handheld objects,” tionsandDeviceDesign,”inSecondJointEuroHapticsConferenceand
JournalofNeurophysiology,vol.95,no.2,pp.893–901,2006,pMID: SymposiumonHapticInterfacesforVirtualEnvironmentandTeleoperator
16251266.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00198.2005 Systems(WHC’07),Mar.2007,pp.133–138.
[51] T. Tanabe, H. Yano, and H. Iwata, “Evaluation of the Perceptual [68] C.Pacchierotti,G.Salvietti,I.Hussain,L.Meli,andD.Prattichizzo,“The
Characteristics of a Force Induced by Asymmetric Vibrations,” IEEE hRing:Awearablehapticdevicetoavoidocclusionsinhandtracking,”
Transactions on Haptics, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 220–231, Apr. 2018, in2016IEEEHapticsSymposium(HAPTICS),Apr.2016,pp.134–139,
conferenceName:IEEETransactionsonHaptics. iSSN:2324-7355.
[52] H.Culbertson,J.M.Walker,andA.M.Okamura,“Modelinganddesign [69] T. Murakami, T. Person, C. L. Fernando, and K. Minamizawa,
ofasymmetricvibrationstoinduceungroundedpullingsensationthrough “Altered touch: miniature haptic display with force, thermal and
asymmetric skin displacement,” in 2016 IEEE Haptics Symposium tactile feedback for augmented haptics,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2017
(HAPTICS),Apr.2016,pp.27–33,iSSN:2324-7355. Posters, ser. SIGGRAPH ’17. New York, NY, USA: Association
[53] T.Amemiya,H.Ando,andT.Maeda,“Virtualforcedisplay:direction for Computing Machinery, Jul. 2017, pp. 1–2. [Online]. Available:
guidanceusingasymmetricaccelerationviaperiodictranslationalmotion,” https://doi.org/10.1145/3102163.3102225
in First Joint Eurohaptics Conference and Symposium on Haptic [70] H.A.J.vanRiessenandY.Vardar,“Relocatingthermalstimulitothe
Interfaces for Virtual Environment and Teleoperator Systems. World proximalphalanxmaynotaffectvibrotactilesensitivityonthefingertip,”
HapticsConference,Mar.2005,pp.619–622. 2023.
[54] H.W.Tappeiner,R.L.Klatzky,B.Unger,andR.Hollis,“Goodvibrations: [71] H.Culbertson,S.B.Schorr,andA.M.Okamura,“Haptics:Thepresent
Asymmetric vibrations for directional haptic cues,” in World Haptics and future of artificial touch sensation,” Annual Review of Control,
2009-ThirdJointEuroHapticsconferenceandSymposiumonHaptic Robotics,andAutonomousSystems,vol.1,no.1,pp.385–409,2018.
InterfacesforVirtualEnvironmentandTeleoperatorSystems,Mar.2009, [72] D. V. Keyson and A. J. M. Houtsma, “Directional sensitivity to
pp.285–289. a tactile point stimulus moving across the fingerpad,” Perception
[55] P.J.Berkelman,Z.J.Butler,andR.L.Hollis,“Designofahemispherical & Psychophysics, vol. 57, no. 5, pp. 738–744, Jul. 1995. [Online].
magneticlevitationhapticinterfacedevice,”inProceedingsoftheASME Available:https://doi.org/10.3758/BF03213278
Winter Annual Meeting, Symposium on Haptic Interfaces for Virtual [73] K. Drewing, M. Fritschi, R. Zopf, M. O. Ernst, and M. Buss,
Environment and Teleoperator Systems,(Atlanta), vol. 58. Citeseer, “First evaluation of a novel tactile display exerting shear force
1996,pp.483–488. via lateral displacement,” ACM Transactions on Applied Perception,
[56] J. Rekimoto, “Traxion: a tactile interaction device with virtual force vol. 2, no. 2, pp. 118–131, Apr. 2005. [Online]. Available:
sensation,”inProceedingsofthe26thannualACMsymposiumonUser https://doi.org/10.1145/1060581.1060586
interface software and technology, ser. UIST ’13. New York, NY, [74] B.T.Gleeson,S.K.Horschel,andW.R.Provancher,“Perceptionof
USA:AssociationforComputingMachinery,Oct.2013,pp.427–432. DirectionforAppliedTangentialSkinDisplacement:EffectsofSpeed,
[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/2501988.2502044 Displacement,andRepetition,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.3,
[57] T.AmemiyaandH.Gomi,“DistinctPseudo-AttractionForceSensation no.3,pp.177–188,Jul.2010,conferenceName:IEEETransactionson
byaThumb-SizedVibratorthatOscillatesAsymmetrically,”inHaptics: Haptics.
Neuroscience,Devices,Modeling,andApplications,ser.LectureNotesin [75] ——,“DesignofaFingertip-MountedTactileDisplaywithTangential
ComputerScience,M.AuvrayandC.Duriez,Eds. Berlin,Heidelberg: Skin Displacement Feedback,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 3,
Springer,2014,pp.88–95. no.4,pp.297–301,Oct.2010,conferenceName:IEEETransactionson
[58] Y. Tanaka, A. Horie, and X. A. Chen, “DualVib: Simulating Haptic Haptics.
SensationofDynamicMassbyCombiningPseudo-ForceandTexture [76] B.T.Gleeson,C.A.Stewart,andW.R.Provancher,“ImprovedTactile
Feedback,” in 26th ACM Symposium on Virtual Reality Software ShearFeedback:TactorDesignandanAperture-BasedRestraint,”IEEE
and Technology, ser. VRST ’20. New York, NY, USA: Association TransactionsonHaptics,vol.4,no.4,pp.253–262,Oct.2011,conference
for Computing Machinery, Nov. 2020, pp. 1–10. [Online]. Available: Name:IEEETransactionsonHaptics.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3385956.3418964 [77] A.L.Guinan,N.C.Hornbaker,M.N.Montandon,A.J.Doxon,andW.R.
[59] T.Tanabe,H.Yano,H.Endo,S.Ino,andH.Iwata,“PullingIllusionBased Provancher,“Back-to-backskinstretchfeedbackforcommunicatingfive
onthePhaseDifferenceoftheFrequencyComponentsofAsymmetric degree-of-freedomdirectioncues,”in2013WorldHapticsConference
Vibrations,”IEEE/ASMETransactionsonMechatronics,vol.26,no.1, (WHC),Apr.2013,pp.13–18.
pp.203–213,Feb.2021,conferenceName:IEEE/ASMETransactions [78] S. B. Schorr, Z. F. Quek, R. Y. Romano, I. Nisky, W. R. Provancher,
onMechatronics. andA.M.Okamura,“Sensorysubstitutionviacutaneousskinstretch
[60] T. Tanabe, H. Endo, and S. Ino, “Effects of Asymmetric Vibration feedback,” in 2013 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
FrequencyonPullingIllusions,”Sensors(Basel,Switzerland),vol.20, Automation,May2013,pp.2341–2346,iSSN:1050-4729.
no.24,p.7086,Dec.2020. [79] Z.F.Quek,S.B.Schorr,I.Nisky,A.M.Okamura,andW.R.Provancher,
[61] Y.Kurita,S.Yonezawa,A.Ikeda,andT.Ogasawara,“Weightandfriction “AugmentationOfStiffnessPerceptionWitha1-Degree-of-FreedomSkin
displaydevicebycontrollingtheslipconditionofafingertip,”in2011 StretchDevice,”IEEETransactionsonHuman-MachineSystems,vol.44,
IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems, no.6,pp.731–742,Dec.2014,conferenceName:IEEETransactionson
Sep.2011,pp.2127–2132,iSSN:2153-0866. Human-MachineSystems.15
[80] D.Prattichizzo,F.Chinello,C.Pacchierotti,andM.Malvezzi,“Towards [98] D.E.Levac,M.E.Huber,andD.Sternad,“Learningandtransferof
WearabilityinFingertipHaptics:A3-DoFWearableDeviceforCutaneous complexmotorskillsinvirtualreality:aperspectivereview,”Journalof
ForceFeedback,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.6,no.4,pp.506– neuroengineeringandrehabilitation,vol.16,pp.1–15,2019.
516,Oct.2013,conferenceName:IEEETransactionsonHaptics.
[81] F.Chinello,C.Pacchierotti,M.Malvezzi,andD.Prattichizzo,“AThree
Revolute-Revolute-SphericalWearableFingertipCutaneousDevicefor
StiffnessRendering,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.11,no.1,pp.
39–50,Jan.2018,conferenceName:IEEETransactionsonHaptics.
[82] Z.F.Quek,S.B.Schorr,I.Nisky,W.R.Provancher,andA.M.Okamura, Ruben Martin Rodriguez is a PhD candidate at
“Sensory Substitution and Augmentation Using 3-Degree-of-Freedom the University of Basel (Switzerland). Previously,
Skin Deformation Feedback,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 8, he earned his MSc in robotics at Delft University
no.2,pp.209–221,Apr.2015,conferenceName:IEEETransactionson of Technology (The Netherlands) and his BSc in
Haptics. industrialelectronicsandautomationengineeringat
[83] J. M. Suchoski, A. Barron, C. Wu, Z. F. Quek, S. Keller, and A. M. UniversidadCarlosIIIdeMadrid(Spain).Hisearly
Okamura,“Comparisonofkinestheticandskindeformationfeedbackfor researchfocusesonthedevelopmentofhapticsys-
massrendering,”in2016IEEEInternationalConferenceonRobotics temsforrehabilitation.Currently,hisresearchinterest
andAutomation(ICRA),May2016,pp.4030–4035. focusesonthedevelopmentofroboticsolutionsfor
[84] N. Nakazawa, R. Ikeura, and H. Inooka, “Characteristics of human insitu3Dbioprinting.
fingertipsintheshearingdirection,”BiologicalCybernetics,vol.82,pp.
207–214,2000.
[85] D. Leonardis, M. Solazzi, I. Bortone, and A. Frisoli, “A 3-RSR
HapticWearableDeviceforRenderingFingertipContactForces,”IEEE
Transactions on Haptics, vol. 10, no. 3, pp. 305–316, Jul. 2017,
conferenceName:IEEETransactionsonHaptics.
AlexandreL.RatschatisaPh.D.candidateatthe
[86] C. Pacchierotti, S. Sinclair, M. Solazzi, A. Frisoli, V. Hayward, and
Delft University of Technology (The Netherlands).
D. Prattichizzo, “Wearable Haptic Systems for the Fingertip and the
He is also affiliated with the Department of Reha-
Hand: Taxonomy, Review, and Perspectives,” IEEE Transactions on
bilitation Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center (The
Haptics,vol.10,no.4,pp.580–600,Oct.2017,conferenceName:IEEE
Netherlands).HeobtainedhisB.Sc.andM.Sc.inme-
TransactionsonHaptics.
chanicalengineeringfromETHZurich(Switzerland).
[87] A. Adilkhanov, M. Rubagotti, and Z. Kappassov, “Haptic Devices: From 2019–2020 he worked at F&P Robotics AG
Wearability-Based Taxonomy and Literature Review,” IEEE Access, (Switzerland)asasoftwareengineer.Hestartedhis
vol.10,pp.91923–91947,2022,conferenceName:IEEEAccess. positionasaPh.D.candidateinFebruary2022,where
[88] H. Kim, H. Yi, H. Lee, and W. Lee, “HapCube: A Wearable Tactile his research focuses on leveraging robotic devices
DevicetoProvideTangentialandNormalPseudo-ForceFeedbackon forupper-limbrehabilitationandmotorlearningof
a Fingertip,” in Proceedings of the 2018 CHI Conference on Human peoplewithacquiredbraininjury.
Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’18. New York, NY, USA:
AssociationforComputingMachinery,Apr.2018,pp.1–13.[Online].
Available:http://doi.org/10.1145/3173574.3174075
[89] Y. Kamikawa and A. M. Okamura, “Comparison Between Force-
ControlledSkinDeformationFeedbackandHand-GroundedKinesthetic
ForceFeedbackforSensorySubstitution,”IEEERoboticsandAutomation LauraMarchal-CrespoisanAssociateProfessorat
Letters,vol.3,no.3,pp.2174–2181,Jul.2018,conferenceName:IEEE theDelftUniversityofTechnology(TheNetherlands).
RoboticsandAutomationLetters. SheisalsoaffiliatedwiththeDepartmentofReha-
[90] F.Chinello,M.Malvezzi,C.Pacchierotti,andD.Prattichizzo,“Design bilitation Medicine, Erasmus Medical Center (The
anddevelopmentofa3RRSwearablefingertipcutaneousdevice,”in2015 Netherlands),andtheUniversityofBern(Switzer-
IEEEInternationalConferenceonAdvancedIntelligentMechatronics land).SheobtainedherB.S.inindustrialengineering
(AIM),Jul.2015,pp.293–298,iSSN:2159-6255. fromtheUniversitatPolitecnicadeCatalunya(Spain)
[91] T. C. Pataky, M. L. Latash, and V. M. Zatsiorsky, “Viscoelastic and M.Sc. and Ph.D. degrees from the University
response of the finger pad to incremental tangential displacements,” ofCaliforniaatIrvine(USA).ShethenjoinedETH
Journal of Biomechanics, vol. 38, no. 7, pp. 1441–1449, Jul. 2005. Zurich(Switzerland),asapostdocresearcher.In2017
[Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/ sheobtainedaSwissNationalScienceFoundation
S002192900400346X (SNSF)ProfessorshipandjoinedtheUniversityofBernasmedicalfaculty.
[92] P. Preechayasomboon, A. Israr, and M. Samad, “Chasm: A Screw She became an Associate Professor at the Delft University of Technology
Based Expressive Compact Haptic Actuator,” in Proceedings of the inSeptember2020.Shecarriesoutresearchinthegeneralareasofhuman-
2020 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. machine interfaces and biological learning, and, specifically, in the use of
Honolulu HI USA: ACM, Apr. 2020, pp. 1–13. [Online]. Available: roboticassistanceandvirtualrealitytoaidpeopleinlearningmotortasksand
https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/3313831.3376512 rehabilitateafterneurologicinjuries.
[93] G.Serhat,Y.Vardar,andK.Kuchenbecker,“Contactevolutionofdry
andhydratedfingertipsatinitialtouch,”PLoSONE,vol.17,no.7,p.
e0269722,2022.
[94] B. A. Richardson, Y. Vardar, C. Wallraven, and K. J. Kuchenbecker,
“Learning to feel textures: Predicting perceptual similarities from un-
Yasemin Vardar is an Assistant Professor at the
constrainedfinger-surfaceinteractions,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,
Delft University of Technology (The Netherlands).
vol.15,no.4,pp.705–717,2022.
Previously, she was a postdoctoral researcher at
[95] S.Nam,Y.Vardar,D.Gueorguiev,andK.J.Kuchenbecker,“Physical
the Max Planck Institute for Intelligent Systems
variables underlying tactile stickiness during fingerpad detachment,”
(Germany). She earned her Ph.D. in mechanical
FrontiersinNeuroscience,vol.14,2020.[Online].Available:https://www.
engineering at Koc¸ University (Turkey), MSc. in
frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/articles/10.3389/fnins.2020.00235
systems and control at Eindhoven University of
[96] A. L. Ratschat, R. Mart´ın-Rodr´ıguez, Y. Vardar, G. M. Ribbers, and Technology(TheNetherlands),andBSc.inmecha-
L.Marchal-Crespo,“Designandevaluationofamulti-fingerskin-stretch tronicsengineeringatSabanciUniversity(Turkey).
tactileinterfaceforhandrehabilitationrobots,”2024. Herresearchinterestsfocusonunderstandinghuman
[97] M.Newman,B.Gatersleben,K.J.Wyles,andE.Ratcliffe,“Theuse touchandhapticinterfacetechnologydevelopment.
of virtual reality in environment experiences and the importance of Shereceivedseveralawards,includingtheNWOVENIAward(2021)and
realism,” Journal of Environmental Psychology, vol. 79, p. 101733, EurohapticsBestPh.D.ThesisAward(2018).Sheiscurrentlyaco-chairof
2022.[Online].Available:https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/ theTechnicalCommitteeonHaptics.
pii/S0272494421001869