PhysioLLM: Supporting Personalized Health
Insights with Wearables and Large Language
Models
Cathy Mengying Fang∗, Valdemar Danry∗, Nathan Whitmore∗, Andria Bao†,
Andrew Hutchison†, Cayden Pierce∗, Pattie Maes∗,
∗MIT Media Lab
{catfang, vdanry, nathanww, cayden, pattie}@media.mit.com
†MIT
{andria, aphutch}@mit.com
Abstract—We present PhysioLLM, an interactive system that answering in natural language [3]. Second, they have the
leverageslargelanguagemodels(LLMs)toprovidepersonalized potential to relate health data and behaviors to a wealth
health understanding and exploration by integrating physiolog-
of health literature [4]–[6]. Lastly, LLMs have a semantic
ical data from wearables with contextual information. Unlike
understanding of the context that could grant flexibility in
commercial health apps for wearables, our system offers a
comprehensive statistical analysis component that discovers cor- producing insights based on raw data [3]. Integrating LLMs
relationsandtrendsinuserdata,allowinguserstoaskquestions with physiological data offers the potential to build systems
in natural language and receive generated personalized insights, that allow users to ask questions and receive personalized
andguidesthemtodevelopactionablegoals.Asacasestudy,we
responses, enhancing their understanding of their health and
focusonimprovingsleepquality,givenitsmeasurabilitythrough
motivating positive behavior changes. This research addresses
physiological data and its importance to general well-being.
Throughauserstudywith24Fitbitwatchusers,wedemonstrate two main questions: (1) how to implement an LLM-based
that PhysioLLM outperforms both the Fitbit App alone and systemthatgeneratespersonalizedinsightsfromphysiological
a generic LLM chatbot in facilitating a deeper, personalized dataandcommunicatesthemthroughnaturallanguage,and(2)
understanding of health data and supporting actionable steps
how such a system impacts users’ understanding of their data
toward personal health goals.
and helps them develop actionable health goals.
Index Terms—Large language model, Sleep, Conversational
interface, Physiological data, Digital health app, Wearable, AI We designed PhysioLLM, a novel system that utilizes an
orchestration of LLMs to deliver personalized insights by
incorporatingusers’owndatafromalreadyavailablewearable
I. INTRODUCTION healthtrackerstogetherwithcontextualinformation.Different
The advent of wearable health monitors, such as Fitbit, from conventional health applications, our system conducts
Apple Watch, and Samsung Gear has made it possible to statistical analyses of the user’s data to uncover patterns and
continuously collect detailed physiological data, such as heart relationships within the data. As a case study, we focus on
rate, activity data, and sleep stages. They bring convenience improving sleep as the main health goal. Sleeping well is
and awareness to our personal health and provide a granular one the most important things to stay healthy physically and
look into one’s habits and how they affect physiology. These mentally[7].Thelatestwearabledevicesofferin-depthreports
data and trends can help nudge healthier behavior and may on sleep, providing information on sleep timing, sleep stages
even help detect health problems [1]. While it is important and commonly used metrics such as wake time after sleep
to make accessible and accurate health monitoring systems, onset. They also typically provide a sleep score to indicate
individuals who wish to change their habits are currently overall sleep quality. However, it is often not obvious to users
requiredtofirstdeeplyunderstandtheirphysiologicaldataand how one can improve one’s sleep score and the relationships
how it correlates with their daily routine, and finally think of between one’s daytime activity and sleep.
ways to work towards positive changes. However, users often To understand what might improve individuals’ under-
struggle to make sense of the data and translate them into standing of their data and what questions they might ask a
meaningfulactions[2].Interactionswiththedataaretypically conversational interface, we recruited actual users for an in-
predefined by graphical user interfaces provided by the phone situ experiment. 24 adult Fitbit users shared their most recent
and wearables, which offer limited interaction and generic weekofFitbitdata.Eachparticipantusedatext-basedchatbot
recommendations with few personalized insights. thatwaseitherthecompletePhysioLLMsystemwithpersonal
Large Language Models (LLMs) potentially present a data and insights, an LLM chatbot with personal data but no
promising solution to these challenges. For one, they en- accesstoinsights,oraplacebooff-the-shelfLLMchatbotwith
able individuals to engage in unconstrained questioning and nopersonaldataorgeneratedinsights.Theyfilledoutasurvey
4202
nuJ
72
]CH.sc[
1v38291.6042:viXrabefore and after interacting with the interface that assessed wearablehealthdatabutalsoallowstheusertointuitivelyun-
their understanding of their sleep data, how motivated they derstand the implications of their data through conversations.
felt after interacting with the interface, and how actionable
B. LLM-based Data Analysis
their goals were based on their interactions with the interface.
The results show that chatting with an LLM-based system, Different from fine-tuning an LLM for domain-specific
which provides effective personalized insights using our LLM tasks, another approach is to prompt a large language model
architecture,improvesone’sunderstandingoftheirownhealth. to generate code to then be run by a code executor to produce
Theinterfacewasperceivedasmorepersonalizedthanchatting calculations and graphs [12]. While this approach has already
with a generic LLM-based chatbot. In fact, the latter resulted found its way into commercial products1, it requires explicit
in the user having less motivation to change, and their goals knowledge of the types of analyses to run. To overcome
were found to be less actionable. this challenge, other systems have added multiple ”chains”
We also interviewed two sleep experts to review the per- or nodes of LLMs where each LLM in sequence selects the
sonal insights generated by the system and its responses and appropriate analysis from a set of possible analysis actions
suggestions provided to the user. Overall, the experts found [13]. While this method enables users to explore their data
the insights reasonable but noted the system’s tendency to without prior knowledge or conducting analyses themselves,
overemphasize correlation values. They suggested improving it does not incorporate personal information about the user.
the system by providing the LLM with more background on Additionally,itstillrequiresuserstohavesomeunderstanding
the data generation process and tuning responses to be more of potential hypotheses to test based on data trends and to
modest when based on sparse data and potentially spurious suggest these for further exploration. Physiollm takes into
correlations. accountthecontextofthepersonalhealthdataandformulates
hypotheses based on the data a priori. As such, it guides
In summary, the contributions of this work are:
the user through a more focused conversation that prioritizes
• AnovelorchestrationofLLMsthatintegratesphysiolog-
notable discoveries.
ical and contextual data to support conversations about
personalized health insights. C. LLM for Personal Health Insight Generation
• Anin-the-wildstudywith24usersthatinteractedwiththe Many studies integrate personal health records from an
system and the study insights derived from quantitative
electronichealthrecord(EHR)foreffectivediseaseprediction
and qualitative results.
[14], [15] or to help patients understand health records [6].
• Evidences that show the interface is perceived as person- Health-LLM proposed by Kim et al. adapts the public health
alized and effectively improves users’ understanding of
prediction tasks with wearable data to enable personal health
their health through personalized insights.
support [16]. Most related to our work is PH-LLM [5], a
• A preliminary valuation by two sleep experts of the fine-tuned model for contextualizing physiological data and
accuracy and quality of the generated personal insights
producing personalized insights. The work focuses on bench-
and suggestions.
marking the LLM’s capability against human domain experts.
Commercial systems are beginning to offer ChatGPT-based
II. RELATEDWORK
conversations to discuss training plans2 and interpretations of
A. LLMs For Health Prediction heart rate variability data3. With the increasing availability
of LLM-based services, prior research has emphasized the
The use of LLMs for medical tasks has rapidly increased,
prediction accuracy of these models. However, it remains
with applications such as knowledge extraction [8] and dis-
unclear how to effectively communicate these predictions and
ease prediction [9]. Researchers found that the GPT-4 model
insightstoengageusersinpositivebehaviorchange.Ourwork
exceeded the passing score on the United States Medical
with PhysioLLM investigates not only how an LLM can be
Licensing Examinations, an exam that allows individuals to
used to create personalized insights but also how such LLM-
practice medicine in the U.S., by over 20 points [10]. Med-
generated insights should be delivered so that individuals can
PaLM2, a fine-tuned domain-specific medical LLM set a
better understand their data and develop actionable plans.
new state-of-the-art by scoring up to 86.5% on the MedQA
Stromel et al. compare the modality of the insight between
dataset, a dataset containing expert answers to medical ques-
text and chart and found LLM-generated text-based narrative
tions [4]. Meanwhile, researchers have finetuned LLMs for
to be more effective at helping people reflect on their data
mental health specific tasks such as the prediction of stress
[17]. However, their investigation is limited to a one-turn
and depression, achieving accuracies from 48% to 87% [11].
interaction, and the data is limited to step count, whereas
Taken together, these advancements highlight the substantial
our system supports multi-turn conversations and explores the
potential of LLMs in interpreting and reasoning about health
relationship among a variety of sensor data types to uncover
information and their growing potential for supporting health-
relationshipsthatmayotherwisebedifficulttoseeataglance.
careprofessionals.However,currentapproachesdonotenable
individualswhoarenotmedicalprofessionalstocontextualize
1https://github.com/features/copilot
theknowledgewithpersonaldataandhealthgoals.Incontrast, 2https://www.whoop.com/
PhysioLLM not only derives tailored insights from personal 3https://welltory.com/Fig.1. OverviewofthePhysioLLMsystemwithanexampleconversation.
III. MOTIVATIONANDDESIGNGOALS IV. PHYSIOLLMARCHITECTUREANDIMPLEMENTATION
Figure 1 shows an overview of the system. The system
consists of three main components: data preparation, insight
We hypothesize that engaging in a personalized conver- generation,andtheconversationalinterface.Next,wedescribe
sation that includes actionable insights about one’s health each component in depth.
data can enhance understanding of the data and the ability
to develop effective action plans towards healthy behaviors. A. Data Preparation
The concept of Personalization is evident through the LLM’s
The quality of the responses depends on the quality and
grounded knowledge of the user’s data and its references to
interpretability of the input data, which necessitates a process
the data sources in its response. Actionable insights refer to
that prepares the data in formats that LLMs expect and
the LLM-generated discoveries of trends, correlations, and
instructs the LLMs on how to interpret the data. Initially, we
patternswithintheuser’sdata,aswellasactionable,follow-up
thought to leverage the code-generation capabilities of LLMs
questions and suggestions based on these discoveries. While
to provide real-time analysis of the data. Early experiments
currentaccompanyingappsofwearabledevicesallowusersto
showedthatthisapproachfailstobeconsistentlyaccurateand
explore the collected data through graphical representations,
fast, which are two important design principles. In addition,
uncovering actionable insights remains challenging. Data vi-
the need to generate bespoke functions is rare; meaningful
sualizations alone can lead to bias in interpreting their data,
analyses are often in the category of fundamental statisti-
and one way to reduce such bias is to incorporate statistical
cal analysis, such as mean, variance, trends over time, and
analysis for comparison and correlation [18]. Additionally,
correlation between data types. Thus, the system consists of
although users can search for solutions to specific problems,
an ”offline” (as opposed to real-time) preparation phase that
these queries are often not contextualized within their data.
conductsstatisticalanalysisonandsummarizestheuser’sdata.
Inadditiontomakingpersonalizedandinsightfulresponses Specifically, the process is as follows:
ourprimaryresearchanddesigngoal,wedesignedoursystem 1) Data Filtering and Alignment: The Fitbit data is ex-
with the following important principles in mind: Privacy- portedandfilteredforthedatesofinterest.Therawdatafrom
preserving: To safeguard user confidentiality and trust, we different sensors have varying sampling rates. For example,
ensure that no identifiable information is included in the step count is sampled every minute, heart rate is sampled
communication with third-party systems; Responsible: To every 5 minutes, and sedentary minute is sampled daily. Thus
maintain ethical standards and avoid potential harm, our we consolidated daily values for each data type and hourly
system should never provide medical or clinical diagnoses; values for step count and heart rate. Accurate representation
Accuracy: To provide reliable and trustworthy information, of temporal information is essential, as the subsequent steps
we ensure all responses are based on the data sources and that derive the correlations and potential causal relationships
avoid any fabrication or hallucination of values; Responsive: rely on the temporal dimension. Therefore, we aligned the
To create a smooth and engaging user experience, the system different sensor data based on date and time considering the
is designed for fast response times, making the conversation device’s timezone. Because we are interested in the effect of
feel seamless and fluid. dailyactivitiesonsleepquality,weadjustedthe’dateofsleep’Fig.3. Thestudyprotocol.
capable of receiving multi-modal input. We input the user’s
biography (provided by the user’s demographic survey), the
summaryandcorrelationmatrixofthedata,andtheplotofthe
hourly trends of heart rate and step count. We tried inputting
the correlation matrix as a plot, but it resulted in consistent
factualerrors,soanumericalrepresentationofthematrixwas
used instead. The system metaprompt instructs the LLM to
generate at least 10 insights. For each insight, it needs to
provide reasoning, assumptions, and explanations that make
use of the data. The data sources need to be specific with
values, and it must use a combination of different sources of
data. After each insight, it needs to give a score between 0-10
Fig.2. Thestepstakentosummarizethedataandgenerateinsightsfromthe on how likely the insight is to be the most important factor
databeforetheinformationispassedtotheconversationLLM. affectingsleepquality.Anexampleoutputofthisstepisshown
to correspond with the day following the recorded daytime in Figure 2.
activities. For simplicity, we excluded naps (i.e., not the main
C. Conversational Interface Design
sleep event). In the event of missing data, an average of the
weekly value was used. The final list of data is in Figure 2. The conversational interface is a text-based chatbot on a
2) GenerationofSummary,TrendsandCorrelations: After webbrowserthatcanbeaccessedonaphoneoralaptop.The
thedatahadbeenfilteredandaligned,wesummarizedthedata interface offers an interactive way to understand the data via
to extract the averages of the week, dates of min and max a summary of data, discussions of implications, and answers
values, and trends. For trends, we used a permissive threshold to questions. The conversation is driven by an LLM which
of ±0.15 because the goal is not to perform statistical hy- is prompt-tuned to focus on unique and personal trends and
pothesis testing but rather to provide the LLM with narrative insights (Figure 1). We again used OpenAI’s GPT-4-turbo
descriptionsofpossibletrends.Thehourlystepcountandheart model (temperature=0, max token=4096) but with a different
rate were plotted to show the visual pattern of one’s activity system metaprompt. The model takes in the pre-generated
andheartrateeachdayoveraweek.Then,wecalculatedpair- insights and summary of the week of data as inputs. The
wise correlation values. An example of the pattern graph and systemmetapromptoftheLLMhasafewcriticalcomponents:
correlation matrix plot is shown in Figure 2. role:definesthecharacteroftheLLManditshigh-levelrolein
theconversation;data:describestheexpectedinput,including
B. User Modeler and Insight Generation
the person’s biography, the summary of Fitbit data for the
Deeper insights such as how the data correlate with each time period of interest, the correlation matrix, and health data
other and the implications of the data are not apparent to trends; communication style: specifies a concise language
a user. As such, the mere integration of the user’s data in style,avoidingoverlytechnicaljargon.task:ensurestheLLM
an LLM is not enough as one can obtain a similar summary encouragesuserstoexploreallinsightsbysuggestingrelevant
from the smartwatch’s accompanying app. In addition, advice questions; opening format: grounds the conversation with a
one can get from searching the web is often generic. While self-introduction,anoverviewofthedata,derivedinsights,and
general advice can be applicable and helpful, anomalies and three follow-up questions to guide user exploration. caution:
edge cases are arguably important yet challenging to catch anticipates and mitigates malicious or unintended uses of
using traditional machine learning approaches. The advantage the LLM, such as off-topic questions; An example of the
of LLMs is that: (1) they have ample prior knowledge of conversation is in Figure 1.
statistics, insights on health, and common sense; (2) they
can take into account the user’s profile and other contextual
V. USERSTUDY
information, such as gender, age, and habits. To generate Instead of evaluating the efficacy of LLMs at predicting
meta-level insights, we used OpenAI’s GPT-4-turbo model health concerns, our focus is on helping people understand
(temperature=0, max token=4096), which is an LLM model their data and arrive at actionable insights, which we believeLLMs have the potential to support. Thus, we implemented D. Hypotheses and Measurements
and evaluated our system in real-world settings where actual
Below are the hypotheses and the corresponding metrics
users interacted with our system using their wearable devices
usedtomeasureandcomparetheeffectivenessofthedifferent
and personal data.
conditionsinfouroutcomesofinterest.Thepre-surveyfocuses
on outcomes as a result of using the Fitbit App. The post-
A. Procedure
survey contains an identical set of questions as the pre-survey
Figure 3 shows an overview of the experimental protocol.
tomeasurethedifferenceintheoutcomeafterinteractingwith
Participants were asked to wear the Fitbit for minimally a
the chatbot.
week,includingduringsleep.Theycompletedademographics
survey and a pre-survey that asked about their understanding • H1: C3>C2>C1 in improving individual’s understand-
ing of their data. Measured by: 7 qualitative questions,
of their data and goals after using the Fitbit App. The survey
each followed by a quantitative self-rated confidence
breakdown is detailed in the later section. Once participants
score (1-7), and 1 quantitative rating of the interface (1-
had at least a week of data, they exported and shared their
7).
Fitbitdatawiththeexperimenters.Theirrawdatawassecurely
storedandneversharedwithanythird-partysystems,including • H2:C3>C2>C1inmakingindividualsfeelmotivatedto
improve their sleep. Measured by: 1 qualitative question,
the LLMs. They then interacted with a version of our system
and 3 quantitative ratings of the interface (1-7).
depending on which condition group they were randomly
assigned to. They needed to complete at least 10 exchanges • H3: C3>C2>C1 in helping individuals form actionable
goals to improve their sleep. Measured by: 1 qualitative
with the chatbot. Their chat conversations were logged and
question,and 3quantitative ratingsof theinterface(1-7).
shared with the experimenters. Finally, participants completed
a post-survey about the interface with the same questions as • H4:C3>C2>C1asamorepersonalizedinterface.Mea-
sured by: 2 quantitative ratings of the interface (1-7).
the pre-survey. Participants received $15 for completing the
study, which was approved by the institution’s IRB.
E. Analysis
B. Conditions
For the quantitative results, we treat the mean of the
The study has 3 between-subject conditions (Figure 3): aggregated 7-point Likert scores within each category as a
Placebo (C1): Chat with an off-the-shelf LLM with no continuous variable. We used a linear mixed effects (LME)
personal information; Control (C2): Chat with an LLM that model (lme4 package in R [20]) to account for the nested
has access to a summary of their Fitbit data; Intervention data structure, namely each subject has 2 observations: pre-
(C3): Chat with an LLM that has access to their Fitbit data survey and post-survey. We used the random intercept model,
summary, insights on how their data correlate, and generated allowing each subject to have a unique intercept. The predic-
follow-up questions that guide the user through the insights. tors of interest are Test (pre vs post) and Condition (placebo,
NotethattheplacebogroupwasstillaskedtosharetheirFitbit control,andintervention),andwecontrolforAIliteracy,Fitbit
data, despite their summarized data never being provided to use frequency, and cognitive reflection test. Intuitively, the
the conversational interface. four outcomes should not be independent as outcomes from
the same person have the same underlying determinants. For
C. Participants
example, one’s motivation to improve their sleep could be
50 Participants were recruited through university mailing dependent on how much they understand their data. However,
lists,5participatedinthepilotstudy,and21didnotcomplete we do not model the correlations among the outcomes at this
the full study and were excluded from the data analysis. point. Thus, we fit a random intercept linear mixed effect
This left us with 24 participants, 8 for C1, 8 for C2, and modelforeachoutcomeseparately.Sinceourhypothesesneed
8 for C3. The sample population has a mean age of 29.09 to compare three pairs of the conditions, and the LME model
(SD=8.50). 12 identified as male, 12 as female. All have used only compares two pairs (Control and Placebo, Intervention
asmartwatchbeforebutmaynotbeaFitbitcompatiblewatch. and Placebo), we conducted an post-hoc pairwise comparison
For consistency, we gave those who own a different type of using the emmeans package in R [21], which produces an
smartwatch a Fitbit watch to wear for a week. Participants adjusted p-value.
must not have any serious health or sleep concerns as our Wealsoopen-codedandthematicallyclusteredparticipants’
system should not provide medical diagnosis or advice. 77% qualitative questionnaire responses and conversation logs to
typically use the Fitbit app at least once a day, 43% use extract trends. Specifically, we compared the qualitative re-
LLM-based systems more than once a day, and 74% got full sponses to the knowledge questions and action plans before
scores on the Cognitive Reflection Test [19], where a higher and after interacting with the chatbot. We also compared the
score indicates individuals’ ability to suppress an intuitive post-survey action plans against the conversation log. The
and spontaneous wrong answer in favor of a reflective and hypothesis is that the conversation content has a positive
deliberative right answer. In our study, this test assessed influence on one’s knowledge about their data, ability to
participants’ acceptance of statistical explanations as opposed generate actionable plans, and confidence in their knowledge
to adhering to prior beliefs. and action plans.VI. QUANTITATIVERESULTS ”higher HRV is correlated with better sleep,” whereas they
initially had not heard of HRV.
Overall, interacting with a chatbot in addition to using the
When asked about what they thought had the most impact
Fitbit app increased users’ understanding. Specifically, the
on their sleep, participants in the placebo group answered
post-hoc pairwise comparison reveals that both Control and
similarly in the pre- and post-survey, whereas those in control
Intervention groups had a statistically significant increase in
and intervention groups were able to pinpoint that physical
understanding (estimate=1.28 and 1.05 respectively, p<.01
activity during the day significantly affects their sleep (P32,
and p=.02 respectively) (Figure 4). Comparing the amount
P46, P402). Furthermore, participants were more specific
of change post-interaction between the conditions, the LME
about the timing of the activities. For example, in pre- and
model and pairwise comparison show that the Control group
post-survey, participants mentioned that caffeine can make it
had a significantly greater increase than the Placebo group
hardertofallasleep,butpost-studyresponsesmorefrequently
(estimate=1.01,p=.03)inunderstandingbetweenthepost-and
mentionthat”caffeineintakeclosetobedtimedecreasessleep
pre-survey results (Figure 4), while the difference between
quality”(P33).Similarly,mostparticipantsconclusivelystated
Intervention and Placebo groups approached significance (es-
in the post-survey that exercise leads to better sleep, which is
timate=0.77, p=.08) (Table I).
an improvement from the varied and uncertain responses in
On the other hand, interacting with a generic chatbot that
the pre-survey.
has no personal data or tailored insights felt less personalized
thanusingtheFitbitApp,whereasthefullPhysioLLMsystem Comparing goals with conversation content – We were
was rated the highest for this category (Figure 4). The pre- also interested in whether the interaction with the chatbot led
survey rating varied between conditions, so the pre-post in- to more personal and actionable goals. Quantitative results
teraction differences were not significant between conditions. show that the control and intervention groups rated the in-
The LME model did not reveal any statistical significance for terface as more personalized and relevant and that they are
the fixed or interaction effects. more confident in their ability to use their health data to
improvetheirsleep.Thequantitativesurveyaskedparticipants
Similarly,thePlacebogroupratedthegenericchatbotlower
to list three goals and explain why and how they want to
foroutcomesactionableandmotivationcomparedtousingthe
achieve these goals. In both the pilot study and full study,
Fitbit App alone, and the full PhysioLLM system was again
participants adapted their goals based on chatbot feedback.
rated the highest for both outcomes (Figure 4). Comparing
In particular, participants in the intervention group related
betweenconditions,TheLMEmodelshowstheControlgroup
dailybehaviorswithspecificsleepoutcomesbasedoninsights
had a significantly greater increase in supporting actionable
goals than the Placebo group (estimate=1.75, p=.03) (Figure
FixedEffects Estimate SE df t p
4, Table I).
Understanding
(Intercept) 3.84 0.73 21 5.24 <0.001***
VII. DISCUSSION Test 0.27 0.30 21 0.91 0.37
Control -0.37 0.36 18 -1.03 0.32
Combining numerical results and trends extracted from the Intervention -0.34 0.35 18 -0.94 0.35
qualitative results, we now discuss the system’s performance Test:Control 1.01 0.43 21 2.37 0.03*
in achieving our design goals. Test:Intervention 0.77 0.43 21 1.82 0.08
Motivating
Comparing understanding pre- and post-interaction –
(Intercept) 4.75 1.14 21 4.18 <0.001***
As mentioned earlier, the quantitative data shows the control Test -0.54 0.46 21 -1.16 0.26
and intervention groups had a significant increase in confi- Control -0.32 0.56 18 -0.57 0.58
Intervention -0.15 0.56 18 -0.27 0.79
denceintheirunderstandingofthedata(Figure4).Qualitative
Test:Control 0.96 0.66 21 1.45 0.16
resultsrevealedfurtherthattherewasanincreaseindetailand Test:Intervention 0.58 0.66 21 0.88 0.39
clarity in post-survey responses. When asked if they knew Actionable
what certain terminologies mean and their influence on sleep, (Intercept) 4.21 1.29 21 3.27 <0.001***
Test -0.16 0.54 21 -0.31 0.76
there was a decrease in the number of ”no” responses in the
Control -0.60 0.63 18 -0.94 0.36
post-survey.Forinstance,manyparticipantsinitially”vaguely” Intervention -0.25 0.64 18 -0.39 0.70
understood various sleep stages, but later described sleep’s Test:Control 1.75 0.76 21 2.31 0.03*
Test:Intervention 0.96 0.76 21 1.26 0.22
”importance for memory, emotions, other health regulation”
Personalized
(P202)inthepost-survey.Therewerealsoseveralmisconcep-
(Intercept) 3.86 1.62 21 2.39 0.03*
tionsbeforetheinteractionwiththechatbot,andtheresponses Test -0.69 0.54 21 -1.25 0.22
of participants in control and interaction groups indicate a Control -0.13 0.75 18 -0.17 0.86
Intervention 1.10 0.76 18 1.45 0.17
more comprehensive understanding afterward. For example,
Test:Control 1.38 0.78 21 1.77 0.09
P34 initially only knew that ”REM is when dream happens,” Test:Intervention 0.81 0.78 21 1.05 0.31
but stated after the interaction that ”REM (sleep) helps with TABLEI
memory & creativity and deep (sleep) is for restorative sleep”
RESULTSOFTHELINEARMIXEDEFFECTSMODELSTOTESTOUR
HYPOTHESES.TestREPRESENTSFIXEDEFFECTPRE-VSPOST-SURVEY.”:”
whilecitingspecificpercentagesofsleepstages.Thiswasalso INDICATESANINTERACTIONBETWEENTWOEFFECTS,I.E.,THE
seenwithHRVknowledge,whereP46describedthatforthem, BETWEEN-CONDITIONCOMPARISONSINTHEHYPOTHESES.PLACEBOIS
THEBASELINE.*:P<.05,**:P<.01,***:P<.001.Fig.4. BarplotsofLikert-scaleratings.Higherratingsarebetter.Errorbar:SE.*:p<.05,**:p<.01∆:differencebetweenpre-andpost-survey.
provided by the system. For example, some goals were to tions that experts found surprising stemmed from unexpected
”reduce stressful activities late at night” so they can ”go to correlations in the data. The LLM tends to over-index the
sleep at a more consistent time” (P40) or to have ”more correlation values. Experts noted that correlation significance
regularmediumintensityexercise”for”bettersleepandHRV” should be adjusted for the small data sample and redundant
(P45). In contrast, participants in the placebo group had more data categories. They suggested reducing comparisons by
personalgoals,withvaguerexplanationsandreasoningonwhy combiningrelatedvalues,suchasaggregatingdifferentactivity
they wanted to achieve them. levels into a single value.
Personalization – Overall, participants had positive inter- Expertopinionongeneratedfeedback–ExpertJtookthe
actions and thought that conversations with the chatbot were perspective of the user and thought it gave ”good suggestions
”personalized” and ”engaging.” However, a few thought the on the practical side,” while expert B took the perspective of
chatbot was not personalized even though suggestions explic- a medical professional. Expert B remarked that since some
itly mention individual data such as steps per day or hours of insights might be based on spurious statistics, the model
sleep. A possible explanation may be that the health insights should provide more modest comments rather than sounding
providedarewell-known,makingthechatbotresponsesappear certain. While acknowledging occasional over-interpretation
more generic. Nonetheless, participants felt that the interface by the model, Expert J believed that ”the explanations may
focused them on the relevant information. not matter,” as users primarily seek actionable advice, such as
avoiding overexertion and not exercising close to bedtime.
VIII. PRELIMINARYEVALUATIONWITHSLEEPEXPERTS
We aimed to understand how human experts derive insights IX. LIMITATIONANDFUTUREWORK
from physiological data and evaluate PhysioLLM-generated Limitations of sensor data – We assume most people
suggestions. Two sleep experts, B and J, were independently follow a weekly routine, so we choose a week of data as the
interviewed using an experimenter’s personal data as a case range of input data. Some correlation values can be counter-
study. They were presented with the same input (biography, intuitive due to the short time window of data. In addition,
summary, correlation, and trends) given to the LLM and severaldifferenthealthconditionscancausethesamechanges
asked to generate insights without additional context. They in sensor readings. For example, heart rate variability can be
then reviewed the LLM’s generated insights and the system’s lowduetostress,orbecauseonehasaninfection.Becausethe
responses via its interface. Below, we summarize the main data are inherently ambiguous, the system should not try to
insights from both interviews. provide specific diagnoses based on the data, rather it should
ComparisonbetweenLLMandhumanexpertinsights– suggest testable hypotheses to the user which they can try to
WecomparedhowhumanexpertsandPhysioLLMapproached identify the root causes.
the provided information. Both experts focused on big-picture Limitationsofinsights–Thecurrentimplementationrelies
data to assess the user’s sleep health, whereas the LLM con- on GPT’s prior knowledge during training. This is acceptable
centrated on data correlations. Some insights generated from as prior work has shown that the zero-shot GPT-4 can have
the correlation matrix were similar between the LLM and the 84% accuracy when answering medical licensing exams [10].
experts.However,expertsfoundsomecorrelationsunexpected A fine-tuned GPT for medical diagnosis can improve the
and counterintuitive, such as an increase in sedentary minutes accuracy and comprehensiveness of the system. The way
correlating with a higher percentage of deep sleep. The LLM the insights are presented could also be more diverse. Some
justified this by suggesting it ”could be due to the body’s participants wished they were given more visuals, such as
increased need to recover from activity.” In contrast, the graphs to represent the data the chatbot is referencing. In the
experts dismissed this correlation, noting that the step count future, the conversational interface can be directly integrated
and activity minutes indicated the person did not engage in into the companying app, and the chatbot can reference the
activities intense enough to require such recovery. graphical representations in addition to the textual insights.
Expert opinion on insights–Overall,thesystemprovided Safety, privacy, and ethics – The system has embedded
reasonable and correct explanations. Most of the explana- counter-action prompts to prevent abusive uses of the systemthatarebeyondthesystem’scapabilitiesandintendeduses,but contextualizing AI-enabled conversational chatbots with time-
furthertestsontherobustnessofthesafetypromptareneeded. series, personal data. We envision that this system allows
The outcome of the generation should be factually accurate, individuals to better understand how their body functions and
especially in the domains of personal health. Mistakes such the consequences of actions, thereby making the internal and
as Google’s AI search feature suggesting people eat rocks4 invisible visible.
highlightthechallengeofmakingtheLLMfactuallygrounded.
However,notallmistakesareabsurdandobvious.Thenatural, REFERENCES
human-soundingoutputsoftheLLMsystemsareworrisomely
persuasive. We made sure users knew the system was not [1] S. Sun, A. A. Folarin, Y. Ranjan, Z. Rashid, P. Conde, C. Stewart,
allowed or capable of giving medical diagnoses and advice, N. Cummins, F. Matcham, G. Dalla Costa, S. Simblett, et al., “Us-
ing smartphones and wearable devices to monitor behavioral changes
and that the system should acknowledge its limitations. Last during covid-19,” Journal of medical Internet research, vol. 22, no. 9,
but not least, health and activity data is sensitive information. p.e19992,2020.
By design, we made sure that no raw data was sent to the [2] S.Canali,V.Schiaffonati,andA.Aliverti,“Challengesandrecommen-
dations for wearable devices in digital health: Data quality, interoper-
LLM, and we de-identified all data and survey results.
ability, health equity, fairness,” PLOS Digital Health, vol. 1, no. 10,
Participant pool – The participant group was recruited p.e0000104,2022.
with some interest in improving their sleep but most had [3] J.Achiam,S.Adler,S.Agarwal,L.Ahmad,I.Akkaya,F.L.Aleman,
D. Almeida, J. Altenschmidt, S. Altman, S. Anadkat, et al., “Gpt-4
no specific sleep issues. This reduced the likelihood of our
technicalreport,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.08774,2023.
system discovering findings that were significantly different [4] K. Singhal, T. Tu, J. Gottweis, R. Sayres, E. Wulczyn, L. Hou,
from common knowledge and suggested actions that could K. Clark, S. Pfohl, H. Cole-Lewis, D. Neal, et al., “Towards expert-
level medical question answering with large language models,” arXiv
result in drastic behavior change. In the future, we hope
preprintarXiv:2305.09617,2023.
to work with a broader user group with more diverse sleep [5] J. Cosentino, A. Belyaeva, X. Liu, N. A. Furlotte, Z. Yang, C. Lee,
patterns. E. Schenck, Y. Patel, J. Cui, L. Schneider, R. Bryant, R. G. Gomes,
A. Jiang, R. Lee, Y. Liu, J. Perez, J. K. Rogers, C. Speed, S. Tailor,
Just-in-time assistance – Our system allows the user to
M.Walker,J.Yu,T.Althoff,C.Heneghan,J.Hernandez,M.Malhotra,
reflect on recent but historical data. A proactive, always-on L. Stern, Y. Matias, G. S. Corrado, S. Patel, S. Shetty, J. Zhan,
system could suggest and anticipate physiological states to S. Prabhakara, D. McDuff, and C. Y. McLean, “Towards a personal
healthlargelanguagemodel,”2024.
help individuals take preventive measures.
[6] P.Schmiedmayer,A.Rao,P.Zagar,V.Ravi,A.Zahedivash,A.Ferey-
dooni,andO.Aalami,“Llmonfhir–demystifyinghealthrecords,”arXiv
preprintarXiv:2402.01711,2024.
X. CONCLUSION
[7] M. Walker, Why we sleep: Unlocking the power of sleep and dreams.
SimonandSchuster,2017.
In this paper, we introduced PhysioLLM, a novel system
[8] R. Luo, L. Sun, Y. Xia, T. Qin, S. Zhang, H. Poon, and T.-Y. Liu,
that addresses the question of how to provide personalized “Biogpt:generativepre-trainedtransformerforbiomedicaltextgenera-
health insights from individuals’ wearables. The system or- tionandmining,”Briefingsinbioinformatics,vol.23,no.6,p.bbac409,
2022.
chestrates multiple LLMs and non-LLM modules to generate
[9] A. Belyaeva, J. Cosentino, F. Hormozdiari, K. Eswaran, S. Shetty,
reliable, personal, and insightful outputs. Our user study with G.Corrado,A.Carroll,C.Y.McLean,andN.A.Furlotte,“Multimodal
24 Fitbit watch users demonstrates that PhysioLLM outper- llms for health grounded in individual-specific data,” in Workshop
on Machine Learning for Multimodal Healthcare Data, pp. 86–102,
forms both the Fitbit App and a generic LLM chatbot in
Springer,2023.
facilitatingadeeper,personalizedunderstandingofhealthdata [10] H. Nori, N. King, S. M. McKinney, D. Carignan, and E. Horvitz,
and supporting actionable steps toward personal health goals. “Capabilities of gpt-4 on medical challenge problems,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2303.13375,2023.
Despite limitations, such as handling the randomness and un-
[11] X. Xu, B. Yao, Y. Dong, S. Gabriel, H. Yu, J. Hendler, M. Ghassemi,
knownsinthedataandcontexts,theadaptabilityofoursystem A. K. Dey, and D. Wang, “Mental-llm: Leveraging large language
ensures beneficial and personalized suggestions. Our system modelsformentalhealthpredictionviaonlinetextdata,”Proceedingsof
theACMonInteractive,Mobile,WearableandUbiquitousTechnologies,
uses an off-the-shelf, general-purpose LLM so it has limited
vol.8,no.1,pp.1–32,2024.
experthealthknowledge;integrationsoffine-tunedspecialized
[12] P.MaddiganandT.Susnjak,“Chat2vis:Generatingdatavisualisations
LLMs with our system will further improve the quality of via natural language using chatgpt, codex and gpt-3 large language
the insights. As LLM-based conversational systems become
models,”IeeeAccess,2023.
[13] P. Ma, R. Ding, S. Wang, S. Han, and D. Zhang, “Insightpilot: An
widely integrated with health apps, our study’s insights are
llm-empowered automated data exploration system,” in Proceedings
eminently important for providing the appropriate responses of the 2023 Conference on Empirical Methods in Natural Language
andenablinguserstoqueryanddiscoverinsights.Anecdotally, Processing:SystemDemonstrations,pp.346–352,2023.
[14] Y.Cheng,F.Wang,P.Zhang,andJ.Hu,“Riskpredictionwithelectronic
some participants reported deeper reflections about their sleep
healthrecords:Adeeplearningapproach,”inProceedingsofthe2016
and adjusted daytime activities informed by the interactions SIAM international conference on data mining, pp. 432–440, SIAM,
with our system, which shows the promise of this system in 2016.
[15] H. Cui, Z. Shen, J. Zhang, H. Shao, L. Qin, J. C. Ho, and C. Yang,
nudging people towards positive behavior change and merits
“Llms-basedfew-shotdiseasepredictionsusingehr:Anovelapproach
future study. The significance of this work lies in its potential combining predictive agent reasoning and critical agent instruction,”
to turn general-purpose LLMs into personal intelligence by arXivpreprintarXiv:2403.15464,2024.
[16] Y.Kim,X.Xu,D.McDuff,C.Breazeal,andH.W.Park,“Health-llm:
Largelanguagemodelsforhealthpredictionviawearablesensordata,”
4https://www.bbc.com/news/articles/cd11gzejgz4o arXivpreprintarXiv:2401.06866,2024.[17] K. R. Stro¨mel, S. Henry, T. Johansson, J. Niess, and P. W. Woz´niak,
“Narrating fitness: Leveraging large language models for reflective
fitnesstrackerdatainterpretation,”inProceedingsoftheCHIConference
onHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,pp.1–16,2024.
[18] E. K. Choe, B. Lee, et al., “Characterizing visualization insights from
quantifiedselfers’personaldatapresentations,”IEEEcomputergraphics
andapplications,vol.35,no.4,pp.28–37,2015.
[19] S. Frederick, “Cognitive reflection and decision making,” Journal of
Economicperspectives,vol.19,no.4,pp.25–42,2005.
[20] D.Bates,M.Ma¨chler,B.Bolker,andS.Walker,“Fittinglinearmixed-
effects models using lme4,” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 67,
no.1,pp.1–48,2015.
[21] S. R. Searle, F. M. Speed, and G. A. Milliken, “Population marginal
means in the linear model: an alternative to least squares means,” The
AmericanStatistician,vol.34,no.4,pp.216–221,1980.