Dispersion of personal spaces
Jaroslav Horáček1[0000−0002−0672−4339] and Miroslav
Rada2,3[0000−0002−1761−897X]
1 Charles University, Faculty of Humanities, Department of Sociology, Prague, Czech
Republic
jaroslav.horacek@fhs.cuni.cz
2 Prague University of Economics and Business, Faculty of Informatics and
Statistics, Department of Econometrics, Prague, Czech Republic
3 Prague University of Economics and Business, Faculty of Finance and Accounting,
Department of Financial Accounting and Auditing, Prague, Czech Republic
miroslav.rada@vse.cz
Abstract. There are many entities that disseminate in the physical
space – information, gossip, mood, innovation etc. Personal spaces are
alsoentitiesthatdisperseandinterplay.Inthisworkwestudytheemer-
gence of configurations formed by participants when choosing a place
tositinarectangularauditorium.Basedonexperimentalquestionnaire
data we design several models and assess their relevancy to a real time-
lapsefootageoflecturehallbeingfilledup.Themainfocusistocompare
the evolution of entropy of occupied seat configurations in time. Even
though the process of choosing a seat is complex and could depend on
variouspropertiesofparticipantsorenvironment,someofthedeveloped
models can capture at least basic essence of the real processes. After
introducing the problem of seat selection and related results in close re-
search areas, we introduce preliminary collected data and build models
ofseatselectionbasedonthem.Wecomparetheresultingmodelstothe
real observational data and discuss areas of future research directions.
Keywords: Seatpreference·Personalspace·Territoriality·Computer
modeling.
1 Introduction
Most of us have encountered a situation when we entered a lecture room or
auditorium for the first time and had to choose a seat. A few people had been
already seated there and we expected an indefinite number of people to arrive
after us.
It is very interesting to observe formation of such patterns from the per-
spective of a teacher or speaker. For example, at the beginning of his book [8]
Schelling contemplates a phenomenon that occurred during his lecture – several
front rows of seats were left vacant whilst the other rows in an auditorium were
fully packed.
Despiteitscommonoccurrence,phenomenacorrespondingtopatternsresult-
ingfromseatingpreferencesarenotfrequentlystudied.Thereisonlyfewstudies
4202
yaM
03
]AM.sc[
1v59891.5042:viXra2 J. Horáček and M. Rada
dedicated to this topic. In [2] they study the influence of seating on study per-
formance. The study [5] shows that students are biased to choose seats on the
left side of the classroom. In [4] they review the impact of seating arrangement.
Animportantfactorinfluencingtheseatselectionprocessisterritoriality.The
study [6] identified seats that are considered highly territorial – seats at the end
of rows or in the corners of a classroom. It was showed that highly territorial
seats attract students with greater territorial needs. Various arrangements of
an auditorium were examined – auditorium consisting of rows of tables with
chairs,U-shapedauditorium,rowsoftablet-armchairsorchairsclusteredaround
isolated tables.
Inanotherstudy[3]theyconsiderinterplayofhumanterritorialityandseat-
ing preference. They discovered that after several lectures students tend to oc-
cupy the same seat (or at least location). More than 90% of students confirmed
that they tend to always occupy the same location. However, they were unsure
aboutthereasonsforsuchabehavior.Thefollowingreasonsreceivedthehighest
scores – security, sense of control or identity. However, there are several other
reasons for this behavior such as social order, social role, stimulation etc.
Human territoriality might have several meanings unlike the territoriality
of animals [3]. One of the possible meanings could be privacy. It is useful to
understanditascontrolofaccesstootherpeople.In[7]theyusePrivacyPrefer-
ence Scale (PPS) that is based on this definition. It distinguishes various types
of privacy – intimacy, not neighboring, seclusion, solitude, anonymity, reserve.
Particularly seclusion and solitude need some further explanation. Seclusion is
understoodasbeingfarfromothers,whilstsolitudemeansbeingalonewithoth-
ersnearby.Allvariantsofprivacymightberelatedtoseatingpreference.Inthis
study,rowsinalecturehallweremarkedasfront,middleandback.Thenvarious
privacyscoresofparticipantsseatedinthoseregionsweremeasured.Mostofthe
privacy factors were more important for participants seated towards the back.
Nevertheless, some of the privacy conditions could be reached independently of
seating in the back or front, e.g., seclusion, anonymity or not neighboring.
Thereare otherstudiesfocused onseatingoutside thelecturehall. Choosing
aseatinacrowdedcoffee-houseisstudiedin[9].Inhisthesis[10]Thomasfocuses
on various situations in public transport. One section is devoted to spaces be-
tween passengers. There are documented examples of maximization of distances
amongpassengers.Ifnecessary,peopletendtositnexttopeopleexpressingsim-
ilarity (e.g., similar gender) or passengers not expressing a defensive behavior
(e.g., placing a body part or other item on adjacent seat). The average dis-
tanceoftwopassengerswasmeasuredtobe1.63seatunits.Anotherworkapply
agent-based models to study emergence of clusters in a bus [1].
Mostofthementionedstudiesaredescriptive–theytrytostaticallycapture
the properties of seating arrangements or participant deliberation about seat
selection.Thepurposeofthisworkistodesigndynamicmodelsofseatselection
that can shed new light on the formation process of collective seating patterns.
In the next section we describe what factors do we consider when building such
models. In the third and fourth section we describe the preliminary experimen-Dispersion of personal spaces 3
tal data and the setup for comparing models respectively. The next section is
devoted to designing the models and their comparison. In the final section we
summarize the results and outline future research directions.
2 Factors to consider
Letusimaginethataperson(oragroupofpeople)arrivesinanauditoriumand
seeks a suitable place to sit. We will call such a person participant.
There are several factors that could influence participant’s seat preference.
Oneofthemcouldbevisualorolfactoryattractivenessofalreadyseatedpartici-
pants. We were often asked about these assumptions during experimental phase
of this work. They could play a significant role, however we assume that all
participants are basically neutral in appearance. We are interested in situations
when there is no such disruptive element in the auditorium.
There are several types of influence outside the environment. It makes a
difference if we know the speaker or whether we expect to be asked questions
during a lecture. That could have a significant influence on our seat selection.
Hence we assume that there is no familiarity or interaction during a lecture.
Another factor we encountered in our experiments is the length of a lecture.
Some of the participants would choose to sit at the ends of seat rows. Either
becauseofhavinganescapewayifthelectureisnotsatisfactoryortohaveeasy
access to rest rooms.
Two other factors are mentioned in [8]. First, people might have learned the
seating habits from other activities or events. For example, they have had a
bad experience with sitting in the front. The second is a hypothesis that people
just do not think about the seat selection too much. They just take any near
vacant seat, that satisfies some basic social rules, e.g. not too many people need
to stand up when getting to a seat. The book suggest that it could be due to
the of interest. However, we suggest that the reason could be the limited time
of deliberation on seat selection. We return to this idea when designing seat
selection models.
In the introductory section the two important factors were mentions – ter-
ritoriality and privacy. We will definitely make use of them in the following
sections.
Seating preferences could be based on sensory capabilities of a participant.
For example, a participant with hearing or vision impairment would rather sit
in the front. For now, we do not include these conditions in our models.
In [1] they consider the following parameters of participants – age, gender,
size,ethnicity.Wedonottaketheseparametersintoaccounteithersinceresults
on relation of these parameters and seating preferences are not apparent. In [6]
theyobservedahigherterritorialitywithwomen,however,itcouldbeexplained
simply by the fact that observed woman participants carried more items and
hence needed more personal space.
Anothercharacteristicsmorecommonforpublictransportisshiftingseatsas
mentionedin[10].Ifonesseatisnotsatisfactoryitisreasonabletochangeit.In4 J. Horáček and M. Rada
real situations we can observe people switching their seats with somebody else
or moving to a different location. Such a behavior is not included in our models
but it is a subject of future work.
3 Data and its evaluation
To obtain the first results we rely on preliminary empirical data. As the first
source we used publicly available time lapse videos of lecture halls being filled
up. We were able to find several videos, however, one represented the process of
seating selection in a medium sized lecture hall particularly well4.
In the footage, participants arrive alone or in small groups, hence we also
consider adding new participants in bunches. This footage serves as the first
inspiration for further research, because it neatly illustrates the formation of
seating patterns.
We followed the video until we were still able to track the order of seating of
theparticipants.Atthatmomentthemajorityofseatsstillremainedunoccupied.
Nevertheless, such a moment, when the auditorium is still empty enough, poses
the most interesting case. When the auditorium is nearly full, then the seating
preference is overpowered by the need of a seat.
After extracting the visible part of the auditorium, there remained 7 rows of
seats.Eachrowcontained14seats.Therefore,theauditoriumcanberepresented
byarectangulargridofsize7×14,whereeachcellrepresentsoneseat.InFigure
1 we show such a representation. The black cells represent occupied seats. The
numbers in black cells denote the order of arrival of corresponding participants.
If more cells share the same number it means that all these participants arrived
at the same time as a group.
Fig.1. A tabular depiction of the real auditorium filled with participants. The black
cellsrepresentoccupiedseats.Thewhitecellsrepresentemptyseats.Theseatsmarked
with X represent participants seated before the start of recording. The number in the
black cell depicts the order of arrival of the corresponding participant.
To understand the process of seating pattern formation we took the same
approach as in the paper [9]. We prepared and printed four schematic depic-
4 At the time of writing the paper (14 October, 2023), the footage remains publicly
accessible at the link https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=r76dclwZU9MDispersion of personal spaces 5
tions of seating arrangements in a 7×14 auditorium with some already seated
participants. It was represented in the tabular way mentioned above. The ex-
amples were based on the initial seating arrangements from the real footage.
The preliminary data collection took two rounds. Several undergraduate uni-
versity students were asked whether they want to participate in the following
short thought experiment. All respondents participate in ICT study programs.
The collection of data was voluntary and anonymous. We did not collect any
personal information such as age, gender etc, since there is no proven influence
of these factors on seating preference.
Inthefirstround,12studentswereaskedabout4seatingsituationsdepicted
in Figure 1. They were asked to mark their preferred seating position. If several
positionsseemedequivalent,theywereaskedtomarkallofthem.Thefirstround
served as a pretest of quality of the example seating configurations and we used
it also to improve the overall experiment setup.
Fig.2. Four initial example configurations. The position of a speaker is marked for
each hypothetical auditorium tableau.
In the second round there participated 27 students (not participating in the
first round). The students were presented the same four hypothetical situations
as in the first round, since they proved to be useful. This time, they we asked to
select only one position of their preferred seat. They were instructed as follows:
"Imagine you being a participant at a lecture. It is a one-time event. You par-
ticipate voluntarily and are interested in the content of the lecture. You arrive
from the back of the auditorium and need to pick one seat. Both sides of the au-
ditorium are well accessible. You do not know anybody of the participants. The
lecture is not long (maximum duration is 1 hour). There is no expectation of you
being asked questions by a speaker during the lecture. Some people are already
seated in the auditorium. They all seem neutral in appearance. You should defi-
nitely expect some more people to come. However, you do not know the amount
of the newcomers. Which is your most preferred seat?"6 J. Horáček and M. Rada
Out of the 27 respondents, 9 marked exactly the same spot for all four con-
figurations. There are several possible reasons for this outcome. First, they were
bored with the task and hence filled the form without paying attention. Second,
the seat choice depended on a preferred seat position in general and was hence
independent of the seating arrangement (this was verbally confirmed by one
of the participants). Anyway, in this preliminary testing phase we temporarily
leavethe9respondentsoutofouranalysissincewedonotknowanythingabout
their motivation fur such answers. Interestingly, 8 of these 9 respondents chose
a position at the edge of the auditorium.
For our further analysis we work with 18 valid questionnaires. Since each
consisted of 4 configurations, it gives us 72 cases of marked seating preferences
in total.
Thereareseveralinterestingoutcomesoftheanalysis.First,ifthereisenough
space,respondentsrarelychooseapositiondirectlyneighboring(vertically,hori-
zontallyordiagonally)tosomeone.Suchachoicewasmadebyonly3participants
in only 6 cases (about 8% of all the cases).
We first worked with the hypothesis that participants choose a seat that
maximizesthedistancetothenearestalreadyseatedparticipant.Sincethegridis
discreteandrectangular,weusedtheManhattandistanceforsuchmeasurement.
The set of all participants is denoted by P and for a participant p we denote
p ,p his/her row and seat respectively. Then the distance of two participants
r s
p,q is defined as:
d(p,q)=|p −q |+|p −q |.
r r s s
Figure 3 shows frequencies of distances to the nearest seated participant. It
seems that participants tend to pick a seat close to already seated participants.
However,somesmallgapispreferred(minimumdistanceequalto3appearedin
43% of cases).
Fig.3. Frequency of distances to the nearest seated participant.
Contrarytoourhypothesis,participantsdonotseemtomaximizetheirmin-
imum distance to others. Only in 4 out of 72 cases could we see a seating choice
that visually resembled maximization of distance to others. In the discarded set
of participants a seat selection similar to maximization is more common (12 outDispersion of personal spaces 7
of 36 cases). Nevertheless, maximization of distance to other participants is a
phenomenon we return to in the next sections.
Another way to measure distance is the distance from the center of the mass
of already seated participants. We assign numbers to the rows starting from the
back (the largest number is of the front row). Similarly, we number the seats
from left to right. Then, row c and seat c of the center of mass c is defined as:
r s
(cid:18)(cid:80) p (cid:19) (cid:18)(cid:80) p (cid:19)
c =round p∈P r , c =round p∈P s .
r |P| s |P|
We use rounding to the nearest integer with round half up tie-breaking rule.
In Figure 4 we show the frequency of distances to the center of the mass of
already seated participants. For measurement we omitted the lower right con-
figuration from Figure 2 because there was only one seated groups. The largest
distances were mostly produced by one respondent. It seems that a reasonable
distance from the center of mass plays (maybe subconsciously) a role in the
choice of a seat. We will utilize the results in these following sections.
Fig.4. Frequency of distances to the center of mass.
4 Basic setup
Using the results from the previous section, it is our goal to design models that
capture the dynamics of seating formation. The data obtained from the real
footage serves for comparison of developed models.
For such a purpose the data from Figure 1 were slightly modified. The cells
whereparticipantssitnexttoeachotherandhavedifferentnumbersaremarked
asonegroupofparticipants.Fromthefootageitisclearthatwhenaparticipant
satdirectlynexttoanotherone,theywereacquaintedandbasicallyhadintended
to sit next to each other from the beginning.
The general seating process is defined as follows. In one time step a group of
participantsarrivesandchoosesaspacewhereallgroupmemberscansitnextto
each other. In the real world participants could leave empty seats among them8 J. Horáček and M. Rada
in the case when the auditorium is not fully packed. Since the participants do
not know the number of participants arriving after them, we do not consider
such a possibility and we always perceive a group as one unit that needs to be
placed compactly.
Every simulation run shares the same initial configuration of already seated
participants that is defined by "x" marks in Figure 1. We use the same size
of the auditorium (7×14). That means that a group of 2, 2 and 3 participants
respectivelyisalreadyseatedintheauditoriumattheprescribedpositions.Next,
we add groups of exactly the same sizes and in the same order as in the real
footage. We always assume that there is at least one spot where a group can fit.
At every time step a configuration of already seated participants forms a
certain pattern. To capture the essence of entropy of such a pattern we devised
the following simple measure. For every row it counts the number of transitions
from an empty seat to a seated person and vice versa. For every row this count
is squared and then these values are summed up. This is done to emphasize the
rows of auditorium. This way an arrangement of densely packed seated partic-
ipants will obtain a small score whereas participants loosely spread across the
auditorium with plenty of free space among them will get significantly higher
score. We can represent an auditorium as a binary matrix A where A = 1 if
i,j
thej-thseatintherowiisoccupied.ThematrixelementA isequalto0when
i,j
the corresponding seat is empty. For an auditorium of size m×n the entropy
measure is calculated as
m
(cid:32)
n
(cid:33)2
(cid:88) (cid:88)
e(A)= |A −A | .
r,s−1 r,s
r=1 s=2
Example:Justonerowwith14occupiedseatshasentropy0.Onerowwhere
empty and occupied seats alternate has entropy 169. The entropy of the final
seating arrangement from the real footage is 231.
By measuring seating entropy after arrival of each group we can capture the
evolution of the entropy in time. All tested models are stochastic – they use
randomness to choose among equivalently good seating positions. Therefore, for
each model of seat selection the evolution of entropy in time is obtained by
averaging 1,000 independent runs of the model.
5 Models of seat selection and their comparison
Using the analysis of the empirical data we design several models of seating
behavior and compare them with the real data obtained from the video footage.
In the previous section we pointed out the focus of such a comparison – the
evolution of seating entropy in time.
In this section we present the models in the order of their creation. For each
model we introduce a keyword that is used to address the model. The evolution
trajectoryoftherealworlddataismarkedasreal.Allmodelsworkinagreedy
manner. An arriving group chooses a place to sit and remains seated there. The
models are following:Dispersion of personal spaces 9
– Random seat selection (random) – This model tries to implement the case when
participants actually do not care about choosing a position and rather select an
arbitraryemptyseat.Hence,agroupselectsrandomlyacompactbunchofempty
seats in one row where it can fit.
– Maximization of personal space (max) – A group simply chooses a seating that
maximizes the minimum Manhattan distance to other seated participants. Even
thoughitdoesnotseemthatmajorityofparticipantsselectaseatinthismanner
this model is implemented for the sake of contrast and comparison. Measuring
the minimum distance for a group of participants is equivalent to measuring the
distanceforeachgroupparticipantseparatelyandthentakingminimumdistance.
– Personal space selection (space) – This model loosely incorporates the findings
from the experiment data. A group tries to find an empty space where the mini-
mum Manhattan distance to others is somewhere between 2 and 4 (including the
bounds). If there is no such spot it tries to find a place at even larger distance. If
such seat cannot be found, the group selects a random available space.
– Simplespaceselection (simple)–Thefollowingmodelisacombinationofthefirst
model and a simplification of the previous model. In this setup a group does not
careaboutseatingtoomuch.However,itratherchoosessomespacewhereithasat
least some amount of personal space, i.e., basically one empty seat is left around
the group. This is operationalized by the group having a minimum Manhattan
distance to all participants greater than 2. If there is no such spot then a seating
is chosen randomly.
– Centerofmassselection(center)–Agroupconsidersallavailablespacesthathave
minimumManhattandistancetoothersgreaterorequalto2.Fromsuchavailable
positions it selects randomly among the ones that are closest to the center of the
mass of already seated participants. If there is no such space available, then the
group chooses its spot randomly.
In Figure 5 we show comparison of the models. The last method (center)
incorporating the information about the center of mass seems to resemble the
actual real entropy evolution in the closest way. The model with simple mini-
mization of distance to the center of mass seems The model is the only one that
follows the "bump" of the real data in between the time slots 7 and 9.
Random selection model (random) and maximization model (max) provide
thelowestresemblancetotherealdata.Thissupportstheideathatparticipants
neither do not select their seating positions randomly nor do they maximize
distance from others . The simple variant with embedding the idea of personal
space (simple) seems to be much more accurate. The most complex method
(space) is outperformed by the simpler method (simple). Such an observation
might be consistent with Occam’s razor principle.
6 Summary
Several entities could disseminate in the physical space – information, moods,
memes, gossips. If we adhere to the previous studies of human territoriality and
privacy we could understand personal space to be an entity that also dissemi-
nates in the physical space. Personal spaces of people intervene and force each
othertoformvariouspatterns.Someofthepatternscanbeobservedduringthe10 J. Horáček and M. Rada
Fig.5. Evolution of entropy in time for each of the predefined models and the real
data. For each model the trajectory is averaged over 1,000 independent runs of the
model.
process of seating arrangements. Hence, the main focus of the work was study-
ingtheprocessofemergenceofseatingconfigurationsinrectangularauditorium.
Especially, when participants arrive in smaller groups.
In this work we utilized a time lapse footage of a lecture hall being filled up
and questionnaires with seating examples in order to be able to form models
of emerging seating patterns. The model where seat selection is based not only
on reasonable distance to others but also on distance to the center of the mass
of already seated participants seems to be the most plausible. Its evolution of
auditorium entropy in time resembles most closely the entropy of data obtained
from the real footage.
However, the data we used have limitations. The video footage is only one-
timeexampleofsuchprocess.Therefore,itdoesnotcapturethevastpossibilities
of seating arrangements. The questionnaire might suffer from being of artificial
nature and not reflecting the true basis of seat selection process entirely.
In the real seat selection process many factors can play a role. We discussed
them in the second section of this paper. Some of them could be neglected by
limitingthemodeledsituations,someofthemcannotbeproperlymodeled(e.g.,
the attraction among participants), some of them need to be further employed
in future models.
In future work we intend to capture our own footage of emerging seating ar-
rangements. The method of using questionnaires also has its advantages, hence
we intend to obtain much larger data collection with more refined test configu-
rations.Especially,itisworthtestingthecurrenthypothesisabouttheinfluence
of the center of the mass of already seated participants. Also some other test
configurations are needed to enlighten the behavior of participants when an au-
ditorium is nearly full. It would also be beneficial to enable a verbal feedback of
participants for individual configurations.
Another interesting research direction is exploration of various measures of
distanceandentropy.InthisworkwemostlyusedtheManhattandistancemea-Dispersion of personal spaces 11
sureandoursimplecustomentropymeasure.Explorationofothervariantsmight
bringevenmorerealisticapproachtohowparticipantsperceiveseatingarrange-
ments and also better model comparison.
One particular research question attracts us. A real seating arrangement is
formed locally by people gradually coming to an auditorium. The final seating
arrangement is obtained by a process we could call "crowd social computing".
We can understand participants and their collectivity as a computational unit
thatisablebyitsowngradualself-organizationtoreachacertainconfiguration.
Our question is how close (or how far) such a configuration is from a patterns
computed globally in advance, i.e., by means of optimization. That is because
several optimization areas deal with similar tasks, e.g., rectangle packing or, if
we perceive the auditorium as a set of individual rows, bin packing.
Lastbutnotleast,resultsofstudyingtheseatselectionprocesscanbeapplied
todesignoflectureorconcerthalls.Especially,toenablebetteruseoftheirspace
and to help participants become more comfortable and concentrated.
Acknowledgements The work of the first author was supported by Charles
University, project GA UK No. 234322. The work of the second author was
supported by the Czech Science Foundation project 23-07270S.
References
1. Alam, S.J., Werth, B.: Studying emergence of clusters in a bus passengers seating
preferencemodel.TransportationResearchPartC:EmergingTechnologies16(5),
593–614 (2008)
2. Bergtold, J.S., Yeager, E.A., Griffin, T.W.: Spatial dynamics in the classroom:
Does seating choice matter? Plos one 14(12), e0226953 (2019)
3. Guyot, G.W., Byrd, G.R., Caudle, R.: Classroom seating: An expression of situa-
tional territoriality in humans. Small Group Behavior 11(1), 120–128 (1980)
4. Haghighi, M.M., Jusan, M.M.: Exploring students behavior on seating arrange-
ments in learning environment: a review. Procedia-Social and Behavioral Sciences
36, 287–294 (2012)
5. Harms,V.L.,Poon,L.J.,Smith,A.K.,Elias,L.J.:Takeyourseats:leftwardasym-
metryinclassroomseatingchoice.Frontiersinhumanneuroscience9, 457(2015)
6. Kaya,N.,Burgess,B.:Territoriality:Seatpreferencesindifferenttypesofclassroom
arrangements. Environment and Behavior 39(6), 859–876 (2007)
7. Pedersen,D.M.:Privacypreferencesandclassroomseatselection.SocialBehavior
and Personality: an international journal 22(4), 393–398 (1994)
8. Schelling,T.C.:Micromotivesandmacrobehavior.WWNorton&Company(2006)
9. Staats,H.,Groot,P.:Seatchoiceinacrowdedcafe:effectsofeyecontact,distance,
and anchoring. Frontiers in Psychology 10, 331 (2019)
10. Thomas, J.A.P.K.: The social environment of public transport. Ph.D. thesis, Vic-
toria University of Wellington (2009)