Bearing-Distance Based Flocking with Zone-Based Interactions
Hossein B. Jond1
Abstract—This paper presents a novel zone-based flocking
control approach suitable for dynamic multi-agent systems
attraction
(MAS).InspiredbyReynoldsbehavioralrulesforboids,flocking reaction zone attraction conflict
separation repulsion repulsion
behavioralruleswiththezonesofrepulsion,conflict,attraction,
and surveillance are introduced. For each agent, using only alignment
bearing and distance measurements, behavioral deviation vec- cohesion
tors quantify the deviations from the local separation, local
and global flock velocity alignment, local cohesion, obstacle
avoidance and boundary conditions, and strategic separation
for avoiding alien agents. The control strategy uses the local
perception-based behavioral deviation vectors to guide each Fig. 1. (Left) Flocking behavior based on Reynolds boids model. The
agent’s motion. Additionally, the control strategy incorporates current pose of a nominal boid is indicated in solid red, while its future
adirectionally-awareobstacleavoidancemechanismthatprior- pose,determinedbytheReynoldsflockingrules,isshowningreen.(Middle)
itizes obstacles in the agent’s forward path. Simulation results Commonly used repulsion and attraction zones model in the literature.
validate the effectiveness of this approach in creating flexible, (Right)Proposedrepulsion,conflict(repulsionandattraction),andattraction
zonesmodel.
adaptable, and scalable flocking behavior.
I. INTRODUCTION boids behavioral rules with the previously mentioned semi-
mathematical interpretation. These zones consist of the zone
The concept of flocking draws inspiration from the syn-
of repulsion, the zone of conflict (repulsion and attraction),
chronized collective motion observed in birds, fish, and
andthezoneofattraction.Fig.1depictsthebehavioralrules
other social animals. In 1987, Reynolds [1] introduced three
in boids within the reaction zone, the conventional two-zone
rules that govern the flocking behavior of agents, known as
model, and our three-zone model.
boids, in interaction with neighboring agents. These rules,
Two-zone models typically utilize an attractive–repulsive
which are as follows, describe the flocking behavior of each
potential function with a local minimum at a desired sepa-
agent: i) collision avoidance: avoid collisions with nearby
ration distance. The potential function exhibits a repulsive
flockmates; ii) velocity matching: attempt to match velocity
force within the repulsion zone and an attractive force
with nearby flockmates; iii) flock centering: attempt to
withintheattractionzone,dependingonthepairwiserelative
stay close to nearby flockmates. The original form of these
distances of neighboring agents [2]. Although the potential
rules is that of verbal expressions, which are general and
fieldmanagesbothflockaggregationandcollisionavoidance,
susceptible to various interpretations. A more mathematical
it has limitations, including susceptibility to local minima,
interpretation of these rules is as follows: i) separation:
scalabilityissuesasthenumberofagentsincreases,andrigid
avoid crowding neighbors (within the repulsion zone); ii)
flock formation.
alignment: steer towards the average velocities of neighbors
Olfati-Saber [5] sought to express these behavioral rules
(within the attraction zone); iii) cohesion: steer towards the
mathematically, although not by their direct mathematical
average position of neighbors (within the attraction zone).
translations. Three types of agents, α-agents (cooperative
Flocking studies typically divide the reaction zone of an
agents), β-agents (obstacles), and γ-agents (leaders) are
agent within its perception range into two distinct regions:
introduced. Pairwise potential-based control laws are de-
the zone of repulsion and the zone of attraction [2], [3].
signed for α-agent interactions to form α-lattices, typically
A three-zone reaction model, which divides the agents’
hexagonal, and to manage interactions with obstacles and
perception range into non-overlapping zones for repulsion,
leaders. The α-lattice flock formation has gained significant
orientation, and attraction, has also been explored [4]. In
attention [6]–[8]; however, it lacks a key property of boids
these models, agents interact with each other based on the
flocking behavior—flexible and adaptable spatial configu-
behavioral zone in which their neighbors are located. We
ration. The boids behavioral rules do not dictate a lattice-
introduce a three-zone model to effectively implement the
type rigid spatial formation. The Vicsek [9] and Cucker-
Smale[10]modelshavebeenbroadlyacclaimedforexhibit-
*This work was funded by the Czech Science Foundation (GACˇR)
ingcohesiveflockingandconsensusformation.Nevertheless,
under research project no. 23-07517S and the European Union un-
der the project Robotics and Advanced Industrial Production (reg. no. both models originally lacked flock centering, inter-agent
CZ.02.01.01/00/22008/0004590). separation, or obstacle avoidance. Moreover, these models
1The author is with the Department of Cybernetics, Faculty of Elec-
led to rigid and occasionally regular patterns, lacking the
trical Engineering, Czech Technical University in Prague, Czech Republic
hossein.barghi.jond@fel.cvut.cz flexibility of the boids model.
4202
peS
61
]AM.sc[
1v74001.9042:viXraMost existing results aimed at flocking and formation
control are based on the assumption that agents exchange
their position and velocity information via a high-rate com-
munication channel, typically represented by directed or o
undirectedgraphs[11]–[13].Whilethismaybeexcessivefor surveillance
(conditional
current multi-agent and multi-robot systems, obstacles and repulsion)
attraction s
delays impact the communication quality [14]. Furthermore,
si conflict
thelimitationsandunreliabilityofglobalpositioningsystems ai ( ra et pt ura lsc it oio nn
)
and
drive the need for alternative flocking approaches that do ci repulsion
not depend on communication and instead utilize only the ri
agents’ onboard capabilities. On top of that, the original
i
flockingbehavioralrulesdesignedforperception-basedboids l
can be more closely replicated. f
This paper introduces a novel flocking control approach
based on local perception with zone-based interactions. In-
m
spired by the Reynolds rules for realistic flocking behavior,
g
eachagent’sperceptionrangeispartitionedintothezonesof
repulsion, conflict, attraction, and surveillance. By introduc-
ing the zone of conflict, where both repulsion and attraction
coexist, fluid-like motion is enabled. The outer zone of
surveillance is to detect and avoid alien agents. The interac-
information link
tionrulesdefineeachagent’sbehavior,frominteractionswith
nearby flockmates to avoidance of alien agents, obstacles,
or boundaries, and adaption to the global flock speed. The
Fig. 2. Repulsion, conflict (repulsion and attraction), attraction, and
interplay of repulsive and attractive forces created by these surveillance(conditionalrepulsion)zones.Thesetoftheneighborsofagent
rules produces the collective motion characteristic of real- iintherepulsion,conflict,attraction,andsurveillancezones,respectively,
areNr ={l},Nc={s,m},Na={f,g},Ns={o}.
world flocking behavior. The desired flocking behavior for i i i i
each agent is quantified within these zones with simple and
perception-based expressions relying solely on bearing and
s from the individual. Briefly, the reaction zone for each
i
distance measurements. The agent’s control input is directly
individual is divided into four zones as follows:
proportionaltoitsdeviationsfromthedesiredbehaviors.This
1) Repulsion: the innermost zone,
distributed control strategy allows MAS to achieve flexible
2) Conflict: the inner annular region,
and adaptive flocking behavior.
3) Attraction: the intermediate annular region,
The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section II
4) Surveillance: the outermost annular region.
providesthezone-basedflockingmodel,includingtheflock-
These zones are illustrated in Fig. 2.
ing rules, their mathematical translations, and the control
In our model, group flocking emerges from the following
strategy. Section III derives the flocking control strategy
individual behavioral rules, based on local perception in the
using only bearing and distance measurements. Section IV
zones defined above. These rules are as follows:
illustrates the simulation results. Section V concludes the
paper and outlines future work. 1) Local separation: Move away from neighbors in the
repulsion and conflict zones until they are positioned
II. ZONE-BASEDFLOCKINGMODEL
at the boundary of the latter zone,
A. Flocking Rules 2) Local alignment: Move to the weighted average ve-
For each individual, four concentric zones are defined: locities of the neighbors in the conflict and attraction
the innermost zone of repulsion, the inner annular region zones,
of conflict, the intermediate annular region of attraction, 3) Localcohesion:Movetotheweightedaverageposition
and the outermost annular region of surveillance. Without of the neighbors in the conflict and attraction zones,
loss of generality, we consider the repulsion zone to be 4) Strategic separation: Move away from alien agents
an interval in 1D, a circular area in 2D, and a spherical untiltheyarepositionedattheboundaryofthesurveil-
volumein3D,allwithinadistance(orradius)r .Theconflict lance zone,
i
zone is the inner annular region between the repulsion zone 5) Obstacle avoidance and boundary constraints: Move
and a larger perceptual zone, extending to a distance (or away from obstacles and boundaries,
radius) c from the individual. The attraction zone is the 6) Global speed alignment: Move to the global desired
i
intermediate annular region between the conflict zone and a flock speed.
further perceptual zone, extending to a distance (or radius) In the Reynolds boids model, separation is local, with
a from the individual. Finally, the surveillance zone is the agentsmaintainingacloseyetsafedistancefromflockmates
i
outermostannular region,extending toa distance(or radius) to ensure cohesion without overcrowding. In addition tolocal separation, strategic separation involves adopting a
larger distance from potentially dangerous alien agents to conflict zone
ensure safety and gain a tactical edge. Local alignment
shifts individual speeds toward those of their neighbors,
creatingafeedbackloopthateventuallystabilizestheflock’s
global speed. When some agents alter their speeds, their
neighborsadjustaccordingly,resultinginanewglobalspeed. ci
For smooth and coordinated group motion in a flock, it is
essential to maintain a cohesive global speed tailored to agent i
the flock’s specific purpose, such as foraging or escaping
predators. We model natural predator phenomena as alien
agents, which indisputably cause collisions, fragmentation,
and the dispersal of flock agents. These interaction rules
define each agent’s behavior, from interactions with nearby
flockmates to avoidance of threats, obstacles, or boundaries,
and adaption with the global flock speed. The interplay of Fig.3. Triangularobstacleavoidancezonealignedwiththeagent’sheading.
repulsiveandattractiveforcescreatedbytheserulesproduces
the collective motion characteristic of real-world flocking
behavior. eachwiththemagnitudeofαc where0<α≤1isascaling
i
factor and R is the rotation matrix
B. Mathematical Expressions of Flocking Rules
(cid:20) (cid:21)
Consider a MAS of n agents indexed by V ={1,··· ,n}. cos(θ) −sin(θ)
R(θ)= .
Letp ,v ∈Rd (d=1,2,3)denotethepositionandvelocity sin(θ) cos(θ)
i i
of the i-th agent, respectively, with i ∈ V. The set of the
neighborsofagenti∈V initsrepulsion,conflict,attraction, The heading vector h i represents the longest altitude of
and surveillance zones are, respectively, defined as N ir = the triangular reaction zone. The vectors h⊥ i + and h⊥ i −
{j|j ̸= i and ∥p −p ∥ ≤ r }, Nc = {j|j ̸= i and r < correspond to the halves of the opposite side to the longest
j i i i i
∥p −p ∥ ≤ c }, Na = {j|j ̸= i and c < ∥p −p ∥ ≤ altitudeofthiszonein2D.For3Denvironments,thesehalves
j i i i i j i
a }, Ns = {k| such that a < ∥q − p ∥ ≤ s }, where extend to the vertical dimension, this is crucial for avoiding
i i i k i i
q denotes the position of k-th alien agent and ∥.∥ is the objects in all directions.
k
Euclidean norm. Note that Nr ∩Nc ∩Na ∩Ns = ∅. For The mathematical translations of the flocking rules are as
i i i i
the sake of brevity, we define N¯r = Nr ∪Nc and N¯a = follows:
i i i i
N ic∪N ia. 1) Local separation:
For directionally aware and flexible collision avoidance
with obstacles and boundary constraints, a triangular obsta- els = (cid:88) ωls(p −p −c p j −p i ), (1)
cle avoidance reaction zone is defined around each agent, i j∈N¯r ij j i i∥p j −p i∥
enclosedwithinitsconflictzone,asillustratedinFig.3.The i
longest altitude of the triangle is aligned with the agent’s where ωlr is the local separation weight that the agent
ij
heading.Thus,theobstacleavoidancereactionzoneislarger i assigns to each of its neighbors in N¯r. The bearing
i
in the direction of motion to accommodate the agent’s need vector pj−pi between agents i and j carries only
formorespacetoreacttoobstaclesaheadduetoitsvelocity.
∥pj−pi∥
directional information. When scaled by a desired
Theoppositesidetothelongestaltitudenarrowsthereaction
distance c , it represents the safe or comfortable local
i
zone on the agent’s sides, where collisions with stationary
separation offset vector for agent i relative to neigh-
obstacles are less likely. The configuration of the triangle
boring agent j within agent i’s repulsion and conflict
(or tetrahedron in 3D) obstacle avoidance zone can adapt to zones.Thevectorels ∈Rddenotesagenti’sdeviations
i
the agent’s speed or mission. At higher speeds, the longest
from the desired local separation behavior and creates
altitude may extend (e.g., to the agent’s attraction zone) for
a repulsive potential for that agent.
more reaction space, while at slower speeds, the zone may
2) Local cohesion:
contract (e.g., to the agent’s repulsion zone).
For each agent, the heading vector is defined as 1 (cid:88)
elc = ωlcp −p , (2)
v i (cid:80) ωlc ij j i
h i =c i∥vi ∥, j∈N¯ ia ij j∈N¯ ia
i
where h has a magnitude of c . For 2D environments, two where ωlc > 0 is the local cohesion weight that the
i i ij
perpendicular vectors to h , formed by rotating h by ±π, agent i assigns to each of its neighbors in N¯a. The
i i 2 i
are vector elc ∈ Rd denotes agent i’s vector deviations
i
π h π h from the desired local cohesion behavior and creates
h ⊥ =αc R(− ) i , h ⊥ =αc R( ) i ,
i+ i 2 ∥h ∥ i− i 2 ∥h ∥ an attractive potential for that agent.
i i3) Local alignment: denotes its deviations from the desired global speed
1 (cid:88) alignment behavior and creates an attractive potential.
ela = ωlav −v , (3)
i (cid:80) ωla ij j i Remark 1. If the agent’s conflict and surveillance zones are
j∈N¯ ia ij j∈N¯ ia not defined, c
i
and s
i
default to r
i
in (1),(4), and (5).
where ωla > 0 is the local alignment weight that the Remark 2. Given the magnitude of the position vectors, it is
ij
agent i assigns to each of its neighbors in N¯a. The imperativetoscaledownthemagnitudeofelc whilepreserv-
i ij
vector ela ∈ Rd denotes agent i’s deviations from ing its direction to ensure consistency. One straightforward
i
the desired local alignment behavior and creates an methodistonormalizeelc,andthenmultiplyitbyapositive
i
attractive potential. weight.
4) Strategic separation:
C. Flocking Controller
es is = (cid:88) ω is ks(q k−p i−s i∥q qk− −p pi ∥), (4) The deviation of an agent from the desired flocking
k∈Ns k i behavior, as defined in (1)–(6), represents the flocking re-
i
where ωss > 0 is the strategic separation weight quirementsforthatagent.Thetotaldeviationvectorforagent
ik i∈V from the desired flocking behavior is expressed as
that the agent i assigns to each alien agent (i.e.,
n oo ffn s- efl to vc ek cm toa rte sag qe jn −t) piin N rei ps r. eT seh ne tsst arat se ag fi ec ds ie rp ea cr tia oti no an
l
e i =el is+el ic+el ia+es is+eo ia+eg ia. (7)
i∥qj−pi∥
Let u ∈ Rd denote the control input vector for agent
distance from a potentially dangerous alien k. The i
vector ess ∈ Rd denotes agent i’s deviations from i∈V. We define
i
u =g e , (8)
the desired strategic separation behavior and creates i i i
a repulsive potential. where g is the controller gain. Unifying each agent’s repul-
i
5) Obstacle avoidance and boundary constraints:
sion and attraction potentials into the control input creates
b−p an artificial flocking potential energy for that agent.
eoa =ωoa(b−p −c i ), (5)
i i i i∥b−p i∥ Remark 3. With boundary conditions, the environment is
where ωoa > 0 is the obstacle avoidance weight confined, and thus, even if some agents become separated
i
that the agent i assigns to the obstacle within its from the flock or the flock fragments, the agents will
obstacle avoidance reaction zone and b denotes the eventually reunite. In the absence of boundary conditions,
it is necessary to assume that each agent always has at least
closestpointontheobstacle’sedgeorboundarytothe
agent. The obstacle avoidance offset vector c b−pi oneflockmatewithinitsconflictorattractionzone.Toensure
i∥b−pi∥
this, a straightforward approach is to gradually increase the
represents a safe directional distance from obstacles
and boundaries. The vector eoa ∈ Rd denotes agent radius of the attraction zone until a flockmate is detected.
i
i’s deviations from the desired obstacle avoidance Remark 4. The controller (8) does not explicitly account
behavior and creates a repulsive potential. for bounded control effort. The control input of agent i are
Eachagent continuouslymonitorswhether itsobstacle bounded as follows,
avoidance reaction zone intersects with an obstacle or (cid:18) (cid:19)
∥u ∥ u
boundary.Astraightforwardapproachistocheckifits u i =um i axtanh umi ax ∥ui ∥, (9)
headingvectorh andtheperpendicularvectors(i.e.,in i i
i
2D,thevectorsh i⊥ +andh i⊥ −)intersectwithanobstacle where um i ax are the maximum acceleration magnitudes for
or boundary. If an intersection is detected, the agent agenti.Thesesmoothcutoffsatum i ax maintainthedirection
identifies b. The offset vector eoa is then computed while reducing the magnitude.
i
proportionally to the distance from the boundary and Remark5. Theresultantvelocityfrom(9)forphysicalagents
is used to adjust the agent’s position accordingly. The is subject to saturation. To prevent velocity saturation, the
triangular zone-based directional obstacle avoidance velocity of agent i is restricted as follows,
strategy focuses on obstacles directly ahead in the (cid:18) (cid:19)
∥v ∥ v
agent’s trajectory. By prioritizing avoidance in the v i =v imaxtanh vmi ax ∥vi ∥, (10)
heading direction, the agent minimizes unnecessary i i
reactions to obstacles that are less likely to impact its where v imax is the maximum velocity magnitudes for agent
path. i. If the computed velocity exceeds the agent’s limits, it is
6) Global speed alignment: smoothly capped at v imax.
v
ega =ωga(vd i −v ), (6) III. FLOCKINGWITHBEARING-DISTANCE
i i ∥v i∥ i MEASUREMENTS
wherev denotesthedesiredglobalspeedandωga ≥0 Ingeneral,multi-agentsystem(MAS)controlcanbeclas-
d i
istheglobalspeedalignmentweightorgain.Ifagenti sified into position-based, displacement-based, and distance-
is informed about v , then ωga >0, otherwise ωga = based control [15]. The controller in (8) falls under the
d i i
0. For each informed agent i, the vector ega ∈ Rd position-based category. In this approach, agents sense their
ipositions relative to a global coordinate system and actively yields
adjust their positions to meet the desired behavior, defined (cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
ωlcelc = ωlcp − ωlcp
in terms of desired positions within the global coordinate ij i ij j ij i
system. Consequently, this method requires agents to be j∈N¯a j∈N¯a j∈N¯a
i i i
(cid:88) (cid:88)
equipped with precise global positioning sensors. Let p ij = = ω il jc(p j −p i)= ω il jcd ijb ij,
p −p be the relative position vector , with p˙ =v −v .
j i ij j i j∈N¯a j∈N¯a
If the relative positions p are sensed with respect to the i i
ij or,
global coordinate system, meaning the agents know the
orientation of the global coordinate system, all flocking elc = 1 (cid:88) ωlcd b , (14)
b peha av nio dra p˙l d .ev Cia ot nio sen qv ue ec nt to lyrs
,
tc ha en cb oe nr te ro-e llx ep rre insse (8d )in trat ner sm itis ono sf i (cid:80) j∈N¯ iaω il jc j∈N¯ ila ij ij ij
ij ij
to a displacement-based control approach, where agents no which is the bearing-distance based local cohesion
longer need to sense their absolute positions. In distance- deviation vector for the agent i.
basedcontrol,agentsactivelyregulatethedistancesbetween 3) Bearing-distance based local alignment: Similarly to
themselvesandtheirneighborstoachievethedesiredbehav- thebearing-distancebasedlocalcohesion,wearriveat
ior defined by the inter-agent distances. Each agent senses 1 (cid:88)
the relative positions of its neighbors with respect to its el ia = (cid:80) ωla ω il ja(v j −v i).
own local coordinate system, with the orientations of these j∈N¯ ia ij j∈N¯ ia
localcoordinatesystemsnotnecessarilybeingaligned.While
Using(12),thebearing-distancebasedlocalalignment
distance-based control offers advantages in terms of reduced
deviation vector for agent i is given by
sensing requirements, it demands more interactions among
agents to maintain the desired behavior. Since flocking ela = 1 (cid:88) ωlad (b˙ +d˙ b ). (15)
a dg ise pn lt as c, el mik ee ntb -o bi ad ss e, dar ae ndpe drc ise tp at nio cn e-- bd ari sv ee dn cin ot ne tr ra oc lti av pe pe ron ati cti he es s, i (cid:80) j∈N¯ iaω il ja j∈N¯ ia ij ij ij ij ij
are more practical for flocking. In the following, we derive 4) Bearing-distance based strategic separation: Denote
the desired behavioral deviation vectors for flocking based b ik asthe bearing vectorbetweenagent i andanalien
on bearing measurements and inter-agent distances. This agent k, and d ik as the distance between them. The
eliminates the need for agents to have knowledge of the bearing-distance based strategic separation deviation
global coordinate system or their positions. vector for agent i is given by
Let the bearing vector b ij = ∥pp jj −− pp ii ∥ and inter-agent es is = (cid:88) ω is js(d ik−s i)b ik. (16)
distance d = ∥p − p ∥ be available from the onboard
ij j i j∈Ns
sensors.Theirrateofchangeisalsoeithermeasureddirectly i
or computed from the sensor data. The bearing vector b 5) Bearing-distance based obstacle avoidance and bound-
ij
and inter-agent distance d ij are related by ary constraints: Denote b ie as the bearing vector
between agent i and a boundary edge (of an obstacle
p −p
b ij = j d
ij
i. (11) o Tr he env bi er ao rn im nge -n dt i) s, taa nn cd ed i be aa ss edthe obd sis tata cn lece ab ve ot iw de ae nn cethe am nd.
boundary constraints deviation vector for agent i is
The time derivative of the bearing vector b is given by
ij
given by
1
b˙ ij = d (v j −v i)−d˙ ijb ij, eo ia =ω ioa(d ie−c i)b ie. (17)
ij
or, 6) Bearing-distancebasedglobalspeedalignment:Define
v −v =d (b˙ +d˙ b ). (12) the auxiliary vector
j i ij ij ij ij
uaux =g (els+elc+ela+ess+eoa). (18)
The desired behavioral deviation vectors for flocking, i i i i i i i
based on bearing measurements and inter-agent distances, For an informed agent i with the desired global speed
are derived as follows: vd, its velocity is estimated based on the bearing-
1) Bearing-distance based local separation: By substitut- distance measurements as follows,
ing the bearing vector b into (1) and using (11),
ij vˆ =vˆprev+δuaux, (19)
we obtain the bearing-distance based local separation i i i
deviation vector for the agent i as where vˆprev denotes the previously estimated velocity
i
(cid:88) at the prior time step, and δ is the time step duration.
els = ωls(d −c )b . (13)
i ij ij i ij Accordingly, the bearing-distance based global speed
j∈N¯ ir alignment deviation vector for agent i is given by
2) Bearing-distance based local cohesion: Multiplying vˆ
both sides of local cohesion in (2) by (cid:80) j∈N¯ ilaω il jc eg ia =ω iga(vd ∥vˆ ii ∥ −vˆ i). (20)Given that all behavioral deviation vectors are derived arrange freely as long as they maintain cohesion, separation,
in terms of bearing-distance measurements, the bearing- and alignment. In contrast, lattice-type flocking enforces a
distance based flocking control input vector for agent i∈V regular geometric arrangement.
is computed as
Remark 6. When c = c is set for all agent pairs in (13)
u =uaux+g ega. (21) i
i i i i and accounting (13) for maintaining cohesion, separation,
and alignment, the flock adopts a lattice-type geometric
The proposed distributed flocking scheme is summarized
configuration.
in Algorithm 1. For each agent, the behavioral deviation
vectors for local separation, local cohesion, local alignment,
strategic separation, and obstacle avoidance using bearing
IV. SIMULATIONRESULTS
vectorsandinter-agentdistances.Thesedeviationvectorsare This section presents an illustrative example to validate
aggregatedtoformanauxiliaryvectortoestimatetheagent’s the proposed flocking model. We consider a MAS with
velocity in alignment with a desired global speed. The n = 10 agents, indexed by V = {1,··· ,10}, operating in
control input for each agent is then computed by combining a 2D environment (d = 2). Each agent follows the double-
the auxiliary vector with the global speed alignment vector. integrator dynamics [16]
This distributed approach enables adaptive flocking control
(cid:40)
based on local interactions. In the algorithm, m denotes the p˙ =v ,
i i
(22)
numberofalienagents,orepresentsthenumberofobstacles,
v˙ =u ,
i i
and pmin and pmax specify the boundary conditions.
where u ∈ R2 denotes the control input (acceleration) for
i
Algorithm 1 Bearing-Distance Based Flocking with Zone- agent i∈V.
Based Interactions For each agent i ∈ V, the zone radii are set as follows,
1: Set d, n, v d, m, o, pmin,pmax. therepulsionzoneradiusr
i
=1.5m,theconflictzoneradius
2: Initialize o obstacles. c = 3.0m, the attraction zone radius a = 5.0m, and the
i i
3: Initialize p i for i ∈ {1,··· ,n} and pa k for k ∈ surveillance zone radius s i = 6.0m. The control gains are
{1,··· ,m}. uniformly set to g = 1.0 for all agents. We set weights
i
4: Initialize r i, c i, a i, s i, g i, v imax, v i, um i ax, ω il js, ω il jc, ω il ja, as follows, repulsion weights ω ls = 5, cohesion attraction
ω is js, ω io ja, ω ig ja for i,j ∈{1,··· ,n}, and v kamax, v ka for weights ω
lc
=0.75, and alignment attraction weights ω
la
=
k ∈{1,··· ,m}. 0.25. Additionally, the surveillance zone repulsion weight
5: for each time step do ω and obstacle avoidance weight ω are both set to 5.
ss oa
6: for each agent i∈{1,··· ,n} do The global attraction weights for each agent are defined as
7: Identify neighbors N ir, N ic, N ia, and N is based on ω
ga
= 5. The repulsion weights are slightly bigger than
distance measurements d ij, d ik, d ie. the attraction weight to prioritize separation and collision
8: Measure the bearing vectors b ij, b ik, b ie. avoidance over cohesion and alignment. The environment
9: Calculate separation deviation el is from (13). is confined, with boundaries from [0m,0m] to [50m,50m].
10: Calculate cohesion deviation el ic from(14). The environment also contains an irregularly shaped station-
11: Calculate alignment deviation el ia from (15). ary obstacle and contains an irregularly shaped stationary
12: Calculate strategic separation deviation es is from obstacle. An alien agent is trapped within a triangular zone
(16). within the environment. The flock agents are unaware of the
13: Calculate obstacle avoidance and boundary condi- alien’s presence until it enters their surveillance zone. The
tions deviation eo ia in (17). alien can detect flock agents within a radius of 9m. Once
14: Calculate auxiliary ua iux from (18). the flock agents come within range, the alien follows the
15: Calculate vˆ i from (19). closest agent until it reaches the borders of its triangular
16: Calculate global speed alignment deviation eg ia zone. The shorter surveillance radius of the flock agents
from (20). causesadelayedreactiontothealien’spresence.Theagents’
17: Calculate control input u i from (21). positions and velocities were initialized randomly within the
18: Bound control input u i from (9). range [0,10]m. The maximum speed and acceleration for
19: Update velocity v i. each agent are set to vmax = 4m/s and umax = 2m/s2,
i i
20: Bound velocity v i from (10) respectively. The desired global flock speed is defined as
21: Update position p i. v
d
= 3m/s. The total time is 100.0s, with a time step of
22: end for 0.1s.
23: for each alien k ∈{1,··· ,m} do Fig. 4 illustrates the resultant flocking behavior. The
24: Update pa k. alien follows the nearest agent when close, causing tempo-
25: end for rary fragmentation in the cohesive flock. Agents navigate
26: end for a narrow passage between the obstacle and boundaries, a
maneuver infeasible with conventional circular buffer zone
Boids-like flocking is unstructured, allowing agents to re- methods.50 50
Time:0.1s 50 50 Time:37.5s
Time:12.5s Time:25.0s
40 40
40 40
]m
[Y
23 00 ]m
[Y
23 00 ]m
[Y
23 00 ]m
[Y
23 00
10 10 10 10
0 0 0 0
0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50
X[m] X[m] X[m] X[m]
50 50 50 50
Time:50.0s Time:75.0s Time:87.5s Time:100.0s
40 40 40 40
30 30 30 30
]m ]m ]m ]m
[Y [Y [Y [Y
20 20 20 20
10 10 10 10
0 0 0 0
0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50
X[m] X[m] X[m] X[m]
Fig.4. Flockingbehaviorof10agents.Theflockingenvironmentisconfinedandincludesanirregularpolygon-shapedstationaryobstacleandanalien
agent. The alien (shown in black), constrained within the transparent blue zone, begins to follow the nearest flocking agent when within proximity. The
flockinitiallydemonstratescohesiveandcollision-freemotion;however,thearrivalofthealienagentcausesatemporaryfragmentation,thoughtheflock
eventually reunites. The agents navigate through a narrow passage between the stationary obstacle and the environmental boundaries. Such a maneuver
wouldnotbepermittedwithaconventionalobstacleavoidancemethod,whichemploysacircularbufferzonearoundirregularobstacles(depictedingray).
Figure 5 shows the profiles of inter-agent distances, motions like in realistic flocking, stochastic elements, such
speeds, and control inputs. Inter-agent distances stay above as stochastic weights or random perturbations in velocities,
the repulsion radius of r =1.5m, reaching up to 10 meters can be integrated into the model. The model’s reliance on
i
whencohesive.Fragmentationduetothealien’sinterference local sensing without communication highlights its potential
temporarily increases distance ranges before normalizing. for scalable applications in real-world autonomous systems.
Agent speeds remain below the maximum of 4m/s, with the Future work will extend the model to multi-robot systems
averageflockspeedclosetothedesired3m/s.Controlinputs including, unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV) flocking control.
are within the specified bounds of 2m/s2.
Thesimulationexampleillustratedtheemergenceofflock- REFERENCES
ing behavior in accordance with the zone-based flocking
[1] C.W.Reynolds,“Flocks,herdsandschools:Adistributedbehavioral
rules defined in subsection II-A. The agents, initially posi- model,”inProceedingsofthe14thAnnualConferenceonComputer
tionedandmovingrandomly,formedacohesivegroup,main- Graphics and Interactive Techniques, ser. SIGGRAPH ’87. New
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 1987, p.
tainingrelativedistanceswhilemovingasacollectiveentity.
25–34.
The flock effectively navigated around an irregular obstacle [2] C.Li,Y.Yang,T.-Y.Huang,andX.-B.Chen,“Animprovedflocking
with the proposed directionally aware obstacle avoidance control algorithm to solve the effect of individual communication
barriers on flocking cohesion in multi-agent systems,” Engineering
mechanism,whichallowedcloserproximitytotheobstacle’s
ApplicationsofArtificialIntelligence,vol.137,p.109110,2024.
edges and passage through a narrow gap, maneuvers not [3] F.Wang,J.Huang,K.H.Low,andT.Hu,“Collectivenavigationof
feasible with conventional circular buffer zone methods. aerialvehicleswarms:Aflockinginspiredapproach,”IEEETransac-
tionsonIntelligentVehicles,vol.9,no.1,pp.1040–1053,2024.
Despiteatemporaryfragmentationcausedbyanalienagent,
[4] I. D. Couzin, J. Krause, R. James, G. D. Ruxton, and N. R. Franks,
the flock reformed cohesively. These results highlight the “Collectivememoryandspatialsortinginanimalgroups,”Journalof
effectivenessofthebearing-distancebasedflockingapproach TheoreticalBiology,vol.218,no.1,pp.1–11,2002.
[5] R. Olfati-Saber, “Flocking for multi-agent dynamic systems: algo-
withzone-basedinteractionsforrealisticboids-likeflocking.
rithmsandtheory,”IEEETransactionsonAutomaticControl,vol.51,
no.3,pp.401–420,2006.
V. CONCLUSIONS [6] G. Wang, M. Liu, F. Wang, and Y. Chen, “A novel and elliptical
lattice design of flocking control for multi-agent ground vehicles,”
Weintroducedadistributedperception-basedflockingcon- IEEEControlSystemsLetters,vol.7,pp.1159–1164,2023.
trol model that leverages zone-based interactions to achieve [7] P.Hastedt,A.Datar,K.Kocev,andH.Werner,“Distributedflocking
controlwithellipsoidallevelsets,”in2024AmericanControlConfer-
adaptable and dynamic flocking behavior without relying
ence(ACC),2024,pp.1018–1023.
on communication or global positioning. By incorporating [8] H.-T.Zhang,Z.Cheng,G.Chen,andC.Li,“Modelpredictiveflocking
a conflict zone where repulsive and attractive forces in- control forsecond-order multi-agentsystems withinput constraints,”
IEEETransactionsonCircuitsandSystemsI:RegularPapers,vol.62,
teract, our model captures the fluidity and adaptability of
no.6,pp.1599–1606,2015.
natural flocking. Simulation results validated the model’s [9] T.Vicsek,A.Cziro´k,E.Ben-Jacob,I.Cohen,andO.Shochet,“Novel
ability to create and manage a cohesive flock in complex typeofphasetransitioninasystemofself-drivenparticles,”Physical
ReviewLetters,vol.75,pp.1226–1229,1995.
scenarios,suchasnavigatingconfinedspacesandinteracting
[10] F.CuckerandS.Smale,“Emergentbehaviorinflocks,”IEEETrans-
with alien agents. Toward less predictable and more lifelike actionsonAutomaticControl,vol.52,no.5,pp.852–862,2007.50 4 2
Average speed
45 3.5 Speed range 1.8
40 1.6
3
]m [ ecnatsiD
12233 50505
D Reis pt ua ln sc ioe nra rn adge ius(ri) ]s=m [ deepS12 .. 2 55
2] s=m
[ stupnI
lortnoC0011 ....
1
6824 Control range
1
10 0.4
5 0.5 0.2
0 0 0
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100 0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70 80 90 100
Time[s] Time[s] Time[s]
Fig. 5. Inter-agent distances, speeds, and control input profiles of the flock agents. The inter-agent distances consistently remain above the individual
repulsion radii (ri =1.5m for all i). When the flock is cohesive, the distances range up to 10m. Fragmentation occurs due to the alien’s interference,
causing a significant increase in distance range before returning to the initial range upon reunification. Agents speeds are below the maximum speeds
(v imax = 4m/s for all i), and the average flock speed stays close to the desired global speed (v d = 3m/s). Control inputs are within their bounds
(umax=2m/s2 foralli).
i
[11] G. Va´sa´rhelyi, C. Vira´gh, G. Somorjai, T. Nepusz, A. E. Eiben, and
T. Vicsek, “Optimized flocking of autonomous drones in confined
environments,”ScienceRobotics,vol.3,no.20,p.eaat3536,2018.
[12] W. Han, J. Wang, Y. Wang, and B. Xu, “Multi-uav flocking control
withahierarchicalcollectivebehaviorpatterninspiredbysheep,”IEEE
TransactionsonAerospaceandElectronicSystems,vol.60,no.2,pp.
2267–2276,2024.
[13] L.Shi,Z.Ma,S.Yan,andT.Ao,“Flockingdynamicsforcooperation-
antagonism multi-agent networks subject to limited communication
resources,” IEEE Transactions on Circuits and Systems I: Regular
Papers,vol.71,no.3,pp.1396–1405,2024.
[14] A. Bonnefond, O. Simonin, and I. Gue´rin-Lassous, “Extension of
flockingmodelstoenvironmentswithobstaclesanddegradedcommu-
nications,”in2021IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligent
RobotsandSystems(IROS),2021,pp.9139–9145.
[15] K.-K. Oh, M.-C. Park, and H.-S. Ahn, “A survey of multi-agent
formationcontrol,”Automatica,vol.53,pp.424–440,2015.
[16] L. E. Beaver, C. Kroninger, and A. A. Malikopoulos, “An optimal
controlapproachtoflocking,”in2020AmericanControlConference
(ACC). Denver,CO,USA:IEEE,Jul.2020,pp.683–688.