Optimality Gap of Decentralized Submodular Maximization under
Probabilistic Communication
Joan Vendrell and Solmaz Kia, Senior Member, IEEE
Algorithm 1 Sequential Greedy Algorithm
Abstract—Thispaperconsiderstheproblemofdecentralized
submodular maximization subject to partition matroid con- Input: LocalsetsP1,···,Pn andutilityfunctionf
straint using a sequential greedy algorithm with probabilistic Output: S¯⊂P satisfying|S¯∩Pi|≤κi,i∈A.
inter-agent message-passing. We propose a communication- S¯ SG←∅
aware framework where the probability of successful commu- S¯ i←∅fori∈A
fori∈Ado
nication between connected devices is considered. Our anal-
y
h
ps
i
agi ss
h
sili nin
g
gt hr sto
i
ed
n
qu
g
uc eie
t
nss
cp
eth
o
be
te
ann seto
i
dt ai lo oin
nnfl
to huf eet
n
ah
c
ge
e
enp
o
tr
n
’o sdb bea rtb
e
oi
r
ali
m
dst cii
n
ac
sin
to gp ret ti lhm
iae
ba ml ii lt
ie
ty
s
ysg
a
aa
g
np
e
d-, for s Sj ¯⋆ i∈ ← ←{1 a S¯, r i. g. m ∪. a, {xκ ssi ⋆∈} }Pd io \S¯ i∆(s|(S¯ SG∪S¯ i))
endfor
strategic decisions regarding agents that can broadcast their S¯ SG←S¯ SG∪S¯
i
messages multiple times in a resource-limited environment. endfor
Thisworknotonlycontributestheoreticalinsightsbutalsohas S¯←S¯
SG
practicalimplicationsfordesigningandanalyzingdecentralized
systemsinuncertaincommunicationenvironments.Anumerical
example demonstrates the impact of our results.
Keywords: Decentralized SubmodularMaximization; Probabilistic
Message-Passing; Optimality Gap Analysis. Fig.1. A directed chain graph where an arrow from one node to
another signifies an edge, indicating directional information flow
I. INTRODUCTION from the tail node (in-neighbor) to the head node (out-neighbor).
This paper considers the problem of decentralized sub- simple sequential greedy algorithm shown in Algorithm 1 is
modular maximization subject to a partition matroid when guaranteed to provide a constant 1/2-approximation factor
agents implement a sequential greedy algorithm with prob- solution for the submodular maximization problem (1).
abilistic inter-agent communication. We study a network of Submodular maximization problems subject to matroid
n agents, denoted as A = {1,...,n}, each equipped with constraintsappearinmanydata-centricproblems,suchasag-
communication and computation capabilities and intercon- glomerative clustering, exemplar-based clustering [2], cate-
nected via a directed chain graph (see Fig. 1). The goal for goricalfeaturecompression[3],anddatasubsetselection[4].
each agent i ∈ A is to select up to κ i ∈ Z >0 strategies To alleviate the burden on central sequential greedy solvers
from its local distinct discrete strategy set P i in way that a handling massive data, various parallel computing methods
normalmonotoneincreasingandsubmodularutilityfunction such as MapReduce-based solvers or federated learning
f :2P →R ≥0,P=(cid:83) i∈AP i,evaluatedatcollectivestrategy frameworks [5] have been proposed.
set of the agents is maximized. The optimization problem is In the domain of cyber-physical systems, submodular
expressed as maximization problems of the form (1) appear in various
optimal resource allocation and scheduling tasks, such as
optimal sensor placement [6], energy storage placement [7],
maxf(S) (1a)
[8], measurement scheduling [9], voltage control in smart
S∈I
I =(cid:8) S ⊂P(cid:12) (cid:12) |S∩P i|≤κ i, ∀i∈A(cid:9) , (1b) grids [10], and persistent monitoring via mobile robots [11].
These applications often require decentralized solutions,
where I is a partition matroid, restricting the number of whereagentsachieveaglobaloptimalsolutionthroughlocal
strategies each agent i ∈ A can choose to κ i. The agents computations and inter-agent interactions/communication.
access the utility function via a black box that returns f(S) Distributedsolutionsbasedoncontinuousrelaxations[12],
for any set S ⊂P (value oracle model). [13] are proposed in the literature to solve problem (1)
Submodular function maximization problems such as (1) over graph integration topologies, however, they often come
areoftenNP-hard[1].However,submodularity,apropertyof with significant communication and computation costs. The
set functions with deep theoretical implications, enables the sequential decision-making structure of Algorithm 1 lends
establishment of constant factor approximate (suboptimal) itself naturally to decentralized implementation over a di-
solutions for submodular maximization problems. A funda- rected chain graph using sequential message-passing, as
mental result by Nemhauser et al. [1] establishes that the describedinAlgorithm2[11].Startingwiththefirstagentin
the chain, each agent, after receiving S¯ —the compound
SG
This work is supported by UCI-LANL fellowship. Authors are with
choices of the preceding agents—from its in-neighbor, runs
the Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering Department of University of
CaliforniaIrvie,Irvine,CA,USAjvendrel,solmaz@uci.edu a local sequential greedy algorithm over its local dataset
4202
peS
61
]AM.sc[
1v97990.9042:viXraAlgorithm 2 Decentralized Sequential Greedy Algorithm
Input: LocalsetsP1,···,Pn andutilityfunctionf
Output: S¯⊂P satisfying|S¯∩Pi|≤κi,i∈A.
Everyagenti∈AinitializesalocalcopyofS¯ SG←∅
Everyagenti∈AinitializesS¯ i←∅
fori∈Ado (a) Information graph G (b) Information graph G
I I
ifi̸=1then
whenthechainisfullycon- when the chain is discon-
S¯ i←S¯
i−1 nected. nected.
endif
forj∈{1,···,κi}do
s S¯⋆ i← ←a S¯r igm ∪a {x ss ⋆∈ }Pi\S¯ i∆(s|S¯ SG∪S¯ i) F ni eg c. te2 d. edE gx ea ,m inp dl ie cs ato inf gin ff ao ilr um reat oio fn ms eh sa sr ai gn eg dt eo lp ivo elo ryg ,ie iss. shT oh we nd bis yco ren d-
endfor arrows on the message-passing graph.
SendS¯ i toagenti+1 any P ⊆P ⊆P and for all p∈P \P we have that
endfor 2 1 1
S¯←∪i∈AS¯
i
f(P ∪{p})−f(P )≥f(P ∪{p})−f(P ) (3)
2 2 1 1
to make its choices considering the choices already made.
Functionf isnormaliff(∅)=0andismonotoneincreasing
Afterdeterminingitslocalselectionsandincorporatingthem
into S¯ , the agent forwards this updated set to its out- if for any P 1 ⊂ P 2 ⊂ P we have f(P 1) ≥ f(P 2). For any
SG
p ∈ P and any P ⊂ P, ∆(p|P) = f(P ∪{p})−f(P) is
neighbor. This method of sequential message-passing can
the marginal gain of adding p to the set P.
also be facilitated through cloud access.
In practice, message delivery reliability between an in-
II. SEQUENTIALGREEDYUNDERPROBABILISTIC
neighbor and its out-neighbor is not always assured. The ef-
INTER-AGENTMESSAGE-PASSING
fect of delivery failures on a decentralized sequential greedy
algorithm has been explored in [14]; refer to Section II for To set the stage to address Problem 1, it is pivotal to
more information. This research examines how a specific first examine the consequences of failed message deliver-
message passing sequence impacts the optimality gap from ies and the ensuing disruption in the flow of information
a deterministic point of view. However, practical message during the algorithm’s operation. For this purpose, we use
delivery success is subject to unpredictable factors such as two specific graph topologies: the communication graph G,
communication channel strength, agent reliability, and net- which describes the sequence of message transfers, and the
workcongestion.Theimpactofprobabilisticcommunication information graph G I, which describes the dissemination of
onconvergenceinvariousoptimizationproblemsiswelldoc- information as a result of the message-passing process; see
umentedintheliterature,suchasin[15],[16].Thesestudies Fig. 2. In the information graph, an arrow from agent i
offer theoretical insights and have practical significance for to agent j indicates that agent j has successfully received
thedesignandanalysisofdecentralizedsystemsinuncertain informationfromagenti,eitherdirectlyorthroughmessage-
communicationsettings.Consideringtheseuncertainties,this passing by other agents preceding agent i.
paper addresses the pivotal research question of how prob- When implementing Algorithm 2, a fully successful mes-
abilistic message-passing affects the guaranteed optimality sage transmission sequence, depicted in Fig. 2(a), equates to
gapofadecentralizedsequentialgreedyalgorithm.Weframe the formation of a complete graph in the undirected version
this challenge as the following problem statement. of the communication graph G I. Conversely, interruptions in
Problem 1 (Probabilistic Sequential Message-Passing): the message-passing path, as shown in Fig. 2(b), result in
Withintheframeworkofthedecentralizedsequentialgreedy an undirected version of G I that lacks full connectivity. To
Algorithm 2, assume the probability of a message S¯ i being evaluatethedegreetowhichG I approachesacompletegraph
successfully transmitted from agent i to its out-neighbor configuration, we employ the clique number of the informa-
i+1 is p i. Determine the probabilistic optimality gap α
p
in tion graph, denoted by W(G I), as a metric. This measure,
indicative of the size of the largest clique (complete sub-
E[f(S¯)]≥α pf(S⋆), (2) graph) within the graph, serves to quantify the graph’s con-
nectivity level. In the context of Algorithm 2, a complete G
where S⋆ is the maximizer of optimization problem (1). □ I
yields a clique number equal to n. Interruptions in message
The main objective of this paper is to investigate and passage, however, diminish this number, signifying reduced
address Problem 1, focusing on characterizing the proba- information connectivity. One can expect that the larger the
bilistic optimality gap, α . Understanding α is crucial for cliquenumber,indicatingalargerfullyconnectedcomponent
p p
decentralized sequential greedy algorithms operating under intheinformationgraph,thebettertheoptimalitygapshould
probabilisticmessage-passingconditions.Thisworknotonly be for the sequential greedy algorithm. This hypothesis has
contributes theoretical insights but also has practical impli- been formally validated in [14], which demonstrates that
cationsfordesigningandanalyzingdecentralizedsystemsin the optimality gap of a sequential greedy algorithm tackling
uncertain communication environments. problem (1)–under the condition that agents’ policy sets do
Notation and definitions: For a discrete ground set P, 2P is not overlap–can be effectively quantified as follows.
its power set, the set that contains all the subsets of P. A Lemma 2.1: (Optimally gap under deterministic unsuc-
set function f :2P →R is submodular if and only if for cessful message-passing [14]): Consider the optimization
≥0sequenceoutcomeasseq.Theprobabilityofeachseq ∈S
seq
can be computed from a combination of n − 1 Bernoulli
distributions, each representing a possible connection be-
tween agents, that is, seq ∼B(p ,...,p ). Consequently,
1 n−1
computing the clique number and associated probability for
each sequence individually, will lead to an exponential time
computation to determine α . However, as seen in Fig. 3,
p
multiple sequence outcomes can have the same clique num-
ber. In what follows, we propose a methodology that groups
sequences based on their underlying structure. Specifically,
to determine the probability of each clique number, we
analyze the structure common to sequences that result in
Fig. 3. Examples of information sharing topologies. The top
plots show the communication graph G along with its consequent the same clique numbers and derive an exact formula for
maximum clique number. Arrow going from agent i to agent these probabilities. Our approach reduces the complexity of
j means that agent j receives agent i’s information. In red are
computingα topolynomialtime.Thecriticalinformationin
represented the communication failures. p
ourstudyisthatthecliquenumberisdefinedbythelengthof
problem (1). The optimality gap of the sequential greedy al- the longest directed path in the message-passing graph, plus
gorithmwhensomemessage-passingpathsaredisconnected one. We start with the following result. In this result and
is given by f(S¯ SG)≥ 2+n−1 W(GI)f(S⋆). □ what follows, to simplify the notation, we write P(W(G I))
This bound recovers the well-known optimality gap of 1/2 as P(W).
Lemma 2.2: (Probability of Achieving a Specific Clique
when the information graph is complete, i.e., W(G )=n.
I
Number in Probabilistic Sequential Message-Passing): The
When message-passing success is probabilistic, both the probability that message-passing sequences successfully
outcome of the algorithm’s execution and the clique num- achieve a clique number of l is given by
ber of the information graph become random variables. To
P(W=l)=P(W≥l)−P(W≥l+1).
deduce the expected optimality gap, we propose employing
Proof: P(W ≥ l) represents the probability that
a decision tree representation to account for all possible
message-passingsequencesachieveacliquenumberthatisat
message-passing outcomes. The upper diagram in Fig. 3 least l. These sequences, which satisfy W(G ) ≥ l, include
I
showsthisdecisiontreeforthenetworkoffiveagentsshown those with exact clique numbers ranging from l to n, and
in Fig. 2, where the red dashed lines represent unsuccessful these sequences are mutually exclusive. Thus, we express
messages and the black arrows denote successful ones. The
P(W ≥l)=P(W =l)+P(W =l+1)+···+P(W =n).
lowerdiagraminFig.3displaystheassociatedcliquenumber
for each message-passing sequence outcome. For instance, Similarly, P(W≥l+1)=P(W =l+1)+···+P(W =n).
The proof then follows by deducting P(W ≥ l+1) from
the leftmost path on the decision tree, indicating a scenario
P(W ≥l).
where no messages are successfully passed, results in a
In what follows, we explain how to compute P(W ≥
clique number of one. In contrast, the rightmost path, which
l + 1) to fully describe α from (4). P(W ≥ l + 1) is
signifies a scenario in which all messages are successfully p
equivalent to determining the probability of a family of
delivered, resulting in W(G )=n=5. With a comprehen-
I
message-passingsequencesachievingamaximumconnected
sive overview of all possible message-passing scenarios,the
component length of l. To this end, we introduce some
expected optimality gap of Algorithm 2 can be accurately
essentialdefinitions.Afamilyofmessage-passingsequences,
characterized as follows.
denoted by F, refers to a group of sequences that exhibit a
Theorem 2.1: (OptimalGapunderProbabilisticmessage-
specific pattern of connectivity. Thus, a family of message-
passing): Regarding Problem 1, the probabilistic optimality
passing sequences is an event associated with the random
gap α in (2) can be expressed as
p
variableseq.Withaslightabuseofterminology,wedefinea
(cid:88)n 1
α = P(W(G )=l), (4) generativesequenceastheguidelineinwhichaconnectivity
p l=1 2+n−l I structure is imposed on some of the edges of the massage-
where P(W(G )=l) denotes the probability that the clique passing sequence, e.g., the first two edges are connected,
I
number of the information graph G is l. but the fourth is not. Thus, a generative sequence becomes
I
Proof: Sinceα istheexpectedprobabilisticoptimality basis for a family of sequences in which all members
p
gap, we calculate it by summing over all the possible have the first two edges connected but the fourth not. We
optimality gaps computed from Lemma 2.1 based on the denote a generative sequence by g(C,D), where C,D ⊂
cliquenumberslwithintherangefrom1ton,eachweighted {1,··· ,n − 1}, respectively, specify the set of connected
by its probability P(W(G )=l). edges and disconnected edges of the generative sequence.
I
As shown in Fig. 3, a probabilistic communication chain For examples of generative sequences, see Fig. 4. We let
oflengthn−1has2n−1possiblemessage-passingsequences. F(g(C,D)) to denote the family generated by g(C,D).
Denote the collection of all such sequence outcomes as Lemma 2.3 (Probability of a family): Given a massage
S , and the random variable associated with any given passing sequence of n agents with the corresponding prob-
seqused for i ∈ {1,··· ,l + 1}, a family F(gl) with i ∈
i
{l + 2,··· ,n − l} will be dependent with families with
j ∈ {1,...,i − l − 1} as (C ∪ D ) ∩ (C ∪ D ) = ∅.
i i j j
Therefore,weareseekingfortheindependentsetoffamilies
in F(gl) which can defined as the sequences in F(gl) that
i i
(a) Generative sequences of size l=2. do not belong to previous families F(gl), in set notation
j
F(gl)\F(gl). Note that by invoking a general probability
i j
rule 1 we obtain
P(F(gl)\F(gl))=P(F(gl))·(1−P(F(gl))) (7)
i j i j
As a generalization for the previous expression, for the
sake of understanding, let us consider the families that
(b) Generative sequences of size l=3.
createsdependencytoF(gl),∪i−l−1F(gl),suchasS .Then,
i j=1 j i
Fig.4. Examplesofgenerativesequences,whichgeneratefamilies notice that
of message-passing sequences that have connected components of
P(F(gl)\S )=P(F(gl))·(1−P(S ))
atleastlengthtwo(topplot)andlengththree(bottomplot).Agreen i i i i
link indicates an imposed connected edge, and a red link indicates =P(F(gl))·(1−P(∪i−l−1F(gl)))
an imposed disconnected edge. For example, generative sequence i j=1 j
C in the top plot corresponds to g({3,4},{2}) and in the bottom (cid:88)i−l−1
=P(F(gl))·(1− P(F(gl))).
plot corresponds to g({3,4,5},{2}). i j
j=1
ability of successful message-passing of {p 1,p 2,··· ,p n−1}, To obtain a close expression for (6) it is needed to find
the probability of family generated by g(C,D) is the independent expression for each family. By a simple set
(cid:89) (cid:89)
P(F(g(C,D))= p (1−p ). (5) operation it can be seen that
i j
i∈C j∈D
Lemma 2.3’s proof follows trivially by writing all the out- ∪n−lF(gl)=(∪l−1F(gl))∪(∪n−lF(cid:101)(gl))
i=1 i i=1 i i=l i
comes generated by g(C,D) and adding their probabilities. =(∪l−1F(gl))∪(∪n−lF(gl)\S )
i=1 i i=l i i
We call two generative sequences independent when the
familiestheyinitiatearedistinct,inthesensethatthereexists where F(cid:101)(g il)=F(g il)\S
i
is the independent expressions for
no seq ∈S that is a member of the families generated by families i∈{l+2,...,n−l}. Therefore
seq
thesegenerativesequences.Forexample,intopplotofFig.4 P(W≥l+1)=P(∪n−lF(gl))
i=1 i
generativesequencesAandB,andAandCareindependent,
=P((F(gl),··· ,F(gl ))∪(F(gl)\S,··· ,F(gl )\S )))
but generative sequences A and D are not independent. 1 l−1 l l n−l n−l
Next, we walk through the process of creating a family =(cid:88)l+1 P(F(gl))+(cid:88)l P(F(gl)\S )
i i i
i=1 i=n−l
of message-passing sequences that feature connected com-
=(cid:88)l+1 P(F(gl))+(cid:88)n−l P(F(gl))·(1−(cid:88)i−l−1 P(F(gl))).
ponents with a minimum length of l∈{1,...,n−1}. For a i i j
i=1 i=l+2 j=1
specified l, we consider the generative sequences gl(C ,D ), (8)
i i i
where i∈{1,...,n−l}, with C i ={i,i+1,...,i+l−1} Each P(F(gl)) is computed from (5). Notice that equation
j
representing the pre-specified connected components, and
(8) can be computed in O(n − l) oracle calls to (5) and
D i = {i − 1} indicating the pre-specified disconnected there is no need of computing all of the 2n−1 the possible
components,notingthatD =∅.Thesegenerativesequences
1 sequences. With equation (8) at hand, from Lemma 2.2 we
eachcontributetothecreationoffamiliesofmessage-passing
arrive at
sequencesthatensurethepresenceofconnectedcomponents
at least l units long. Collectively, these sequences consti- P(W =l)=P(∪n−lF(gl))−P(∪n−l−1F(gl+1)). (9)
i=1 i i=1 i
tute ∪n−lF(gl), capturing the full set of message-passing
i=1 i Now, using expression (9), the proposed optimality gap in
sequenceswithconnectedcomponentsofatleastl inlength,
Theorem 2.1 can be easily computed in polynomial time.
as depicted in Fig. 4 through examples involving a chain of
That not only allows the computation of the gap itself, but
8 agents. It is noteworthy that
creates the possibility of pursuing an analysis of how the
P(W≥l+1)=P(∪n−lF(gl)). (6) algorithm would perform in the worst-case scenario as a
i=1 i
function of the parameters of the system.
Given the construction where C ∩D ̸= ∅ for any i ∈
i j+1
{1,...,l} and j ∈ {i,...,l +1}, as illustrated in Fig. 4, III. EXTRARESOURCESASSIGNMENTEFFECTONTHE
the families generated by gl for i ∈ {1,...,l + 1} are PROBABILISTICGAP
i
independent and thus mutually exclusive events. Therefore, By allowing repeated communication, we can increase
(cid:88)l+1 the probability of message delivery and subsequently im-
P(∪l+1F(gl))= P(F(gl)).
i=1 i i provetheoptimalitygap.However,multiplemessage-passing
i=1
However, families from i = l + 1 to i = n − l have
1FortwoindependenteventsAandB,wehaveP(A\B)=P(A)·(1−
dependencies that we discuss next. With the same statement P(B))[17].Fig. 5. Coverage Problem: (from left to right) initial distribution, coverage considering under no communication failure and coverage
under the outcome [0,1,1,1,0,1,1] of probabilistic communication. The disks show the coverage footprint of the sensors; the sensors
corresponding to each agent is colored similarly. Note that when communication chain breaks, some agents tend to go to the same
placement, reducing the coverage substantially; in the fully successful communication we achieve a solution f(S)=1879, while in the
disconnection situation f(S)=1246.
increases the end-to-end delay of executing the algorithm
and may not be possible in resource limited scenarios.
Therefore, the natural research question arises pertaining to
theallocationofafinitequantityofmultiplemessage-passing
rights in an optimal manner. Fig.6. Two different possible m communication chains.
Problem 2 (multiple message-passing right allocation):
Given the decentralized sequential greedy Algorithm 2, the communication strategy is a polynomial-time process.
let p i be the probability that the message S¯ i from agent Furtherexaminationof(9)revealsthatdoublingthemessage-
i ∈ A reaches its out-neighbor i+1. If only one agent can passing trail for agent k does not influence families where
transmit its message twice, which agent should be chosen i≤k−l+1. Thus, by equipping the system with a certain
to maximize α p in (2)? □ memory capacity, computation time of α p for all possible
The key observation is that the best agent to reinforce is not reinforcements can be significantly reduced.
solelytheonewiththelowestcommunicationprobabilitybut
a combination of communication reliability and the agent’s IV. EMPIRICALSTUDYOFTHEPROBABILISTICGAP
position in the communication chain. This is demonstrated
Consider a multi-sensor deployment problem where a
in our empirical study in Section IV.
group of 8 heterogeneous agents A = {1,...,8}, each
The message-passing process from agent i to agent i+1
with two sensors to deploy at some prespecified deployment
follows a Bernoulli distribution
points of interest. There are 25 total locations where sensors
T !
p (T ,r)= i ·pr ·(1−p )Ti−r, can be deployed, but each agent i ∈ A has access to
i i r!(T i−r)! i,0 i,0 only a subset of 12 locations, denoted by B i. The sets B
i
where p is the probability of agent’s successful delivery are not distinct, but using a simple trick, we can create
i,0
in one communication, T is the number of trials (messages the local selection set of the agents in a distinct way as
i
sent) and r is the number of successes (messages delivered). P i = {(i,b) | b ∈ B i} for i ∈ A. The environment includes
Sincecommunicationbetweentwonodesisestablishedwhen a set of 2,200 randomly generated sampled points, denoted
at least one success occurs, the probability that the recipient by V. The sensor deployment objective is to cover as many
gets the message is pointsfromV aspossible,whichisaccomplishedbysolving
a maximization problem of the form (1) with κ = 2 and
i
p i(T i,r≥1)=1−p i(T i,r =0)=1−(1−p i,0)Ti. (10) the utility function given by f(S) = (cid:80) g(p), where
p∈V
g(p) = 1 if there exists at least one element (ℓ,b) ∈ S
Notethatp (T ,r ≥1)isthenewcommunicationprobability
i i such that ∥c−p∥≤ρ ; otherwise g(p)=0. Here, ρ is the
fromagentitoagenti+1,forthesakeofunderstanding,we ℓ ℓ
coverage radius of sensor ℓ. This utility function is known
willkeepreferringtothemasp .ByconsideringaBernoulli
i to be submodular and monotone increasing. This problem is
measure, expression in Lemma 2.3 can be re-defined as
illustrated in Fig. 5.
(cid:89) (cid:89)
P(F(g(C,D))= (1−(1−p )Ti) (1−p )Tj, Forvisualizationofthecommunicationchain,welabelthe
i j
i∈C j∈D agents alphabetically. Now consider two different sequences
enablingustoanalyzethebehaviorofmessage-passingrein- of communication: lexicographic order ABCDEFGH and a
forcement for T i ≥ 1. Note that when the message-passing random shuffle DBHGFCAE, as shown in Fig. 6. Note that
count T i for a device i increases, the expected optimality with n agents, there are up to n! possible communication
gap needs to be recalculated. As previously mentioned, for chains that can be established. In this section, we consider
each l, calculating its probability P(W ≥l) requires a time onlytwosequencestoillustratetheparticularbehaviorunder
complexity of O(n−l). Consequently, the gap α p can be the allowance for extra message-passing. It is important to
determined within O(n·(n−1)), indicating that optimizing note that due to the probabilistic nature of the problem, the
2TABLEI
extended to scenarios where multiple agents are allowed
OPTIMALITYGAPANDUTILITYVALUEWITHANDWITHOUT
multiple message-passing opportunities. This extension can
COMMUNICATIONREINFORCEMENT.THEAGENTa⋆,WHICHIS
beframedasasetfunctionmaximizationproblemsubjectto
ALLOWEDTOCOMMUNICATETWICE,ISSELECTEDBASEDON
auniformmatroidconstraint,withα astheutilityfunction.
p
ACHIEVINGTHEHIGHESTαp.
What agents to reinforce can be efficiently decided using a
Sequence f(·) αp a⋆ e⋆ f′(·) α′ p sequential greedy approach, given that α p is monotone in-
ABCDEFGH 1324.21 0.2692 F 6 1610.88 0.3243 creasingand,ifshowntobesubmodular,wouldbenefitfrom
DBHGFCAE 1554.54 0.2788 C 4 1749.21 0.3313
theknownoptimalitygapof0.63.Futureworkwillfocuson
TABLEII formally proving the submodularity of α p and developing
αpVS.DIFFERENTAGENTa∈{1,···,7}ALLOWEDTOCOMMUNICATE strategies to optimize communication reinforcement in more
TWICE. complexscenariosinvolvingmultipleagents.Weaimalsoto
leverage insights from this study to design more robust and
Sequence 1 2 3 4 5 6 7
ABCDEFGH 0.2974 0.3192 0.3006 0.3012 0.3218 0.3243 0.3030 efficient decentralized systems for real-world applications,
DBHGFCAE 0.2998 0.3286 0.3028 0.3313 0.3166 0.3218 0.3004 particularlyinenvironmentswherecommunicationreliability
is variable and resources are limited.
results presented in this section are the mean values from
10,000 iterations for each scenario.
REFERENCES
TableI showsthe results ofour studyfor the communica-
[1] G. L. Nemhauser, L. A. Wolsey, and M. L. Fisher, “An analysis of
tion chains illustrated in Fig. 6. The second column presents
approximationsformaximizingsubmodularsetfunctions—i,”Mathe-
the average utility value over 10,000 iterations when agents maticalProgramming,vol.14,no.1,pp.265–294,1978.
use Algorithm 2 to determine their deployment locations. [2] P.-J. Honysz, A. Schulze-Struchtrup, S. Buschja¨ger, and K. Morik,
“Providing meaningful data summarizations using examplar-based
The third column shows α computed from (4). The fourth
p clusteringinindustry4.0,”ArXiv,vol.abs/2105.12026,2021.
column identifies the agent a⋆ whose communication is [3] A.Rostamizadeh,H.Esfandiari,L.Chen,MohammadHossein,Bateni,
reinforced by allowing two back-to-back communication T.Fu,andV.Mirrokni,“Categoricalfeaturecompressionviasubmod-
ularoptimization,”inicml,pp.515–523,2019.
trials.Theagenttobereinforcedisdeterminedbycomputing
[4] K. Wei, R. Iyer, and J. Bilmes, “Max-sum diversification, mono-
α p for all possible reinforcements, with these values shown tone submodular functions and dynamic updates,” in icml, vol. 37,
in Table II. The fifth column indicates the edge label that pp.1954–1963,2015.
is reinforced (the link coming out of a⋆). Finally, the sixth [5] A. Rafiey, “Decomposable submodular maximization in federated
setting,”ArXiv,vol.abs/2402.00138,2024.
and seventh columns present the average utility value and [6] N.MehrandR.Horowitz,“Asubmodularapproachforoptimalsensor
α′ computed from (4) under communication reinforcement. placement in traffic networks,” in American Control Conference,
p
As expected, we observe that α′ > α , indicating that pp.6353–6358,2018.
p p [7] J. Qin, I. Yang, and R. Rajagopal, “Submodularity of storage place-
reinforcement improves the expected optimality gap. This ment optimization in power networks,” IEEE Tran. on Automatic
improvement is also reflected in the utility values. Another Control,vol.64,no.8,pp.3268–3283,2019.
[8] M. Bucciarelli, S. Paoletti, E. Dall’Anese, and A. Vicino, “On the
noteworthy observation is that the reinforced agent is not
greedyplacementofenergystoragesystemsindistributiongrids,”in
necessarily the one with the lowest communication proba- AmericanControlConference,2020.
bility, and the reinforced edge differs between sequences. [9] S.T.JawaidandS.Smith,“Submodularityandgreedyalgorithmsin
sensorschedulingforlineardynamicalsystems,”Automatica,vol.61,
V. CONCLUSIONS pp.282–288,2015.
[10] Z. Liu, A. Clark, P. Lee, L. Bushnell, D. Kirschen, and R. Pooven-
This paper addressed the problem of decentralized sub- dran,“Towardsscalablevoltagecontrolinsmartgrid:Asubmodular
modular maximization subject to partition matroid con- optimization approach,” in ACM/IEEE 7th International Conference
onCyber-PhysicalSystems,2016.
straintusingasequentialgreedyalgorithmwithprobabilistic
[11] N.RezazadehandS.S.Kia,“Asub-modularrecedinghorizonsolution
inter-agentmessage-passing.Weproposedacommunication- for mobile multi-agent persistent monitoring,” Automatica, vol. 127,
aware framework that considers the reliability of communi- p.109460,2021.
[12] A. Robey, A. Adibi, B. Schlotfeldt, G. Pappas, and H. Hassani,
cationbetweenconnecteddevices,emphasizingitsimpacton
“Optimal algorithms for submodular maximization with distributed
theoptimalitygap.Ouranalysisintroducedthenotionofthe constraints,”ArXiv,vol.abs/1909.13676,2019.
probabilistic optimality gap α , highlighting its crucial role [13] N. Rezazadeh and S. S. Kia, “Distributed strategy selection: A sub-
p
modular set function maximization approach,” Automatica, vol. 153,
in understanding the expected performance of the sequential
p.111000,2023.
greedy algorithm under probabilistic communication. By [14] B.GharesifardandS.L.Smith,“Distributedsubmodularmaximization
characterizing α as an explicit function of communication withlimitedinformation,”IEEETransactionsonControlofNetwork
p
Systems,vol.5,no.4,pp.1635–1645,2018.
probabilities, we created a framework to answer critical
[15] J.Perazzone,S.Wang,M.Ji,andK.Chan,“Communication-efficient
questionssuchaswhichagentshouldbereinforced(allowed device scheduling for federated learning using stochastic optimiza-
multiple communications) to improve the optimality gap tion,”inIEEEINFOCOM2022-IEEEConferenceonComputerCom-
munications,(Piscataway,N,J),pp.1449–1458,IEEE,2022.
or how to compare the optimality gaps of various com-
[16] M.RostamiandS.S.Kia,“Federatedlearningusingvariancereduced
munication chains, where the order of agents in the chain stochasticgradientforprobabilisticallyactivatedagents,”inAmerican
changes while their reliability remains the same. In our ControlConference,pp.861–866,IEEE,2023.
[17] L. Bassham, A. Rukhin, J. Soto, J. Nechvatal, M. Smid, S. Leigh,
empirical study, we specifically focused on the case where
M. Levenson, M. Vangel, N. Heckert, and D. Banks, “A statistical
only one agent is allowed to communicate twice. However, testsuiteforrandomandpseudorandomnumbergeneratorsforcryp-
the methodology we presented is generalizable and can be tographicapplications,”2010-09-162010.