Brain Tumor Segmentation (BraTS) Challenge 2024: Meningioma
Radiotherapy Planning Automated Segmentation
Dominic LaBella 1 Katherine Schumacher 2 Michael Mix 2 Kevin Leu 3 Shan McBurney-Lin 3 Pierre Nedelec 3 Javier
Villanueva-Meyer 3 Jonathan Shapey 4 Tom Vercauteren 5 Kazumi Chia 6 Omar Al-Salihi 6 Justin Leu 7 Lia Halasz 7 Yury
Velichko 8 Chunhao Wang 1 John Kirkpatrick 1 Scott Floyd 1 Zachary J. Reitman 1 Trey Mullikin 1 Ulas Bagci 9 Sean
Sachdev 8 Jona A. Hattangadi-Gluth 10 Tyler M. Seibert 10,11,12 Nikdokht Farid 11 Connor Puett 10 Matthew W. Pease 13
Kevin Shiue 14 Syed Muhammad Anwar 15,16 Shahriar Faghani 17 Peter Taylor 2 Muhammad Ammar Haider 18 Pranav
Warman 19 Jake Albrecht 20 Andr´as Jakab 21 Mana Moassefi 22 Verena Chung 20 Alejandro Aristizabal 23,24 Alexandros
Karargyris 23 Hasan Kassem 23 Sarthak Pati 25,26,27 Micah Sheller 28,23 Aaron Coley 29 Christina Huang 1 Siddharth Ghanta 29
Alex Schneider 29 Conrad Sharp 29 Rachit Saluja 30 Florian Kofler 31,32,33,34 Philipp Lohmann 35,36 Phillipp Vollmuth 37,38
Louis Gagnon 39 Maruf Adewole 40 Hongwei Bran Li 41,42,43 Anahita Fathi Kazerooni 44,45 Nourel Hoda Tahon 46 Udunna
Anazodo 47 Ahmed W. Moawad 48 Bjoern Menze 49,42 Marius George Linguraru 15,16 Mariam Aboian 44 Benedikt Wiestler 42
Ujjwal Baid 26,50 Gian-Marco Conte 51 Andreas M. Rauschecker 3 Ayman Nada 46 Aly H. Abayazeed 52 Raymond Huang 53
Maria Correia de Verdier 54,55 Jeffrey D. Rudie 55,3 Spyridon Bakas 26,56,13,57 Evan Calabrese 58,3
1 Department of Radiation Oncology, Duke University Medical Center, Durham, NC, USA
2 Department of Radiation Oncology, SUNY Upstate Medical University, Syracuse, NY, USA
3 Center for Intelligent Imaging (ci2), Department of Radiology and Biomedical Imaging, University of California San
Francisco (UCSF), San Francisco, CA, USA
4 Department of Neurosurgery, King’s College Hospital, London, United Kingdom
5 School of Biomedical Engineering and Imaging Sciences, King’s College London, London, United Kingdom
6 Guy’s and St Thomas’ NHS Foundation Trust
7 Department of Radiation Oncology, University of Washington, Seattle, WA, USA
8 Department of Radiology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
9 Department of Radiation Oncology, Northwestern University, Evanston, IL, USA
10 Department of Radiation Medicine and Applied Sciences, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
11 Department of Radiology, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
12 Department of Bioengineering, University of California San Diego, La Jolla, CA, USA
13 Department of Neurological Surgery, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
14 Department of Radiation Oncology, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA
15 Children’s National Hospital, Washington DC, USA
16 George Washington University, Washington DC, USA
17 Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
18 CMH Lahore Medical College, Lahore, Pakistan
19 Duke University Medical Center, School of Medicine, Durham, NC, USA
20 Sage Bionetworks, USA
21 University of Zu¨rich, Zu¨rich, Switzerland
22 Artificial Intelligence Lab, Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
23 MLCommons
24 Factored AI
25 Center For Federated Learning in Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA
26 Division of Computational Pathology, Department of Pathology and Laboratory Medicine, Indiana University School
of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
27 Medical Working Group, MLCommons, San Fransisco, CA, USA
28 Intel
29 Duke University, Durham, NC, USA
30 Cornell University, Ithaca, NY, USA
31 Helmholtz AI, Helmholtz Munich, Germany
32 Department of Informatics, Technical University Munich, Germany
33 TranslaTUM - Central Institute for Translational Cancer Research, Technical University of Munich, Germany
1
4202
yaM
82
]VC.sc[
1v38381.5042:viXraLaBella and Calabrese, 2024
34 Department of Diagnostic and Interventional Neuroradiology, School of Medicine, Klinikum rechts der Isar, Technical
University of Munich, Germany
35 Institute of Neuroscience and Medicine (INM-4), Research Center Juelich, Juelich, Germany
36 Department of Nuclear Medicine, University Hospital RWTH Aachen, Aachen, Germany
37 Department of Medical Image Computing, German Cancer Research Center (DKFZ), Heidelberg, Germany
38 Department of Neuroradiology, University Hospital Bonn, Bonn Germany
39 Department of Radiology and Nuclear Medicine, Universit´e Laval, Qu´ebec, Qu´ebec, Canada
40 Medical Artificial Intelligence (MAI) Lab, Crestview Radiology, Lagos, Nigeria
41 Athinoula A Martinos Center for Biomedical Imaging, Massachusetts General Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
42 Department of Neuroradiology, Technical University of Munich, Munich, Germany
43 University of Zurich, Switzerland
44 Children’s Hospital of Philadelphia, University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
45 Center for AI and Data Science for Integrated Diagnostics (AI2D) and Center for Biomedical Image Computing and
Analytics (CBICA), University of Pennsylvania, Philadelphia, PA, USA
46 University of Missouri, Columbia, MO, USA
47 Montreal Neurological Institute (MNI), McGill University, Montreal, QC, Canada
48 Mercy Catholic Medical Center, Darby, PA, USA
49 Biomedical Image Analysis and Machine Learning, Department of Quantitative Biomedicine, University of Zurich,
Switzerland
50 Center for Federated Learning in Medicine, Indiana University, Indianapolis, IN, USA
51 Department of Radiology, Mayo Clinic, Rochester, MN, USA
52 Neosoma Inc. Stanford Medicine, Stanford, CA, USA
53 Department of Radiology, Brigham and Women’s Hospital, Boston, MA, USA
54 Department of Surgical Sciences, Section of Neuroradiology, Uppsala University, Uppsala, Sweden
55 Department of Radiology, University of California San Diego, CA, USA.
56 Department of Radiology and Imaging Sciences, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
57 Department of Biostatistics and Health Data Science, Indiana University School of Medicine, Indianapolis, IN, USA
58 Duke University Medical Center, Department of Radiology, Durham, NC, USA
Abstract
The 2024 Brain Tumor Segmentation Meningioma Radiotherapy (BraTS-MEN-RT) challenge aims to advance
automated segmentation algorithms using the largest known multi-institutional dataset of radiotherapy planning brain
MRIs with expert-annotated target labels for patients with intact or post-operative meningioma that underwent either
conventional external beam radiotherapy or stereotactic radiosurgery. Each case includes a defaced 3D post-contrast
T1-weighted radiotherapy planning MRI in its native acquisition space, accompanied by a single-label “target volume”
representing the gross tumor volume (GTV) and any at-risk post-operative site. Target volume annotations adhere
to established radiotherapy planning protocols, ensuring consistency across cases and institutions. For pre-operative
meningiomas, the target volume encompasses the entire GTV and associated nodular dural tail, while for post-operative
cases,itincludesat-riskresectioncavitymarginsasdeterminedbythetreatinginstitution. Caseannotationswerereviewed
and approved by expert neuroradiologists and radiation oncologists. Participating teams will develop, containerize, and
evaluate automated segmentation models using this comprehensive dataset. Model performance will be assessed using
the lesion-wise Dice Similarity Coefficient and the 95% Hausdorff distance. The top-performing teams will be recognized
at the Medical Image Computing and Computer Assisted Intervention Conference in October 2024. BraTS-MEN-RT
is expected to significantly advance automated radiotherapy planning by enabling precise tumor segmentation and
facilitating tailored treatment, ultimately improving patient outcomes.
Keywords
Meningioma, BraTS, Machine Learning, Segmentation, BraTS-Meningioma, Image Analysis Challenge, Artificial
Intelligence, AI, Radiation Oncology, Radiotherapy, Stereotactic Radiosurgery, Gamma Knife
©2024LaBellaandCalabrese.License:CC-BY4.0
22024 BraTS-MEN-RT Challenge
1. Introduction and Related Works ning, radiotherapy, and treatment response assessment. To
date, published data on reliable automated methods for
M eningioma is the most common primary intracra- meningioma GTV segmentation is limited. Most tumor
nial tumor and comprises 40.8% of all CNS tu-
segmentation studies, including all prior BraTS challenges,
mors and 55.4% of all non-malignant CNS tumors
have focused exclusively on pre-operative tumors after pre-
[1, 2, 3]. The vast majority, 99.1%, are non-malignant and
processing to a 1mm3 isotropic resampled image space,
can be followed with serial magnetic resonance imaging
which limits clinical utility [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25, 26].
(MRI) if asymptomatic [3, 4, 5]. WHO grade I comprise
Segmenting post-operative tumors is a considerably more
80% of meningioma and standard of care for tumors re-
complex challenge but is also considerably more clinically
quiring treatment is maximal surgical resection if surgi-
relevant. Recentstudieshavereportedonpost-operativeau-
cally accessible. Higher grade meningiomas (World Health
tomated segmentation models for glioma, but none known
Organization [WHO] grades II and III), if left untreated,
to date have focused on post-operative meningioma seg-
are associated with higher morbidity and mortality rates
mentation [27, 28]. The BraTS 2023 Meningioma (2023
and often recur despite optimal management [6, 7, 8, 9].
BraTS-MEN) challenge focused on pre-operative menin-
For WHO grade I meningioma, if gross tumor resection
gioma cases and utilized multi-sequence co-registered brain
is achieved, then surveillance imaging alone is often ap-
MRI studies to segment regions of interest including the
propriate. In cases of subtotal resection or non-resectable
whole tumor (WT), tumor core (TC), and enhancing tu-
tumors, observation or radiotherapy with external beam ra-
mor (ET) [20]. The TC consisted of all enhancing and
diotherapy (EBRT) or stereotactic radiosurgery (SRS) can
non-enhancing tumor. The WT consisted of the TC and
be considered [10, 11, 12, 13, 14]. The Simpson grading
all surrounding non-enhancing T2/FLAIR hyperintensity
system for meningioma resection classifies resection from
(SNFH). However, in radiotherapy, the SNFH does not play
a grade of 0 – 5 and helps guide indication for adjuvant
a common role in the delineation of target volumes for
radiotherapy [7, 15]. Essentially all grade III and many
meningioma.
grade II meningiomas will be treated with radiotherapy,
Furthermore, previous BraTS challenges utilized skull-
either as a primary treatment modality, as an adjunct in
stripping, whereas the 2024 Brain Tumor Segmentation
the immediate post-operative setting, and/or in the setting
Meningioma Radiotherapy (BraTS-MEN-RT) challenge will
of meningioma recurrence [16, 17, 18]. For WHO grade II
preserve extracranial structures and instead use automated
and III meningioma, radiotherapy has shown improvement
defacing algorithms to preserve patient anonymity [29]. By
in progression free survival and overall survival [10, 19].
including extracranial tissue, using a more generous defac-
Accuratesegmentationofthepre-operativemeningioma
ing anonymization algorithm, the automated segmentation
grosstumorvolume(GTV)andclinicaltargetvolume(CTV)
models will be more relevant and deployable into clinical
is essential for radiotherapy planning. The phase II EORTC
workflows. Finally, target labels will consist of a single
22042-026042 study on adjuvant postoperative high-dose
tumor region (the GTV) in the native acquisition space. To
radiotherapy for atypical and malignant meningioma defines
reduce barriers to participation, we will provide software to
the GTV as visible tumor which is the region of enhance-
automatically convert challenge data to a canonical refer-
ment on post-operative brain MRI [14]. They define the
ence space like previous BraTS challenges, as well as to
clinical target volume CTV1 as the GTV and/or sub clinical
convert resulting labels back to patient native space for
microscopic tumor (may include the pre-operative tumor
subsequent evaluation.
bed, peritumoral edema, hyperostotic changes if any, and
dural enhancement or thickening as seen in the CT/MRI at The purpose of the BraTS-MEN-RT challenge is to cre-
diagnosis) plus a 3D 10 mm margin [14]. The CTV2 was ate a community benchmark for automated segmentation
defined as the GTV and/or sub clinical microscopic tumor of meningioma GTV based on pre-radiotherapy planning
plus a 3D 5 mm margin [14]. The phase II RTOG 0539 brain MRI exams. This task, if successful, will provide an
study of observation for low-risk meningioma and radio- important tool for the objective delineation of meningioma
therapy for intermediate and high-risk meningioma defines GTV, which will be the first BraTS challenge that is im-
GTV as the tumor bed and residual enhancement, including mediately relevant for radiotherapy planning. Participating
nodular dural tail enhancement, but not small linear dural teams’automatedsegmentationmodelswillbeopen-source,
tail enhancement [12, 13]. providing both industry partners and clinical researchers
the opportunity to utilize and build upon the radiotherapy
Unfortunately, GTV and CTV segmentation is complex,
planning automated segmentation models for meningioma.
time-consuming, and requires considerable expertise. Au-
tomated tumor segmentation on brain MRI has matured
into a clinically viable tool that can provide objective as-
2. Methods
sessments of tumor volume and can assist in surgical plan-
3LaBella and Calabrese, 2024
2.1 Data Description
Each case within the BraTS-MEN-RT challenge consists
exclusively of radiotherapy planning brain MRI scans in
either the pre-operative or post-operative setting. All brain
MRI studies included tumors in the field of view that were
radiographically or pathologically consistent with menin-
gioma. Brain MRI studies consisted of a single series (3D
postcontrast T1-weighted imaging, most commonly spoiled
gradient echo or similar (T1c)) in native acquisition space,
which mimics the data available for most radiotherapy plan-
ning scenarios. This has evolved from the 4 multi-sequence
MRI scans that were co-registered to a canonical atlas
space, SRI24, with 1mm3 isotropic resampling that were
utilizedineachoftheBraTS2023 automatedsegmentation
challenges [20, 26, 24, 25, 30].
2.2 Defining Meningioma Target Volume
Figure 1: Image panels depicting a case that utilizes a ra-
For the purposes of the BraTS-MEN-RT challenge, there
diation planning Gamma Knife headframe. Pan-
will be a single target volume label. The target volume
els A, B, and C depict an intact meningioma
annotation protocol will differ depending on whether the
(red) in Meckel’s cave on T1c radiation planning
radiotherapyplanningscanwasobtainedinthepre-operative
axial, sagittal, and coronal images, respectively.
or post-operative setting.
Note that this challenge’s defacing technique pre-
If the meningioma radiotherapy course was planned in
servesthismeningiomaascomparedtotheBraTS
the pre-operative setting, then the target volume label will
2023MeningiomaSegmentationchallenge’sskull-
comprise of the portion of the tumor visible on the T1c
stripping pre-processing technique which would
brain MRI (Figure 1).
have excluded this case. Panel D shows the SRS
If the meningioma radiotherapy course was planned in
localizer box fiducials attached to a standard
the post-operative setting, then the target will comprise of
Gamma Knife headframe.
the post-op resection bed and any residual ET on the T1c
brain MRI (Figures 2 and 3).
These label definitions are clinically useful in radiother-
of the training set in late May 2024. Additional academic
apy planning and were agreed upon by a coalition of BraTS
centers have the opportunity to contribute additional data
organizers consisting of board-certified radiation oncolo-
prior to the release of validation set images in June-July
gistsandboard-certifiedfellowshiptrainedneuroradiologists.
2024andinternalevaluationoftestsetcasesinAugust2024.
The target volume labels were agreed upon after review
Cases were identified based on any pre-operative or post-
of the EORTC 22042-026042 and RTOG 0589 annotation
operativemeningiomathathadundergoneradiotherapywith
protocols [12, 13, 14].
any radiotherapy technique. Radiotherapy techniques could
All visible intracranial meningiomas are included in the
vary between EBRT or SRS, and utilized either photon,
GTV label, even if they were not treated in the real world
Cobalt-60, or protons as the radiation source. For patients
clinical scenario (Figure 4). The rationale for labeling all
that underwent SRS with GKRS, the stereotactic localizer
meningiomaistoallowthetreatingradiationoncologyteam
fiducials are visible within the brain MRI as seen in Figures
the opportunity to utilize automated segmentations for any
1 and 2. The stereotactic localizer fiducials correspond to
and all meningioma within the patient’s respective brain
the real-world Gamma Knife headframe like the unmodified
MRI. This approach also ensures that automated segmen-
figure depicted by Wiant et al as shown in Figure 5 [31, 32].
tation algorithm training will not be adversely affected by
Case collection methods were chosen by each partici-
non-segmented non-target meningiomas.
pating site independently to promote contribution to the
challenge dataset and data contributors were not required
2.3 Participating Sites
to disclose data collection methods or MRI protocol infor-
Approximately 700 radiotherapy planning T1c brain MRI mation. Like prior BraTS challenges, imaging parameters
scans were contributed from 6 academic medical centers including field strength, echo/repetition time, and image
across the United States (Table 1) at the time of release resolution, varied considerably between and within institu-
42024 BraTS-MEN-RT Challenge
Figure 2: Panels A, B, and C depict an extra-axial menin-
gioma overlying the left frontal lobe in T1c ra-
diotherapy planning axial, sagittal, and coronal Figure 3: Panels A, B, and C showing a postoperative left
views respectively. Note that these images con- parietal meningioma target volume (red) in the
tain “zipper” artifact as demonstrated by the axial, sagittal, and coronal planes, respectively,
streaking horizontal white lines seen in panels B as delineated by the treating institution.
and C, which may be caused by any combina-
tion of radiofrequency interference, inadequate
shielding, or hardware issues. Panel D shows the
Table 1: This table presents the total number of cases pro-
SRSlocalizerboxfiducialsattachedtoastandard
vided by each institution at the time of training
Gamma Knife headframe.
datareleaseinlateMay2024. Notethatthetrain-
ing data was released with ground truth labels.
The included institutions are University of Califor-
tions [20]. Participating sites had the option of submitting
niaSanFrancisco(UCSF),StateUniversityofNew
their own GTV labels for review for potential inclusion in
York Upstate Medical University (SUNY), Univer-
the BraTS-MEN-RT challenge. However, all site-submitted
sity of Washington (UW), University of Missouri
GTV labels underwent rigorous evaluation by the BraTS
(MISS), Duke University (Duke), and University
expert annotators to ensure consistency with the challenge
of San Diego (UCSD).
annotation protocol. If the site-submitted GTV labels did
not conform to the challenge annotation protocol, then
Total Count
they underwent manual revision until conformity was met
as described in section 2.6. Overall 800
UCSF 240
SUNY 220
2.4 Image Data Preprocessing
UW 150
All radiotherapy planning images underwent pre-processing. MISS 90
This included conversion from DICOM and DICOM-RT to DUKE 60
Neuroimaging Informatics Technology Initiative (NIfTI) im- UCSD 30
age file format using dcmrtstruct2nii followed by automated
defacing using the Analysis of Functional Neuroimages tool-
box (AFNI) as seen in Figure 6 [33, 34, 35]. All radiotherapy structures provided within the DICOM-
Thisdecisionwasmadeduetothesuperiorperformance RT structure sets were evaluated, and only the treating
of increased inclusion of meningioma tumors within the institutions’ GTV structure for each respective case was
respective pre-processed brain MRI using the AFNI defacing included in the dataset. The institutions’ GTV structure
method compared to other defacing algorithms [33, 34, 36]. was set as the starting target label before manual revision.
5LaBella and Calabrese, 2024
Figure 4: Panels A, B, and C depict an anterior left falx Figure 5: A Leksell Model G GK headframe fixed to a skull
meningioma (red) on axial, sagittal, and coronal phantom. This figure shows the CT fiducial box
images respectively. Panel B demonstrates an that is used to orient the image reference frame
area of hypointense edema between two separate in LGP.
anterior falcine meningiomas. Note that the hy-
pointenseedemaregionisnotlabeledsincethisis
not typically treated in meningioma radiotherapy.
Panel C shows a coronal slice demonstrating the
distinct intensity difference between the zero T1c
intensity, true black, defaced region (blue arrow)
compared to the low T1c intensity, gray, region
outside the patient’s head (green arrow).
Figure 6: Example of a brain MRI before and after auto-
mated defacing.
Manual quality control was performed on all pre-processed
images to ensure adequate image preparation without total
exclusion of meningioma. If there was only partial inclusion
2.5 Automated Pre-segmentation
of meningioma within the face anonymized brain MRI as
seen in Figure 7, then that respective case was still in-
For cases that did not have a GTV provided by the treating
cluded within the dataset after manual revision of the face
institution, a pre-segmentation algorithm was performed
anonymized brain MRI mask to ensure total meningioma
on the respective brain MRI. A deep convolutional neural
volume inclusion. If the AFNI defacing algorithm removed
network-based automated segmentation model, nnUnet,
meningioma from the field-of-view in its entirety, then the
was used for automated GTV pre-segmentation [38]. The
case was removed from the challenge dataset. All manual
initial model was trained on the 1424 brain MRI from the
quality control was performed using ITKSnap, a free open-
BraTS 2023 Intracranial Meningioma Segmentation Chal-
source, multi-platform interactive software application used
lenge (2023 BraTS-MEN) [20, 21]. However, the cases
to navigate and manually segment structures in 3D and 4D
in the 2023 BraTS-MEN challenge consisted of treatment
biomedical images [37].
naive skull-stripped multi-sequence images that were co-
registered to the SRI24 atlas with isotropic 1mm3 resam-
62024 BraTS-MEN-RT Challenge
Figure 8: Meningioma sub-compartments considered in the
BraTS Pre-operative Meningioma Dataset. Im-
age panels A-C denote the different tumor sub-
compartments included in manual annotations;
(A) ET (blue) visible on a T1-weighted post-
contrast image; (B) the non-enhancing TC (red)
visible on a T1-weighted post-contrast image;
(C)thesurroundingFLAIRhyperintensity(green)
visible on a T2/FLAIR-weighted image; (D) com-
Figure 7: Example of an axial MRI image-label pair slice bined segmentations generating the final tumor
where the treating institution’s meningioma GTV sub-compartment labels provided in the BraTS
extended outside of the defaced image. Pre-operative Meningioma Dataset.
pling, which limits generalization to post-operative and nior radiation oncology resident (D.L.) was performed per
post-treatment tumors in native acquisition space and the annotation protocol outlined in section 2.2. Common
with face removal [39]. The multi-sequence images in- corrective changes included segmenting additional menin-
cluded T1-weighted (T1), T2-weighted (T2), T2-FLAIR gioma targets within the image range, smoothing out label
(FLAIR), and T1c. The 2023 BraTS-MEN cases had multi- edges on adjacent axial slices to most accurately reflect
compartment labels consisting of an ET, TC, and surround- the meningiomas, and correcting for any misregistration
ing non-enhancing T2/FLAIR hyperintensity. Therefore, in between the image-label pair. These common errors are
order to most accurately reflect the image and labels used demonstrated in Figure 9. After initial manual review and
in the BraTS-MEN-RT challenge, only the TC region of correction, each case was further reviewed by a fellowship
interest and the T1c skull-stripped image were used for trained neuroradiologist “approver” (E.C.) before inclusion
training of the pre-segmentation algorithm. The TC re- in the challenge dataset. Manual review and corrections
gion of interest consisted of the addition of the ET label were performed using ITKSnap [37].
(blue) and non-enhancing TC label (red) as shown in Fig-
ure 8, which is an unmodified figure from LaBella et al
3. Discussion
[20, 21]. The pre-segmentation model was applied to all of
the cases without institution GTV labels, which comprised 3.1 Potential Benefits of the Challenge
only about 10% of the overall case data. The automated
The BraTS 2024 Meningioma challenge leverages a unique
pre-segmentation algorithm was retrained on an iterative
and extensive dataset, offering significant advancements
basis as additional BraTS-MEN-RT cases were reviewed.
in the automated segmentation of meningiomas on radio-
The purpose of retraining the model on an iterative basis
therapy planning brain MRI. By focusing on a single T1c
was to improve its ability to recognize meningioma within
MRI sequence in its native resolution, BraTS-MEN-RT
the brain MRI.
addresses the need for clinically practical and easily deploy-
able models. This approach contrasts with previous BraTS
2.6 Manual Corrections
challenges that often required multiple MRI sequences and
For each meningioma case, after either automated pre- pre-processing steps including co-registration to an atlas
segmentation or processing of the provided institution’s spacewithisotropicresamplingandextensiveskull-stripping
image-label pair, manual review and correction by a se- [20, 22, 23, 25, 24, 26]. After completion of the challenge,
7LaBella and Calabrese, 2024
tomated segmentation tools can enhance the overall quality
and reproducibility of radiotherapy treatments.
Automated segmentation lays the groundwork for de-
veloping predictive models that can non-invasively identify
meningioma grade, subtype, and aggressiveness. These
models have the potential to serve as tools for assessing
tumor progression and response to therapies, thereby facili-
tatingpersonalizedtreatmentplans. The2023BraTS-MEN
challenge utilized multi-sequence multi-compartment labels
which provide even more diagnostic radiographic data re-
garding the meningioma cases. Future research can build
on these models to develop tools that predict the risk of
recurrence and guide follow-up care.
3.3 Recommendation to Challenge Participants
Participants in the BraTS-MEN-RT challenge are encour-
aged to use additional public meningioma image datasets,
such as the 1424 pre-operative intact meningioma cases
from the 2023 BraTS-MEN challenge [20, 21]. In order to
best match the case data in the BraTS-MEN-RT challenge,
only the T1c sequence and a single target label should be
included. The 2023 BraTS-MEN challenge’s TC region
of interest best represents the BraTS-MEN-RT target la-
bel. The TC region of interest comprises the enhancing
tumor (blue) and the non-enhancing tumor core (red) as
seen in Figure 8 [20, 21]. Note that the 2023 BraTS-MEN
Figure 9: Axial,sagittal,andcoronalbrainMRIofapatient
casesunderwentpre-processingincludingskull-strippingand
with multiple meningioma demonstrating the dif-
1mm3 isotropic resampling to the SRI24 atlas space, which
ference between the provided institution’s GTV
may introduce model development difficulties due to the
asseeninpanelsA1, B1, andC1comparedtothe
different image spaces between challenges’ images [39]. For
manuallyrevisedtargetlabelasseeninpanelsA2,
participants intending to use this data, it is recommended
B2, and C2. Note that corrections were made
toperformpre-processingandpost-processingoftheBraTS-
regardinginclusionofadditionalmeningioma, cor-
MEN-RT data similar to the 1mm3 isotropic resampling in
rection of label edges, and inter-axial slice label
the SRI24 atlas space using the FeTS toolkit and then back
smoothening.
tonativeresolutionmayassistwithmodeldevelopment[39].
Participants must properly cite all additional datasets used
in their challenge submissions to ensure proper acknowledg-
ment and reproducibility and to be eligible for awards at
participating teams’ automated segmentation models will
the challenge conclusion.
be open source, providing both industry partners and clin-
ical researchers the opportunity to utilize and build upon
the radiotherapy planning automated segmentation models 3.4 Limitations of the Challenge
for meningioma.
Despite the significant advancements, BraTS-MEN-RT
faces several limitations that must be acknowledged:
3.2 Clinical Relevance
3.4.1 Single Modality Focus
In radiation oncology, automated segmentation models of
meningiomaGTVcanimmediatelyacceleratethegeneration The reliance on a single T1c imaging modality may not
of radiotherapy treatment plans. Automated segmentation capture the full heterogeneity of meningiomas and the sur-
models provide consistent and objective tumor volume de- rounding tissue. Multimodal imaging approaches, which in-
lineations, which are essential for developing precise and tegrate data from different MRI sequences or other imaging
effective radiotherapy plans. By reducing the variability and techniques such as CT or PET, could provide more com-
potential errors associated with manual segmentation, au- prehensive insights into tumor characteristics and help with
82024 BraTS-MEN-RT Challenge
target volume delineation [40]. CT imaging best demon- 3.5 Goals for Future Challenges
strates bony changes associated with meningioma includ-
As we look beyond the BraTS-MEN-RT challenge, several
ing hyperostosis, osteolysis, and pneumosinus dilatans [40].
exciting opportunities for future research and challenges
PET labeled with somatostatin receptor II ligands showed
emerge. Thesefuturechallengesshouldaimtoencompassa
an increased sensitivity for detection and delineation of
broader range of tumor types for radiotherapy planning and
meningioma when compared to T1c brain MRI, especially
to incorporate more comprehensive data, including different
near the skull base, falcine area, orbit, and sagittal and
imaging modalities like CT simulation imaging and PET.
cavernous sinus due to transosseous growth [40].
Incorporating additional imaging modalities such as CT and
The 2023 BraTS-MEN challenge had a focus on diag- PET can provide more detailed information about tumor
nostics and interval changes in tumor region of interest characteristics and surrounding anatomy. CT imaging can
volumes and therefore utilized a multi-sequence brain MRI help in identifying bony changes and delineating tumors
and multi-label dataset. Incorporating multiple imaging nearbonystructures, whileGallium-68labeledsomatostatin
modalities introduces additional complexity in data process- analogs used in PET imaging can enhance the detection
ing and model training, and the RTOG and EORTC only and delineation of tumors with high metabolic activity or
require T1c image sequences for radiotherapy planning, and expression of SSTR ligands [40]. This multimodal approach
therefore we only utilized T1c images [12, 13, 14]. can lead to more accurate and robust segmentation models.
Examples of other brain tumor types that commonly
undergo radiotherapy include gliomas, acoustic neuromas,
3.4.2 Variability in MRI Acquisition
vestibular schwannoma, and pediatric tumors [41, 42, 43,
44]. Future studies should focus on building large multi-
DifferencesinMRIacquisitionprotocolsacrossparticipating
institutional expert annotated radiotherapy planning image
institutionscanaffecttheconsistencyandgeneralizabilityof
datasets for each brain tumor type to facilitate the develop-
the automated segmentation models. Variations in scanner
ment of robust automated segmentation models.
types, imaging parameters, and patient head immobiliza-
Future challenges should ensure that both GTVs and
tion may introduce biases that are difficult to account for,
CTVs are included and labeled according to radiation ther-
even with rigorous data pre-processing and standardization
apy annotation protocol consensus guidelines for the respec-
efforts. Ensuring model robustness across different imaging
tive tumor types. This comprehensive automated segmen-
conditions remains a significant challenge. However, by
tation will allow for the development of models that are
including patients that undergo EBRT and SRS, we offer
more clinically relevant and useful in real world radiotherapy
a more heterogeneous dataset that can help create more
planning.
generalizable automated tumor segmentation models.
4. Conclusion
3.4.3 Clinical Utility
The BraTS-MEN-RT challenge provides the largest known
While automated segmentation models hold great promise, dataset of expert annotated meningioma radiotherapy plan-
translating these tools into clinical practice involves several ning brain MRIs and aims to push the boundaries of auto-
hurdles. Clinicians may require additional training to use mated segmentation of meningioma for radiotherapy plan-
these tools effectively, and the models must be thoroughly ning.
validatedindiverseclinicalsettingstoensuretheirreliability This challenge emphasizes the clinical application and
and accuracy. Additionally, integration with existing clini- relevanceofautomatedsegmentationalgorithmsbyutilizing
cal workflows and electronic health record systems needs asingleT1cbrainMRIsequenceatitsnativeresolutionwith
careful consideration to maximize their utility. Many exist- one target label. This deliberate choice aims to simplify the
ing commercial radiotherapy planning applications already integration of participants’ models into clinical workflows,
use automated contouring for a variety of normal organ enhancing their accessibility and practicality for real-world
at risk structures and a limited number of tumor target application.
volume structures. We anticipate that the open-source The potential clinical impact of the BraTS-MEN-RT
release of the BraTS-MEN-RT automated segmentation challenge is substantial. Automated segmentation tools
models developed by each of the participating teams will have the capacity to significantly reduce the time and ex-
provide both academic researchers and industry partners pertise required for manual contouring, which is a critical
the opportunity to create robust and generalizable models and time-consuming step in radiotherapy planning [45]. By
for their radiotherapy planning applications. providing consistent and objective tumor delineations, these
tools can enhance the quality and reproducibility of treat-
9LaBella and Calabrese, 2024
ment plans, leading to more precise and effective patient nosed in the united states in 2016—2020. Neuro-
care. oncology, 25(Supplement 4):iv1–iv99, 2023.
[4] Roland Goldbrunner, Pantelis Stavrinou, Michael D
Acknowledgments Jenkinson, Felix Sahm, Christian Mawrin, Damien C
Weber, Matthias Preusser, Giuseppe Minniti, Morten
Research reported in this publication was partly supported Lund-Johansen, FlorenceLefranc, etal. Eanoguideline
bytheNationalInstitutesofHealth(NIH)underawardnum- on the diagnosis and management of meningiomas.
bers: NCI/ITCRU24CA279629,andNCI/ITCRU01CA242871. Neuro-oncology, 23(11):1821–1834, 2021.
The content of this publication is solely the responsibility
[5] Shigetoshi Yano and Jun-ichi Kuratsu. Indications for
of the authors and does not represent the official views of
surgery in patients with asymptomatic meningiomas
the NIH.
based on an extensive experience. Journal of neuro-
surgery, 105(4):538–543, 2006.
Ethical Standards
[6] Lianhua Zhao, Wei Zhao, Yanwei Hou, Cuixia Wen,
Jing Wang, Pei Wu, and Zaiyu Guo. An overview of
Theworkfollowsappropriateethicalstandardsinconducting
managements in meningiomas. Frontiers in oncology,
research and writing the manuscript, following all applicable
10:1523, 2020.
laws and regulations regarding treatment of animals and
human subjects. All participating sites had institutional [7] Donald Simpson. The recurrence of intracranial menin-
reviewboard (IRB)approval. Awaiverforinformedconsent giomas after surgical treatment. Journal of neurology,
was provided by each institution’s respective IRB. neurosurgery, and psychiatry, 20(1):22, 1957.
[8] David N Louis, Arie Perry, Pieter Wesseling, Daniel J
Brat, Ian A Cree, Dominique Figarella-Branger, Cyn-
Conflicts of Interest
thia Hawkins, HK Ng, Stefan M Pfister, Guido Reifen-
berger, et al. The 2021 who classification of tumors
TMSreportshonorariafromVarianMedicalSystems,WebMD,
GE Healthcare, and Janssen; he has an equity interest in of the central nervous system: a summary. Neuro-
CorTechs Labs, Inc. and serves on its Scientific Advisory
oncology, 23(8):1231–1251, 2021.
Board; he receives research funding from GE Healthcare
[9] Santosh Saraf, Bridget J McCarthy, and J Lee Villano.
through the University of California San Diego.
Updateonmeningiomas. Theoncologist,16(11):1604–
1613, 2011.
Data availability
[10] Collin L Kent, Yvonne M Mowery, Olayode Babatunde,
Ato O Wright, Ian Barak, Frances McSherry, James E
The BraTS-MEN-RT data will be publicly available on
HerndonII,AllanHFriedman,AliZomorodi,Katherine
Synapse as the challenge commences in late May 2024 -
Peters, et al. Long-term outcomes for patients with
October 2024 [46].
atypical or malignant meningiomas treated with or
without radiation therapy: A 25-year retrospective
References analysis of a single-institution experience. Advances
in Radiation Oncology, 7(3):100878, 2022.
[1] ChristianOgasawara,BrandonDPhilbrick,andDCory
Adamson. Meningioma: a review of epidemiology, [11] Valentina Pinzi, Marcello Marchetti, Anna Viola, Irene
pathology, diagnosis, treatment, and future directions. Tramacere, Irene Cane, Cecilia Iezzoni, and Laura
Biomedicines, 9(3):319, 2021. Fariselli. Hypofractionated radiosurgery for large or in
critical-siteintracranialmeningioma: resultsofaphase
[2] Kristin Huntoon, Angus Martin Shaw Toland, and 2 prospective study. International Journal of Radiation
Sonika Dahiya. Meningioma: a review of clinicopatho- Oncology* Biology* Physics, 115(1):153–163, 2023.
logical and molecular aspects. Frontiers in Oncology,
[12] Leland Rogers, Peixin Zhang, Michael A Vogelbaum,
10:579599, 2020.
AriePerry, LynnSAshby, JigneshMModi, AnthonyM
[3] Quinn T Ostrom, Mackenzie Price, Corey Neff, Gino Alleman, James Galvin, David Brachman, Joseph M
Cioffi, Kristin A Waite, Carol Kruchko, and Jill S Jenrette, et al. Intermediate-risk meningioma: initial
Barnholtz-Sloan. Cbtrus statistical report: primary outcomes from nrg oncology rtog 0539. Journal of
brain and other central nervous system tumors diag- neurosurgery, 129(1):35–47, 2017.
102024 BraTS-MEN-RT Challenge
[13] C Leland Rogers, Minhee Won, Michael A Vogel- SullyChen,VerenaChung,etal. Theasnr-miccaibrain
baum, Arie Perry, Lynn S Ashby, Jignesh M Modi, tumor segmentation (brats) challenge 2023: Intracra-
Anthony M Alleman, James Galvin, Shannon E Fogh, nial meningioma. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.07642,
Emad Youssef, et al. High-risk meningioma: initial 2023.
outcomes from nrg oncology/rtog 0539. International
Journal of Radiation Oncology* Biology* Physics, 106 [21] Dominic LaBella, Omaditya Khanna, Shan McBurney-
(4):790–799, 2020. Lin, Ryan Mclean, Pierre Nedelec, Arif S. Rashid,
Nourel hoda Tahon, Talissa Altes, Ujjwal Baid, Rad-
[14] Damien C Weber, Carmen Ares, Salvador Villa, hika Bhalerao, Yaseen Dhemesh, Scott Floyd, De-
Saskia M Peerdeman, Laurette Renard, Brigitta G von Godfrey, Fathi Hilal, Anastasia Janas, Anahita
Baumert, Anna Lucas, Theo Veninga, Alessia Pica, Kazerooni, Collin Kent, John Kirkpatrick, Florian
SarahJefferies,etal. Adjuvantpostoperativehigh-dose Kofler, Kevin Leu, Nazanin Maleki, Bjoern Menze,
radiotherapyforatypicalandmalignantmeningioma: a Maxence Pajot, Zachary J. Reitman, Jeffrey D. Rudie,
phase-iiparallelnon-randomizedandobservationstudy RachitSaluja,YuryVelichko,ChunhaoWang,PranavI.
(eortc 22042-26042). Radiotherapy and oncology, 128 Warman, Nico Sollmann, David Diffley, Khanak K.
(2):260–265, 2018. Nandolia, Daniel I Warren, Ali Hussain, John Pas-
cal Fehringer, Yulia Bronstein, Lisa Deptula, Evan G.
[15] Matthias Simon and Konstantinos Gousias. Grading
Stein, Mahsa Taherzadeh, Eduardo Portela de Oliveira,
meningioma resections: the simpson classification and
Aoife Haughey, Marinos Kontzialis, Luca Saba, Ben-
beyond. Acta Neurochirurgica, 166(1):28, 2024. jaminTurner, MelanieM.T.Bru¨ßeler, ShehbazAnsari,
Athanasios Gkampenis, David Maximilian Weiss, Aya
[16] Manish K Aghi, Bob S Carter, Garth R Cosgrove,
Mansour, Islam H. Shawali, Nikolay Yordanov, Joel M.
Robert G Ojemann, Sepideh Amin-Hanjani, Robert L
Stein, Roula Hourani, Mohammed Yahya Moshebah,
Martuza, William T Curry Jr, Fred G Barker, et al.
Ahmed Magdy Abouelatta, Tanvir Rizvi, Klara Willms,
Long-term recurrence rates of atypical meningiomas
Dann C. Martin, Abdullah Okar, Gennaro D’Anna,
after gross total resection with or without postoper-
Ahmed Taha, Yasaman Sharifi, Shahriar Faghani, Do-
ative adjuvant radiation. Neurosurgery, 64(1):56–60,
minic Kite, Marco Pinho, Muhammad Ammar Haider,
2009.
Michelle Alonso-Basanta, Javier Villanueva-Meyer, An-
[17] Eugen B Hug, Alexander DeVries, Allan F Thorn- dreas M. Rauschecker, Ayman Nada, Mariam Aboian,
ton, John E Munzenrider, Francisco S Pardo, E Tessa Adam Flanders, Spyridon Bakas, and Evan Calabrese.
Hedley-Whyte, Marc R Bussiere, and Robert Ojemann. A multi-institutional meningioma mri dataset for auto-
Management of atypical and malignant meningiomas: mated multi-sequence image segmentation. Scientific
roleofhigh-dose,3d-conformalradiationtherapy. Jour- Data, 11:496, 2024. . URL https://doi.org/10.
nal of neuro-oncology, 48:151–160, 2000. 1038/s41597-024-03350-9.
[18] Christos Boskos, Loic Feuvret, Georges Noel, Jean- [22] Spyridon Bakas, Hamed Akbari, Aristeidis Sotiras,
Louis Habrand, Pascal Pommier, Claire Alapetite, Michel Bilello, Martin Rozycki, Justin S Kirby, John B
Hamid Mammar, Regis Ferrand, Gilbert Boisserie, and Freymann, Keyvan Farahani, and Christos Davatzikos.
Jean-Jacques Mazeron. Combined proton and photon Advancing the cancer genome atlas glioma mri collec-
conformal radiotherapy for intracranial atypical and tions with expert segmentation labels and radiomic
malignant meningioma. International Journal of Ra- features. Scientific data, 4(1):1–13, 2017.
diation Oncology* Biology* Physics, 75(2):399–406,
[23] Bjoern H Menze, Andras Jakab, Stefan Bauer,
2009.
Jayashree Kalpathy-Cramer, Keyvan Farahani, Justin
[19] Kerstin A Kessel, Josefine Hesse, Christoph Straube, Kirby, Yuliya Burren, Nicole Porz, Johannes Slotboom,
Claus Zimmer, Friederike Schmidt-Graf, Ju¨rgen Roland Wiest, et al. The multimodal brain tumor
Schlegel, Bernhard Meyer, and Stephanie E Combs. image segmentation benchmark (brats). IEEE trans-
Modification and optimization of an established prog- actions on medical imaging, 34(10):1993–2024, 2014.
nostic score after re-irradiation of recurrent glioma.
[24] Anahita Fathi Kazerooni, Nastaran Khalili, Xinyang
PLoS One, 12(7):e0180457, 2017.
Liu, Debanjan Haldar, Zhifan Jiang, Syed Muhammed
[20] Dominic LaBella, Maruf Adewole, Michelle Alonso- Anwar, Jake Albrecht, Maruf Adewole, Udunna Ana-
Basanta, Talissa Altes, Syed Muhammad Anwar, zodo, Hannah Anderson, et al. The brain tumor seg-
Ujjwal Baid, Timothy Bergquist, Radhika Bhalerao, mentation (brats) challenge 2023: Focus on pediatrics
11LaBella and Calabrese, 2024
(cbtn-connect-dipgr-asnr-miccai brats-peds). ArXiv, [33] Robert W Cox. Afni: software for analysis and visual-
2023. ization of functional magnetic resonance neuroimages.
Computers and Biomedical research, 29(3):162–173,
[25] Ahmed W Moawad, Anastasia Janas, Ujjwal Baid, Di-
1996.
vya Ramakrishnan, Leon Jekel, Kiril Krantchev, Harri-
son Moy, Rachit Saluja, Klara Osenberg, Klara Wilms, [34] Robert W Cox and James S Hyde. Software tools
et al. The brain tumor segmentation (brats-mets) for analysis and visualization of fmri data. NMR in
challenge 2023: Brain metastasis segmentation on Biomedicine: An International Journal Devoted to the
pre-treatment mri. ArXiv, 2023. Development and Application of Magnetic Resonance
In Vivo, 10(4-5):171–178, 1997.
[26] Maruf Adewole, Jeffrey D Rudie, Anu Gbdamosi,
Oluyemisi Toyobo, Confidence Raymond, Dong Zhang, [35] Thomas Phil, Thomas Albrecht, Skylar Gay,
Olubukola Omidiji, Rachel Akinola, Mohammad Abba and Mathis Ersted Rasmussen. Sikerde-
Suwaid, Adaobi Emegoakor, et al. The brain tumor baard/dcmrtstruct2nii: dcmrtstruct2nii v5 (version
segmentation (brats) challenge 2023: Glioma segmen- v5), 2023. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/
tation in sub-saharan africa patient population (brats- zenodo.4037864.
africa). ArXiv, 2023.
[36] Athena E Theyers, Mojdeh Zamyadi, Mark O’Reilly,
[27] Ekin Ermi¸s, Alain Jungo, Robert Poel, Marcela Blatti- Robert Bartha, Sean Symons, Glenda M MacQueen,
Moreno, Raphael Meier, Urspeter Knecht, Daniel M Stefanie Hassel, Jason P Lerch, Evdokia Anagnostou,
Aebersold, Michael K Fix, Peter Manser, Mauricio Raymond W Lam, et al. Multisite comparison of mri
Reyes, et al. Fully automated brain resection cavity defacing software across multiple cohorts. Frontiers in
delineation for radiation target volume definition in psychiatry, 12:617997, 2021.
glioblastoma patients using deep learning. Radiation
[37] Paul A Yushkevich, Joseph Piven, Heather Cody Ha-
oncology, 15:1–10, 2020.
zlett, Rachel Gimpel Smith, Sean Ho, James C Gee,
[28] AndreaBianconi,LucaFrancescoRossi,MartaBonada, and Guido Gerig. User-guided 3d active contour seg-
Pietro Zeppa, Elsa Nico, Raffaele De Marco, Paola mentation of anatomical structures: significantly im-
Lacroce, Fabio Cofano, Francesco Bruno, Giovanni proved efficiency and reliability. Neuroimage, 31(3):
Morana, et al. Deep learning-based algorithm for post- 1116–1128, 2006.
operative glioblastoma mri segmentation: a promising
[38] Fabian Isensee, Paul F Jaeger, Simon AA Kohl, Jens
new tool for tumor burden assessment. Brain Infor-
Petersen, and Klaus H Maier-Hein. nnu-net: a self-
matics, 10(1):26, 2023.
configuring method for deep learning-based biomedical
[29] Amanda Bischoff-Grethe, I Burak Ozyurt, Evelina image segmentation. Nature methods, 18(2):203–211,
Busa, Brian T Quinn, Christine Fennema-Notestine, 2021.
Camellia P Clark, Shaunna Morris, Mark W Bondi,
[39] Sarthak Pati, Ujjwal Baid, Brandon Edwards, Micah J
Terry L Jernigan, Anders M Dale, et al. A technique
Sheller, Patrick Foley, G Anthony Reina, Siddhesh
for the deidentification of structural brain mr images.
Thakur, Chiharu Sako, Michel Bilello, Christos Da-
Human brain mapping, 28(9):892–903, 2007.
vatzikos, et al. The federated tumor segmentation
[30] Torsten Rohlfing, Natalie M Zahr, Edith V Sullivan, (fets) tool: an open-source solution to further solid
and Adolf Pfefferbaum. The sri24 multichannel atlas tumor research. Physics in Medicine & Biology, 67
of normal adult human brain structure. Human brain (20):204002, 2022.
mapping, 31(5):798–819, 2010.
[40] Raymond Y Huang, Wenya Linda Bi, Brent Grif-
[31] D Wiant and JD Bourland. Simulated gamma knife™ fith, Timothy J Kaufmann, Christian la Foug`ere,
head frame placement for radiosurgical pre-planning. Nils Ole Schmidt, J¨oerg C Tonn, Michael A Vogel-
Technology in cancer research & treatment, 8(4):265– baum, Patrick Y Wen, Kenneth Aldape, et al. Imaging
270, 2009. and diagnostic advances for intracranial meningiomas.
Neuro-oncology, 21(Supplement 1):i44–i61, 2019.
[32] Thomas A Gallagher, Alexander J Nemeth, and Lotfi
Hacein-Bey. An introduction to the fourier transform: [41] Roger Stupp, Warren P Mason, Martin J Van
relationshiptomri. Americanjournalofroentgenology, Den Bent, Michael Weller, Barbara Fisher, Martin JB
190(5):1396–1405, 2008. Taphoorn, Karl Belanger, Alba A Brandes, Christine
122024 BraTS-MEN-RT Challenge
Marosi, Ulrich Bogdahn, et al. Radiotherapy plus con-
comitant and adjuvant temozolomide for glioblastoma.
New England journal of medicine, 352(10):987–996,
2005.
[42] Jason P Sheehan, Robert M Starke, David Mathieu,
Byron Young, Penny K Sneed, Veronica L Chiang,
John YK Lee, Hideyuki Kano, Kyung-Jae Park, Ajay
Niranjan, et al. Gamma knife radiosurgery for the
management of nonfunctioning pituitary adenomas: a
multicenter study. Journal of neurosurgery, 119(2):
446–456, 2013.
[43] DarrenHargrave,UteBartels,andEricBouffet. Diffuse
brainstem glioma in children: critical review of clinical
trials. The lancet oncology, 7(3):241–248, 2006.
[44] Huai-che Yang, Hideyuki Kano, Nasir Raza Awan,
L Dade Lunsford, Ajay Niranjan, John C Flickinger,
Josef Novotny, Jagdish P Bhatnagar, and Douglas
Kondziolka. Gamma knife radiosurgery for larger-
volume vestibular schwannomas. Journal of neuro-
surgery, 114(3):801–807, 2011.
[45] Xianghua Ye, Dazhou Guo, Jia Ge, Senxiang Yan,
YiXin,YuchenSong,YonghengYan,Bing-shenHuang,
Tsung-Min Hung, Zhuotun Zhu, et al. Comprehensive
andclinically accurateheadand neck cancerorgans-at-
risk delineation on a multi-institutional study. Nature
communications, 13(1):6137, 2022.
[46] Dominic LaBella, Evan Calabrese, et al. Brats-men-rt
challenge. https://www.synapse.org/#!Synapse:
syn53708249/wiki/627503, 2024. Accessed: 2024-
05-24.
13