1
Tactile Perception of Electroadhesion: Effect of DC versus AC
Stimulation and Finger Moisture
Easa AliAbbasi, Muhammad Muzammil, Omer Sirin, Philippe Lefe`vre, Ørjan Grøttem Martinsen, and Cagatay Basdogan
Abstract—Electroadhesion has emerged as a viable technique for frictionalforceactingagainstthefinger,inthedirectionoppositetoits
displaying tactile feedback on touch surfaces, particularly capacitive movement. Although the technology for generating tactile feedback
touchscreens found in smartphones and tablets. This involves applying
on a touchscreen via EA is already in place and straightforward to
a voltage signal to the conductive layer of the touchscreen to generate
implement, our knowledge of the underlying contact mechanics, the
tactile sensations on the fingerpads of users. In our investigation, we
explore the tactile perception of electroadhesion under DC and AC nature of electrical interactions between the human finger and the
stimulations. Our tactile perception experiments with 10 participants touchscreen, and also our perception of tactile stimuli generated by
demonstrate a significantly lower voltage detection threshold for AC EA are still limited. Unraveling the physics behind EA holds the
signalscomparedtotheirDCcounterparts.Thisdiscrepancyiselucidated
promise of unlocking innovative technological applications. Beyond
by the underlying electro-mechanical interactions between the finger
and the voltage-induced touchscreen and considering the response of mobile devices, where the potential includes experiencing digital
mechanoreceptors in the fingerpad to electrostatic forces generated by shapes and textures on touch surfaces [9]–[13] and interacting with
electroadhesion.Additionally,ourstudyhighlightstheimpactofmoisture themthroughfinger/handgestures[14],[15],theseadvancementsare
on electroadhesive tactile perception. Participants with moist fingers
poised to extend into diverse domains such as robotics, automation,
exhibited markedly higher threshold levels. Our electrical impedance
spacemissions,andtextiles(seeamorecomprehensivereviewofEA
measurements show a substantial reduction in impedance magnitude
when sweat is present at the finger-touchscreen interface, indicating applications in [16], [17]).
increased conductivity. These findings not only contribute to our un- In terms of contact mechanics, only a few studies have recently
derstanding of tactile perception under electroadhesion but also shed shedsomelightonthephysicsbehindEA.Thechangeinelectrostatic
light on the underlying physics. In this regard, the results of this study
forces between the human finger and a voltage-induced touchscreen
extend beyond mobile devices to encompass other applications of this
technology,includingrobotics,automation,spacemissions,andtextiles. isobservedtobeproportionaltothesquareofthevoltageamplitude
[6]. The increase in electrostatic force due to EA results in a 0.25%
IndexTerms—electroadhesion,electricalimpedance,electrostaticforce,
tactile perception, psychophysics, finger moisture, touchscreen, mobile increase per Volt in frictional force compared to the case of no EA
devices. (e.g. 25% increase for 100 V) [18]. It was claimed that the increase
in frictional force is due to an increase in the real contact area [19].
Despitetheobserveddecreaseinthemeasuredapparentcontactarea
I. INTRODUCTION
during sliding under EA [20], the rise in the number of microscopic
THEhumanhapticsenseisaremarkablesensorysystemcapable
contacts at the interface due to EA leads to an increase in the real
ofdetectingnano-scalewrinklesonseeminglysmoothsurfaces contactarea.Thishypothesisalignswellwiththecontactmechanics
[1] and distinguishing between smooth surfaces with different mate- theory proposed for EA by Persson [21], [22], which considers the
rialcoatings[2]orevenmodifiedsurfacechemistries[3].Despitethe multi-scale nature of contacting surfaces.
extraordinary capabilities of the human finger in discerning minute Compared to the studies on contact mechanics, the number of
details, there remains a limited number of actuation technologies studies investigating the electrical interactions between a human
that can artificially replicate similar tactile sensations on touch finger and a touch surface under EA is only a few. Earlier studies
surfaces. Surface haptics, an emerging field of research, aims to [23]–[25]showedthattheelectricalimpedanceoftheinterfacialgap
improve the way users interact with touch surfaces such as the between the finger and the touch surface is significantly lower for
touchscreens of mobile devices, enhancing the user experience by the stationary finger compared to that of the sliding finger. It was
providing realistic and finer tactile feedback [4]. In this regard, suggestedthatwhenthefingerremainsstationaryonthetouchscreen,
electroadhesion (EA) via electrostatic actuation appears to be a sweat accumulates at the interfacial gap and reduces the potential
promising technique for displaying frictional forces to the user’s difference, decreasing the magnitude of the electrostatic forces [23].
finger as it moves on the touchscreen. In this technique, a voltage Ourrecentstudy[8]highlightedtheimportantroleofchargeleakage
signal is applied to the conductive layer of a capacitive touchscreen from the Stratum Corneum (SC), the outermost layer of skin, to the
to generate an electrostatic attraction force between its surface and touch surface at low frequencies. The experimental results showed
the finger sliding on it [5]–[8]. This results in an increase in the thattheelectrostaticforceexhibitsaninvertedparaboliccurvewitha
peak value at around 250 Hz. An electromechanical model based
E. AliAbbasi, M. Muzammil, O. Sirin, and C. Basdogan are with the
on the fundamental laws of electric fields and Persson’s contact
College of Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul 34450, Turkey (E-mail:
ealiabbasi20@ku.edu.tr; mmuzammil22@ku.edu.tr;osirin13@ku.edu.tr; cbas- mechanics theory [26] was developed to estimate the frequency-
dogan@ku.edu.tr). dependentmagnitudeofelectrostaticforces.Themodelrevealedthat
P. Lefe`vre is with Institute of Information and Communication Technolo- theelectricalpropertiesoftheSCandthechargeleakagefromitare
gies,ElectronicsandAppliedMathematics(ICTEAM),Universite´ catholique
the main causes of the inverted parabolic behavior.
de Louvain, Brussels and Louvain-la-Neuve, Belgium and Institute of Neu-
In terms of tactile perception of EA, the number of studies is
roscience,Universite´ catholiquedeLouvain,BrusselsandLouvain-la-Neuve,
Belgium(E-mail:philippe.lefevre@uclouvain.be). also limited. The sensitivity of the human finger to the polarity of
Ø.G. Martinsen is with Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Sem the voltage signal was investigated and the results showed that the
Sælandsvei24,0371Oslo,NorwayandDepartmentofClinicalandBiomed- participants perceived negative or biphasic pulses better than posi-
ical Engineering, Oslo University Hospital, 0424 Oslo, Norway (E-mail:
tive ones [27]. The detection and discrimination threshold voltages
o.g.martinsen@fys.uio.no).
across different frequencies were measured through psychophysical
#Correspondingauthor:cbasdogan@ku.edu.tr experiments,revealingastatisticallysignificantrelationshipbetween
4202
peS
52
]CH.sc[
1v63961.9042:viXra2
absolute detection voltage and signal frequency. The results showed foradryfinger.Ourelectricalimpedancemeasurementssuggestthat
a U-shaped curve in detection threshold voltage, with the lowest theimpedancedropsdrasticallywhenthereisliquidattheinterface.
valueat125Hzwhereasthediscriminationvoltageremainedconstant As a result, the voltage difference at the air gap and the magnitude
at 1.16 dB against all tested frequencies [5]. The variation in of electrostatic forces decrease.
tactile perception corresponding to the changing waveform of the
applied voltage was investigated in [28]. The results showed that II. MATERIALANDMETHODS
the participants were more sensitive to square voltage signals than A. Participants
sinusoidal ones for frequencies lower than 60 Hz. The analysis of
The tactile perception experiment was conducted with ten adult
the collected force and acceleration data in the frequency domain,
participants (four females and six males) having an average age of
byconsideringthehumantactilesensitivitycurve,suggestedthatthe
29.4years(SD:5.9).Duetoitstime-consumingnature,theelectrical
Pacinian channel was predominantly responsible for detecting EA
impedanceandfrictionmeasurementswereperformedwithonemale
stimuli.Thiswasconsistentacrossallsquarewavesignalsdisplayed
participant(age:34yearsold)havingrelativelydryfingers.Allpartic-
at various frequencies. The interference of multiple tactile stimuli
ipants provided written informed consent to undergo the procedure,
(tactile masking) under EA was also investigated [29]. The results
which was approved by the Ethical Committee for Human Partic-
showed that the sharpness perception of virtual edges depends on
ipants of Koc University (Protocol Numbers: 2022.128.IRB2.020,
the masking amplitude and activation levels of frequency-dependent
2023.280.IRB2.060). The investigation conformed to the principles
psychophysical channels. The tactile perception of a step change in
of the Declaration of Helsinki and the experiments were performed
friction due to EA was investigated by considering the influence of
by following relevant guidelines and regulations.
normal force and sliding velocity [30]. Participants perceived rising
friction(EAisswitchedfromOFFtoONduringsliding)asstronger
thanfallingfriction(EAisswitchedfromONtoOFFduringsliding), B. Tactile Threshold Experiments
andboththenormalforceandslidingvelocitysignificantlyinfluenced We used the setup shown in Fig. 1a for the tactile perception
their perception. experiment.Inthissetup,theinputvoltagesignalsweregeneratedby
With the current technology, generating electrostatic forces be- awaveformgenerator(33220A,AgilentInc.)connectedtoaPCviaa
tween a human finger and a touchscreen to modulate the frictional TCP/IPprotocol.Thesignalswerethenamplifiedbyapiezoamplifier
forces between them is quite straightforward. Empirical evidence (E-413, PI Inc.) and applied to the conductive layer of a capacitive
indicates that generating a perceptible tactile sensation requires the touchscreen (SCT3250, 3M Inc.) for displaying tactile stimulus to
utilization of an AC voltage signal. A DC input voltage signal, the participants. The touchscreen was rigidly fixed with holders to
even with a higher amplitude, does not appear to generate a similar avoidundesiredmechanicalvibrationsduringtheexperiments.ADC
sensation, but the root causes of this difference are not fully known power supply (MCH-303D, Technic Inc.) was utilized to provide 24
yet.Moreover,fingermoistureandenvironmentalhumidityareknown V DC voltage for operating the amplifier. A high-resolution force
to affect frictional forces under EA [20], but their effect on tactile sensor (Nano 17-SI-12-0.12, ATI Industrial Automation Inc.) was
perception and the physics behind the change in electrostatic force placedbelowthetouchscreentomeasurecontactforces.Theseforces
intensity due to accumulated sweat at the interface has received were acquired by a 16-bit analog data acquisition card (PCI-6034E,
less attention. One study investigated the effect of electrowetting, National Instruments Inc.) with 10 kHz sampling frequency. An IR
the change in the wettability of the liquid on the touchscreen under frame (IRTOUCH Inc.) was placed above the touchscreen to detect
EA, and concluded that the increase in frictional forces between the finger position.
finger and the touchscreen at higher humidity levels is mainly due Before the experiments, the participants washed their hands with
totheincreaseincapillaryforces[31].Itwasalsoobservedthatthe soap,rinsedwithwater,anddriedthematroomtemperature,andthe
fingerleftmoreresidue(primarily,sweatandsebum)intheareasof touchscreen was cleaned with alcohol. Throughout the experiments,
atouchscreenwhereEAisactive[32].Theauthorssuggestedthati) theparticipantswereaskedtowearanelasticstrapontheirstationary
theelectrohydrodynamicdeformationofsebumdropletsadheretothe wrist for grounding and put on headphones playing white noise to
fingervalleys,whichresultsinthecreationofextracapillarybridges prevent their tactile perception from being affected by any external
and leftover droplets on the screen’s surface after they break, and auditory cue.
ii) the electric field-induced stabilization of sebum capillary bridges To investigate human tactile detection thresholds for DC and AC
exist between the finger ridges and the screen, which leads to the voltagestimulations,weconductedtheabsolutedetectionexperiment
merging and formation of larger droplets. using2-AlternativeForced-Choice(2AFC)paradigm[33].Duringthe
Inthisstudy,weinvestigatethedifferencesinhumantactiledetec- experiments, participants were asked to slide their index fingers on
tionthresholdunderEAfortheDCandACvoltagesignalsappliedto the touchscreen from left to right twice for a distance of 100 mm
the touchscreen. We show that the detection threshold under the AC in each trial. The tactile stimulus was displayed only in one of the
stimulation is significantly lower than that of the corresponding DC passes, which was randomized to eliminate any bias. Participants
stimulation.Wearguethatbothperceptualandphysicalmechanisms were asked to determine the pass (interval) in which they felt a
causethisdiscrepancy.Weexplaintheperceptualmechanismbehind tactile effect. To regulate their scan speed, a visual cursor moving
this discrepancy using the tactile sensitivity of the human finger to at a speed of 20 mm/s was displayed on the computer monitor and
frequency-dependentstimulationofelectrostaticforcesunderEA[28] the participants were asked to follow it with their index finger. To
while an electrical circuit model, developed based on our electrical assist the participants with controlling their applied normal forces
impedance measurements, is utilized to explain the physics behind on the touchscreen, another visual feedback displayed the real-
it. time magnitude of the applied normal force. The normal force and
We also highlight the adverse effect of fingertip skin moisture on scanningspeedwererecordedineachtrial.Theaveragenormalforce
thetactileperceptionofEAbycorrelatingthefingermoistureofthe forallparticipantswas0.334N(SD:0.084)and0.332N(SD:0.073)
participants measured by a corneometer with their threshold values under DC and AC stimulations, respectively. The average speed for
fortheACsignal.Weshowthatthemagnitudeofelectrostaticforces all participants was 20.01 mm/s (SD: 1.34) and 20.06 mm/s (SD:
inferred from friction measurements is lower for a wet finger than 0.87) under DC and AC stimulations, respectively. If a participant’s3
Fig.1. a)Thesetupusedinourtactileperceptionexperiments.Schematicrepresentationofb)electricalimpedancemeasurementforskin,c)skinmoisture
levelassessment,d)electricalimpedancemeasurementfortouchscreen,ande)electricalimpedancemeasurementforthefingerslidingonthetouchscreen.f)
Thesetupusedinourfrictionforcemeasurements.
normal force or scan speed was not in the desired range (0.1-0.6 weregiveninstructionsandaskedtocompleteatrainingsession.This
N; 10-30 mm/s), the trial was repeated until a measurement within training session enabled participants to adjust their finger scanning
therangewasobtained.Beforestartingtheexperiments,participants speed and normal force before the actual experimentation.4
The amplitude of the voltage signal applied to the touchscreen five minutes in the experiment room, allowing his body to reach
(and hence the magnitude of the tactile stimulus) was altered using normal hydration levels. Conversely, in the moist finger condition,
the three-down/one-up adaptive staircase method [29]. To determine the participant wore thick clothing and waited for fifteen minutes in
the detection thresholds for the sinusoidal AC signal at 125 Hz and theexperimentroomtoinducesweatingandachieveanelevatedlevel
the corresponding DC signal, the experiment started with a voltage of skin moisture.
amplitudeof200V and70.7V,respectively.Itisworthnotinghere Once the magnitude and phase of the electrical impedance are
pp
that the initial voltage amplitude provided sufficiently high intensity known, one can calculate the real and imaginary parts of the
for all participants under the AC stimulation but not under the DC impedance as:
stimulation. However, for safety reasons, the maximum voltage was Re{Z}=|Z|cosΦ
limited to 100 V in DC experiments. If a participant gave three
Im{Z}=|Z|sinΦ
correctresponses(notnecessarilyconsecutive),thevoltagelevelwas
decreased by 5 dB. If a participant gave one incorrect response, the where, |Z| and Φ are the magnitude and phase of the measured
voltage level was increased by 5 dB. The change in response from electrical impedance, respectively. Hence, the susceptance can be
correct to incorrect or vice versa was counted as one reversal. After calculated as:
Im{Z}
one reversal, the step size was decreased to 1 dB. The experiments B =−
Re{Z}2+Im{Z}2
werestoppedautomaticallyifthereversalcountwasfiveatthe±1dB
level (Fig. S1a and b, Supplementary Material). The threshold was 3) ElectricalImpedanceofTouchscreen: Theschematicrepresen-
calculated as the mean of the last five reversals. The moisture level tation of the electrical impedance measurements for the touchscreen
ofeachparticipant’sskinwasmeasuredbyaCorneometer(CM825, is presented in Fig. 1d. Five metallic custom-made electrodes were
Courage-KhazakaElectronic)fourtimes justbeforeandrightafter manufactured for this specific measurement. Using a very thin layer
the experiment and an average of eight measurements was reported ofsilvergrease(8463A,MGChemicals),theelectrodeswereattached
for each participant. tothetouchscreen’ssurfaceatfivedifferentlocations.Theselocations
were selected to cover the surface of the touchscreen. The electrical
impedance data were collected in ten consecutive trials from each
C. Electrical Impedance Experiments
location. Due to the sensitivity of the electrical impedances of
We selected the four-electrode method for all our electrical the touchscreen to the thickness of the silver grease between the
impedance measurements performed by the impedance analyzer electrodesandthetouchscreen,wetriedtoperformthemeasurements
(MFIA, Zurich Instruments Inc.) except for the assessment of skin with the thinnest possible layer of silver grease. However, still rela-
moisture level, in which we utilized three electrodes. Before each tively large variations are observed in the impedance measurements
measurementsession,theimpedanceanalyzerwascalibratedwiththe of the touchscreen.
short-open-load option of the device to compensate for the residual 4) TotalElectricalImpedanceofSlidingFingeronTouchscreen:
impedances in the system. Fig. 1e presents the schematics for the total electrical impedance
1) ElectricalImpedanceofSkin: Fig.1bpresentstheschematicof measurements while the participant’s finger was sliding on the
theelectricalimpedancemeasurementsfortheskin.Wemeasuredthe surfaceofthetouchscreen.Themeasurementswereperformedunder
electricalimpedancesoftheskininthreesessionsonthreeconsecu- two different lubrication conditions: a) nominal and b) wet. In
tivedaysusinghydrogelelectrodes(1050NPSMNeonatalPreWired the nominal finger condition, no excess liquid was added to the
Small Cloth ECG Electrodes, Cardinal Health Inc.) attached to the interfacebetweenthefingerandthetouchscreen.However,obtaining
participant’s right-hand index finger. A larger electrode (HeartStart consistent impedance data with a moist finger proved more chal-
FR2DefibrillatorElectrodePads,PhilipsMedicalSystemsInc.)with lenging, attributed to variations in moisture level, stemming from
a contact area approximately ten times larger than the hydrogel the prolonged duration of the experimentation due to the frequency
electrodewasattachedtotheventralforearmofthesamehand.Using sweepprocedure.Forthisreason,fourdropletsof5µL0.9%Isotonic
a custom-made circular tube, a weight of 100 grams was placed on Sodium Chloride (NaCl) were applied at four different locations on
topofthesmallelectrodeatthefingertipandkeptverticallyaligned. the touchscreen (a total of 20 µL) to imitate a moist finger (called
The weight was equivalent to a normal force of 1 N. ’wet’ condition in the text). The measurements for each condition
2) Assessment of Skin Moisture Level: The schematic representa- were performed in three separate sessions on three different days
tion of the skin moisture level assessment is shown in Fig. 1c. We andthedatawerecollectedintenconsecutivetrials.Auserinterface
measured the low-frequency susceptance of the skin, an indicator was developed to guide the participant in moving his finger on a
of skin moisture [34]–[36], using the impedance analyzer (MFIA, circular path with a desired velocity while controlling his normal
ZurichInstrumentsInc.).Forallmeasurements,weselectedthethree- force. A black-colored cursor circled on a dashed-green trajectory
electrode measurement method, and the impedance analyzer was (r = 4 cm) with a constant velocity of 40 mm/s on the computer
calibratedbeforeeverymeasurementsessionwiththeshort-open-load monitorandtheparticipantwasaskedtofollowitsmotionbymoving
option of the device to compensate for the residual impedances in his finger on the touchscreen at the same speed. The magnitude of
thesystem.ElectrodeMinFig.1cisacustom-mademetalelectrode thenormalforceappliedbytheparticipant’sfingertothetouchscreen
attached to the participant’s fingertip. Electrodes E1 and E2 are wasdisplayedbyabluebaronthemonitorforvisualfeedback.The
electrocardiogram(ECG)electrodes(RedDot2228,3MInc.),which normal force was acquired by the force transducer (Nano 17-SI-12-
were attached to the palm of the same hand. Using a custom-made 0.12,ATIIndustrialAutomationInc.)placedbeneaththetouchscreen.
circulartube,aweightof100gramswasplacedontopofElectrode The participant was trained before the actual experiment to practice
Mandkeptverticallyaligned.Theweightwasequivalenttoanormal maintainingthenormalforcecloseto1Nwhilehisfingercircledon
force of 1 N. The magnitude and phase of the electrical impedance the touchscreen.
weremeasuredat125Hzstimulationfrequencyfor10seconds,witha
samplingfrequencyof2.5kHz.Beforetheexperiment,theparticipant D. Friction Force Experiments
washed his hands with water and soap and dried them with a clean Fig. 1f shows the setup used for friction force measurements. It
towel. In the nominal finger condition, the participant waited for comprisesacapacitivetouchscreen(SCT3250,3MInc.),actuatedby5
avoltagesignalappliedtoitsconductivelayer,whichwasgenerated respectively.TheresultsshowedthatthethresholdvoltageunderAC
through a data acquisition card (PCIe-6321, National Instruments stimulation (30.41 ± 19.28) was significantly lower than that of the
Inc.)andamplifiedbyapiezoamplifier(PZD700AM/S,TrekInc.). DCstimulation(82.36±10.72)forallparticipants.Therewasaclear
The setup was configured to keep the finger stationary while the convergence in threshold values for all participants under the AC
touchscreen slid under it. The movements of the touchscreen were stimulation,whiletherewasnoconvergenceundertheDCstimulation
controlledbytwotranslationalstages(LTS150,ThorlabsInc.)along (notethattheexperimentswerestoppedautomaticallyifthereversal
thedirectionsnormalandtangentialtothesurfaceofthetouchscreen. countwasfiveat±1dBlevel).Thethresholdvoltagewascalculated
Ahigh-speedcamera(IL5H,FastecImagingInc.)andacoaxiallight asthemeanofthelastfivereversals.Theaveragethresholdvalueob-
source(C50C,ContrastechInc.)wereplacedbeneaththetouchscreen tainedunderACstimulation(30.41V)isconsistentwiththethreshold
to capture high-resolution images of the fingerpad contact area. A value reported in our earlier study for the stimulation frequency of
force transducer (Mini40-SI-80-4, ATI Industrial Automation Inc.) 125 Hz [28]. We performed ANOVA with repeated measures on the
was attached under the touchscreen to measure the normal and moisture levels of participants using the measurement time (before
tangential forces acting on the fingerpad via a data acquisition card and after the experiment) and the signal type (DC vs. AC) as the
(PCIe-6034E, National Instruments Inc.) at a sampling frequency of mainfactors.Wedidnotobserveasignificantdifferencebetweenthe
1kHz.Aproportional-integral-derivative(PID)controllerwasimple- moisturelevelsbeforeandaftertheexperiments(F(1,9)=0.205,p=
mented to maintain a constant normal force between the fingerpad 0.661)andDCversusAC(F(1,9)=5.126,p=0.051).However,the
and the touchscreen while the finger slides on its surface. threshold voltages of the participants having very moist fingers (S6,
The experiment aimed to measure the friction force between the S7,S9)werehigherthantheotherparticipantsunderACstimulation
fingerandthetouchscreenunderEA=OFF(novoltagewasapplied (see Fig. 2b). The Pearson correlation showed a positive and strong
to the touchscreen) and EA = ON (an AC voltage signal of 120 V correlation between threshold voltages and moisture level (r = 0.81,
at a frequency of 125Hz was applied to the conductive layer of the p < 0.01). This result is consistent with the results of our earlier
touchscreen) for two distinct moisture conditions of the fingerpad: study[20]andsupportsourclaimthatmoisturehasanadverseeffect
a) nominal and b) moist. The experiments for the nominal finger onthecapacityofEAtomodulatefriction,whichinturnaffectsthe
condition were conducted early in the morning from 7 am to 9 am, tactile perception of EA.
while the participant was fasting to minimize sweat generation. In 1) Effect of Voltage Type: Fig. 2c shows the schematic represen-
contrast, the experiments for the moist finger condition were carried tationofahumanfingerincontactwiththesurfaceofatouchscreen
out in the afternoon between 2 pm to 5 pm. During this time, when EA = OFF. The electrical charges in the insulator layer of the
the participant wore thick warm clothes to raise body temperature, touchscreen (SiO ) and ions in the SC layer of the skin distribute
2
inducing increased sweat generation. It is imperative to note that randomly. Under EA, the positive electrical charges in the insulator
no artificial liquid was introduced to the interface in either of the layerofthetouchscreenattracttheanionsintheskinandaccumulate
twoexperimentalconditions.Beforetheexperiments,thetouchscreen at the skin’s interface, creating the first layer of ions (see Fig.
was cleaned with alcohol. During the experiments, the index finger 2d). These anions attract the cations and build the second layer of
of the participant’s right hand was placed in a custom-made hand ions on top of the first layer. This is known as the electric double
supporttoensureconsistentcontactwiththetouchscreenatanangle layer. As the voltage difference between the touchscreen and the
of 20 degrees. An electrical grounding strap was wrapped around finger skin increases, the free anions in the skin get more attracted
the participant’s wrist to keep him grounded when the voltage was toward the interface and push the ions in the electric double layer
appliedtothetouchscreen.Theparticipantwasadvisedtomaintaina as suggested in [25]. Since ions cannot pass to the insulator layer
stableandstationarypositionthroughouttheexperiments.Thenormal of the touchscreen, their negative charges (electrons) jump to the
force applied to the touchscreen by the finger of the participant was surfaceofthetouchscreen.Thetransferofelectricalchargesfromthe
maintainedat1NviathePIDcontrollerinalltrials.Ineachtrial,the finger skin to the touchscreen’s surface is called the charge leakage
touchscreen was translated under the fingerpad of the participant in phenomenon[8],whichoccursatlowstimulationfrequencies.Hence,
the tangential direction for a distance of 60 mm at a constant speed as the frequency approaches the DC stimulation, more leakage is
of 20 mm/s. observed, causing a reduction in the magnitude of the electric field
Therewereatotalof108trialsintheexperiment,performedin3 and hence, the magnitude of electrostatic forces.
days.Hence,therewere36trialsoneachday(2moistureconditions: 2) Effect of Moisture: Similar to the adverse effect of charge
nominal and moist × 2 EA states: OFF and ON × 3 trials/session leakageatlowfrequencies,fingermoistureproducedbysweatglands
×3sessions).Foreachtrial,theCoFwascalculatedbydividingthe also negatively affects the strength of EA. There are more than 500
recorded tangential force with the corresponding normal force. The eccrine sweat glands on human fingertips [37] and the perspiration
electrostatic force acting on the finger was then inferred from the rateisfastenoughto(partially)filltheairgapbetweenthefingerand
experimental CoF data [18]: thetouchscreen,asshowninFig.2e.UnderEA,theairgapbetween
(cid:18) µOFF(cid:19) the finger and the touchscreen acts as an insulator and does not let
F e = 1− µON F n (1) thechargespassfromtheinterfaceeasily.However,whentheairgap
is replaced with sweat (Fig. 2f), charges can easily pass through the
whereµON andµOFF representmeasuredCoFwhenEA=ONand layerssincesweatisabetterconductor.Hence,thevoltageattheair
EA = OFF, respectively. gap and the magnitude of electrostatic forces decrease.
III. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION B. Friction Force Measurements
A. Tactile Threshold Measurements
Fig. 3a and b display the change in CoF as a function of
Fig. 2a and b present the threshold voltages and fingertip skin displacementforthenominalandmoistfingerconditionsrespectively,
moisture level of each participant under DC and AC stimulations, where each curve represents the mean values of 27 trials. Blue
respectively. Exemplar data of the threshold experiment is given in and red-colored curves depict the CoF for EA = OFF and EA =
Fig.S1aandb(SupplementaryMaterial)forACandDCstimulations, ON, respectively. The shaded regions around the curves represent6
Fig.2. Thethresholdvoltageversusmoisturelevelofeachparticipantundera)DCandb)ACstimulations.Moisturemeasurementsaregiveninarbitrary
units(a.u.)thatrangefrom20(dryskin)to120(verywetskin).c)Schematicrepresentationofahumanfingerincontactwiththesurfaceofatouchscreen
when EA = OFF, where the electrical charges and ions are distributed randomly. d) The schematic of a human finger in contact with the surface of the
touchscreen under EA. Due to the formation of an electric double layer at the skin interface, electrical charges can leak to the surface of the touchscreen.
Schematicrepresentationsofahumanfingerincontactwiththesurfaceofatouchscreene)withoutEAandf)withEAwhenthereisalayeroffingersweat
attheinterface.Duetoitsconductivenature,thechargeexchangebetweenthefingerskinandthetouchscreenincreases.
the standard deviations. The individual trials for the CoF under the nominal and moist conditions are presented in Fig. S2 and7
Fig. 3. Coefficient of friction (CoF) as a function of displacement with and without EA for a) nominal and b) moist finger conditions. The solid curves
showthemeanvaluesandtheshadedregionsaroundthemarethestandarddeviationsforalltrials.c)Meanvaluesofsteady-stateCoFundernominaland
moistfingerconditionswithandwithoutEA.d)RelativedifferenceinCoFbetweenEA=ONandEA=OFFforthenominalandmoistfingerconditions.e)
Electrostaticforcesinferredfromthefrictionmeasurementsforthenominalandmoistfingerconditions.f)Animagecapturedfromtheparticipant’sfingerpad
in the nominal condition (5 minutes after resting in the experiment room). g) An image captured from the fingerpad of the same participant in the moist
condition (15 minutes after resting in the experiment room while wearing thick clothing to activate the sweat glands): sweat accumulation is evident upon
closerinspectionoftheimage.h)Meanvaluesofthesusceptance,anindicatorofskinmoisture,measuredunderthenominalandmoistconditions.
S3 (Supplementary Material) and Fig. S4 and S5 (Supplementary TherelativedifferencesinCoFbetweenEA=ONandEA=OFF
Material), respectively. Similarly, the individual trials recorded for for the nominal and moist conditions are given in Fig. 3d. There
the tangential forces under the nominal and moist conditions are was a contrast of 31% in the nominal condition, whereas a relative
reported in Fig. S6 and S7 (Supplementary Material) and Fig. S8 difference of around 7% was observed in the moist condition. The
and S9 (Supplementary Material), respectively. Fig. 3c depicts the electrostaticforceunderthenominalandmoistconditionsisgivenin
steady-statevaluesofCoFcomputedbyaveragingthedatawithinthe Fig. 3e. Fig. 3f and g show the images taken from the participant’s
interval between 35 mm to 45 mm of displacement. In the nominal fingerpadunderthenominalandmoistconditions,respectively.Sweat
fingercondition,themeanvaluesforEA=OFFandEA=ONwere started to come out of the sweat ducts under the moist condition as
0.29 ± 0.05 and 0.38 ± 0.04, respectively. For the moist condition, shown in Fig. 3g. Fig. 3h presents the mean values of fingerpad’s
themeanvaluesforEA=OFFandEA=ONwere1.47±0.11and susceptance under the nominal and moist conditions. The results
1.58 ± 0.10, respectively. showed that the susceptance of the moist finger was significantly8
higherthanthatofthenominalfinger,suggestingthatthemoistfinger thephenomenonofelectrodepolarization[40].Uponcontactwiththe
hadarelativelyhighermoisturelevelthanthatofthenominalfinger, voltage-inducedtouchscreen,thehumanfingertriggersthemovement
as anticipated. of ions in the finger tissue toward the surface of the touchscreen,
causing the formation of a first layer on the inner finger surface.
C. Electrical Impedance Measurements Thisprimarylayerconsistsofionscarryingelectricchargesopposite
to those of the touchscreen, while the subsequent layer comprises
Fig.4aandbpresenttheaveragemagnitudeandphaseoftheelec-
loosely anchored ions bearing similar charges. The presence of
trical impedance measurements as a function of frequency, respec-
free ions in the finger, possessing charges contrary to those of
tively. The shaded regions around the curves represent the standard
the touchscreen, results in their attraction towards the touchscreen,
errorofmeans.Green,black,magenta,andcyan-coloredcurvesshow
displacing the ions in the first layer and leading to the leakage of
theelectricalimpedancemeasurementsforskin,touchscreen,sliding
electronsfromthefingertothetouchscreensurface.Itisworthnoting
finger in nominal condition, and sliding finger in wet condition, re-
thatthetransferofionsfromthefingertothetouchscreenisrestricted
spectively.Theindividualtrialsofelectricalimpedancemeasurements
becausethetouchscreenhasonlyelectronicchargecarriersratherthan
arealsopresentedinFig.S10-S12(SupplementaryMaterial)forskin,
ionic ones. Particularly at lower frequencies, the sufficient duration
Fig. S13-S17 (Supplementary Material) for touchscreen, Fig. S18-
allowsthefreeionstodisplacethoseinthefirstlayermoreeffectively,
S20(SupplementaryMaterial)forslidingfingerinnominalcondition,
leading to an increased rate of charge leakage and, subsequently,
andFig.S21-S23(SupplementaryMaterial)forslidingfingerinwet
a reduction in the strength of the electric field at the interface (a
condition. As shown in Fig. 4c, we measured the apparent contact
conduction path builds up between the finger and the touchscreen
area of the participant’s fingerpad using a high-resolution camera as
as emerged in the remaining resistance curve in Fig. 4h). Hence, a
130mm2 foranormalforceof1Nusingtheapproachgiveninour
capacitance (C ) in parallel with a resistance (R ) can be used
earlier study [30]. The apparent contact area increased to 300 mm2 EP EP
to model the behavior of the electrode polarization impedance as
whentheinterfacebetweenthefingerandthetouchscreenwasfilled
suggested in [25] (see Fig. 4i for our proposed circuit model).
with NaCl in the wet condition (Fig. 4d). Note that this large value
Similartothenominalcondition,aone-decade-per-decadelinefits
includes the area of the fingerpad plus the area of NaCl around it.
well to the admittance curve of the wet condition in Fig. 4f for
Since the impedance measurements are affected by the contact area
frequencies ranging from 100 Hz to 10 kHz. Hence, the remaining
[38], we normalized the electrical impedance for the wet condition
impedance of the wet condition can be modeled by a set of parallel
by multiplying its real and imaginary parts by the ratio of 300/130.
capacitancesfortheairgap(C′ )andNaCl(C )atfrequencies
AsshowninFig.4a,thesummationofthemagnitudesofskinand gap NaCl
ranging from 100 Hz to 10 kHz. At frequencies lower than 100
touchscreen impedances is not equal to the magnitude of the total
Hz, there is a parasitic capacitance due to the electric double layer
sliding impedance for both the nominal and wet conditions. Hence,
(C′ ) in parallel with a resistance (R′ ). As shown in Fig. 4h,
another impedance must be in series with the skin and touchscreen EP EP
the resistance of the wet condition is lower than that of the nominal
impedances,whichwenamethe”remainingimpedance”.Wesubtract
condition. This indicates that NaCl fills the air gap and creates a
the skin (Z ) and touchscreen (Z ) impedances from the total
Skin TS conductionpathbetweenthefingerandthetouchscreen,whichcanbe
slidingimpedance(Z )toobtaintheremainingimpedance[23],
Sliding modeledbyaresistance(R ).Fig.4jshowsourproposedcircuit
[25]: NaCl
model for the wet condition. Note that the values of C′ , C′ ,
gap EP
and R′ differ from the corresponding ones used for the nominal
Z
R
=Z Sliding−Z Skin−Z
TS
(2) conditiE oP
n.
Themagnitude(solidcurves)andphase(dashedcurves)ofthere-
mainingimpedancefortheslidingfingerunderthenominal(magenta-
D. Overall Discussion
coloredcurve)andwet(cyan-coloredcurve)conditionsarepresented
inFig.4easafunctionoffrequency.Themagnitudeoftheremaining We investigated the effect of input voltage signal type (DC vs.
impedance for the nominal condition was significantly higher than AC) on the tactile perception of EA. The earlier studies [5], [28]
thatofthewetcondition.Inotherwords,theliquidattheinterfaceof investigatedthehumantactilethresholdunderACstimulationbutdid
thefingerandthetouchscreencausedadropinimpedancemagnitude notcorrelateitwiththemoisturelevelofparticipants.Moreover,the
ofmorethantenfoldcomparedtothenominalcondition.Asshownin results of our tactile detection experiment showed that the threshold
Fig.4e,thephaseanglesoftheremainingimpedancesforthenominal voltageundertheACstimulationwassignificantlylowerthanthatof
andwetconditionsshowedaresistivebehavioratlowerfrequencies. the DC stimulation for all participants (Fig. 2a and b). In fact, there
This resistive behavior was followed by purely capacitive behavior was no convergence in threshold voltages under the DC stimulation.
after approximately 30 Hz for the nominal condition (i.e. the phase Theseresultsareconsistentwithourearlierfindings[28]suggest-
angle is around -90 degrees after 30 Hz). However, the phase angle ing that the Pacinian channel is mainly responsible for the tactile
ofthewetconditionshowedacapacitivebehaviorforanarrowrange perception of EA at the frequency of our stimulation (125 Hz).
of frequencies, followed by a sharp return to the resistive behavior. Since the rapidly adapting receptors are not stimulated when a DC
Fig. 4f shows the remaining admittances for the nominal and wet stimulationisappliedtothetouchscreen,itisnotsurprisingthatthe
conditions. A one-decade-per-decade line (dashed purple-colored) magnitudeoftheperceivedtactilestimulusisreduced.Ourthreshold
fits well to the admittance curve of the nominal condition after experimentshowedthatthedetectionofEAstimulidependsnotonly
30 Hz, suggesting a constant capacitance after that frequency (Fig. on the amplitude of the voltage applied to the touchscreen but also
4g). Hence, the remaining impedance of the nominal condition can onthehumanpsychophysicalsensitivitytotactilestimuliasreported
be modeled by a single capacitance (C ) at higher frequencies, in [28]. Each psychophysical channel is sensitive to different input
gap
representingtheairgapbetweenthefingerandthetouchscreen[25]. frequencies, which partially overlap. In our threshold experiments,
Atfrequencieslowerthan30Hz,thereisaparasiticcapacitance.This the frequency of the input voltage under the AC stimulation was
capacitance occurs due to the electric double layer at the interface 125 Hz, which was primarily detected by the Pacinian channel at
between the finger and the touchscreen [39]. The formation of the 250 Hz. Since the electrostatic force is proportional to the square of
electric double layer at the interface of the finger surface underlies the input voltage, the frequency of the output force signal is twice9
Fig.4. Thechangeinaverageelectricalimpedancea)magnitudeandb)phaseasafunctionoffrequencyforfingerskin(green),thetouchscreenitself(black),
slidingfingeronthetouchscreenunderthenominal(magenta)andwet(cyan)conditions.Imagesoftheparticipant’sfingerpadincontactwiththesurfaceof
thetouchscreenforanormalforceof1N(nosliding):c)nominalandd)wetconditions.Thegreen-coloredrectangleandyellow-coloredcontourrepresent
the region of interest for the image processing operations and fitted ellipse to the apparent contact area, respectively. e) The magnitude (solid curves) and
phase(dashedcurves)oftheremainingimpedanceasafunctionoffrequencyfortheslidingfingerunderthenominal(magenta)andwet(cyan)conditions
asafunctionoffrequency.f)Thechangeintheremainingadmittanceasafunctionoffrequencyfortheslidingfingerunderthenominal(magenta)andwet
(cyan)conditions.Thedashedpurple-coloredlinesaretheone-decade-per-decadelinesfittedtotheadmittancecurves.Thechangeintheg)capacitanceand
h)resistanceattheinterfacebetweenthefingerskinandtouchscreenunderthenominalandwetconditionsasafunctionoffrequency.Ourproposedcircuit
modelforthefingerincontactwithavoltage-inducedtouchscreenunderthei)nominalandj)wetconditions.
the frequency of the input voltage applied to the touchscreen [8]. Supplementary Material) is already high due to the high voltage
As shown in Fig. S1c (Supplementary Material), the FFT analysis applied to the touchscreen, while the one in the 12th trial (Fig.
of the tangential force under AC stimulation showed a peak at 250 S1d, Supplementary Material) is lower in magnitude than those of
Hz. The FFT magnitude of the peak in the 3rd trial (Fig. S1c, someotherfrequencies.However,itisknownthathumanvibrotactile10
perception is frequency-dependent, with a sensitivity peak around thesubject’sfingerwasalreadyhighduetomoisture,thenarelatively
250 Hz. If the energy contained by each frequency component small increase in the same force due to EA did not contribute much
is multiplied by the inverse of the normalized human sensitivity to his/her tactile perception. We performed experiments with one
curve [28], then one can more easily appreciate why the small peak participant having relatively dry fingers and measured the friction
observed at 250 Hz in the 12th trial affects the participant’s tactile forces between his right hand’s index finger and the touchscreen
perception significantly. This argument is also supported by the fact under the nominal and moist conditions with and without EA (Fig.
that the participant has successfully given a correct response under 3a-c). Our results showed that, even in the absence of EA, the CoF
ACstimulationnotonlyinthe12thtrialbutalsointhefollowingeight experiencesafive-foldincreasewhentransitioningfromthenominal
trials (Fig. S1a, Supplementary Material), despite the amplitudes of to moist condition. Earlier studies in tribology literature have also
voltagesignalsappliedtothetouchscreenbeingmuchlowerthanthe reported a variation in CoF between dry and wet conditions by a
one,forexample,appliedtothetouchscreeninthe7th trialunderDC factor of 1.5 to 7 [41]–[43]. The increase in CoF was explained by
stimulation(Fig.S1b,SupplementaryMaterial).TheFFTanalysisof thesofteningofthefingerduetotheabsorptionofwater,alsoknown
thetangentialforceforthistrialshowsnopeaksatfrequencieshigher as plasticization, which increases the contact area and, thus, the
than 20 Hz (Fig. S1e, Supplementary Material), suggesting that the tangential frictional force. Others attributed this change to capillary
rapidly adapting receptors were not stimulated. adhesion due to meniscus formation [44], [45], viscous shearing of
Thesignificantdifferenceinthresholdvaluesofparticipantsunder liquidbridgesformedbetweentheskinandthesurface[46],andthe
DC and AC stimulations can also be interpreted using the circuit work of adhesion due to absorbed moisture [47], [48].
models shown in Fig. 4i and j, which were developed based on Our friction measurements showed that the magnitude of electro-
the results of electrical impedance measurements. The remaining staticforcesduetoEAishigherforthenominalconditioncompared
impedances for the nominal (Z ) and wet (Z′ ) conditions can be to the moist condition (Fig. 3e). In the presence of moisture, the
R R
expressed in the Laplace domain as: water particles bridge the air gap between the fingertip and the
touchscreensurface.Thisbridgingeffectshortenstheconductionpath
R
Z R = 1+R EP(C EE PP +C gap)s (3) b loe wtw ere ee dn pth oe tefi nn tig ae lr da ifn fd ert eh ne ceto au cc rh os sc sre te hn e, gre as pu ,lt ci an ug sii nn ga adi rm edin ui cs th ioe nd o inr
R′ the electrostatic force. This observation was verified by comparing
Z R′ =R NaCl+ 1+R E′
P
(cid:0) C E′
P
+E CP g′ ap+C NaCl(cid:1) s (4) the electrical impedance measurements performed with the sliding
finger under the nominal and wet conditions (Fig. 4a and b). In
Atlowandhighfrequencies,Equation3and4reducetoEquation5
the wet condition, we intentionally added some liquid (NaCl) to the
and 6, respectively.
interfacebetweenthefingerandthetouchscreensothattheinterface
lim Z R ≈R EP remainslubricatedthroughoutthefrequencysweep.AsshowninFig.
ω→0 (5) 4a, the magnitude of the electrical impedance for the wet condition
lim Z R ≈0 dropped by more than an order of magnitude, compared to the
ω→∞
nominalcondition.Thisresultsuggeststhatinthepresenceofsweat
lim Z R′ ≈R E′ P +R NaCl attheinterfacebetweenthefingerandthetouchscreen,theelectrical
ω→0 (6)
lim Z R′ ≈R NaCl chargescanmovebetweenthefingerandthetouchscreenmoreeasily,
ω→∞ reducingthemagnitudeofthestrengthoftheelectricfieldatthegap.
This limit analysis shows that under the nominal condition, the
capacitancesC andC becomeeffectivelyshuntedasthestim- IV. CONCLUSION
EP gap
ulationfrequencytendstowardszero(i.e.,DCstimulation),diverting Tactile feedback on touchscreens via EA is an exciting area of
allthecurrentflowtowardstheresistanceR EP,consequentlyleading research and the number of potential applications of this technology
to a higher amount of charge leakage through SC in comparison to are countless [4]. It is also expected that surface haptics via EA in
that observed under AC stimulation. In other words, the interface of the future will extend beyond the touchscreens of electronic devices
the finger and touchscreen is more conductive at lower frequencies and possibly become accessible on a variety of physical surfaces.
due to the leakage of electrical charges from the finger to the These surfaces may include not only flat, curved, and flexible
surfaceofthetouchscreen.Athigherfrequencies,thechargeleakage structures but also those made of hard or soft materials, equipped
diminishesandthebehavioroftheinterfacebecomesmorecapacitive. withembeddedcomputationalcapabilities.Notably,advancementsin
Similarly,underthewetcondition,thecapacitancesC′ ,C′ ,and new material technologies can facilitate the integration of electronic
EP gap
C NaCl short out as the stimulation frequency reaches zero and all and mechanical functionalities [49].
thecurrentflowsthroughtheresistancesR′ andR .However, In this study, we investigated the effect of input signal type
EP NaCl
the resistance of the NaCl (R ) remains effective even at higher (DC vs. AC) and moisture on our tactile perception. The detection
NaCl
frequencies, creating a conduction path between the finger and the thresholdfortactilestimuliundertheACstimulationwasfoundtobe
touchscreen.Atlowfrequencies,R E′ P +R NaCl <R EP sinceNaCl significantlylowerthanthatoftheDCstimulationforallparticipants.
fillsintheairgapbetweenthefingerandthetouchscreenandreduces The FFT analysis of the experimental data and the proposed circuit
theresistivityasshowninFig.4h.Thisoverallunderstandingfurther modelprovidedadeeperunderstandingoftheperceptualandphysical
clarifies the weaker electric field observed during DC stimulation mechanismsbehindthedifferenceintactileperceptionofDCvs.AC
compared to AC stimulation. stimulation. Furthermore, we noted that moisture negatively impacts
Wealsoinvestigatedtheeffectofmoistureonthetactiledetection the tactile perception of EA. This result is in line with our earlier
threshold voltage and found that the participants with very moist experimental study [20], which showed that the relative increase in
fingers (S6, S7, S9) had significantly higher threshold levels than thecoefficientoffrictionissmallerforhigherlevelsoffingertipskin
the other participants (Fig. 2b). For those participants, we argue moisture. The earlier studies in the literature have already reported
that the introduction of finger sweat into the interface reduces that finger moisture affects the contact dynamics under tangential
the strength of the electric field as demonstrated by our electrical loading even when there is no EA [50], [51]. Our measurements in
impedancemeasurements.Furthermore,ifthefrictionforceactingon thisstudyfurthershowedthatthemagnitudeofelectricalimpedance11
drops significantly when sweat exists at the interface between the [13] B. Sadia, A. Sadic, M. Ayyildiz, and C. Basdogan, “Exploration
finger and the touchscreen (see Fig. 4) Sweat, a more conductive strategies for tactile graphics displayed by electrovibration on a
substance, fills the air gap between the finger and the touchscreen touchscreen,” International Journal of Human-Computer Studies,
and causes a reduction in magnitude of electrostatic forces. vol.160,p.102760,2022.
[14] T. Nakamura and A. Yamamoto, “A multi-user surface visuo-
Ourfuturestudieswillinvestigatetheeffectofcontrolledhydration
haptic display using electrostatic friction modulation and
of the interface on friction between the finger and touchscreen
capacitive-type position sensing,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics,
with and without EA. Previous research in tribology, conducted
vol.9,no.3,pp.311–322,2016.
without employing EA, observed an initial rise in the coefficient
[15] S.E.Emgin,A.Aghakhani,T.M.Sezgin,andC.Basdogan,“Hap-
of friction (CoF), which subsequently decreased as the level of table:Aninteractivetabletopprovidingonlinehapticfeedbackfor
moisture or liquid present at the contact interface increased. [42], touchgestures,”IEEETransactionsonVisualizationandComputer
[45], [52], [53]. The underlying physics driving this transformation Graphics,vol.25,no.9,pp.2749–2762,2018.
is not fully elucidated, given the intricate nature of the transition [16] J. Guo, J. Leng, and J. Rossiter, “Electroadhesion technologies
phases between dry and fully lubricated states. This complexity is for robotics: A comprehensive review,” IEEE Transactions on
Robotics,vol.36,no.2,pp.313–327,2019.
particularlypronouncedinthecontextofcontactsinvolvingnonlinear
[17] P.Rajagopalan,M.Muthu,Y.Liu,J.Luo,X.Wang,andC.Wan,
andviscoelasticmaterials,suchasthehumanfingerskin,whichalso
“Advancement of electroadhesion technology for intelligent and
exhibits multi-scale surface roughness. Moreover, our understanding
self-reliant robotic applications,” Advanced Intelligent Systems,
oftheimpactofEAonthislubricationtransitioniscurrentlylimited,
vol.4,no.7,p.2200064,2022.
withonlyahandfulofstudiestouchingthissubjecttodate[20],[31], [18] C. Basdogan, M. A. Sormoli, and O. Sirin, “Modeling sliding
[32]. frictionbetweenhumanfingerandtouchscreenunderelectroadhe-
sion,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.13,no.3,pp.511–521,
ACKNOWLEDGMENT 2020.
[19] M. Ayyildiz, M. Scaraggi, O. Sirin, C. Basdogan, and B. N.
C.B.acknowledgesthefinancialsupportprovidedbytheScientific
Persson, “Contact mechanics between the human finger and a
and Technological Research Council of Turkey (TUBITAK) under
touchscreen under electroadhesion,” Proceedings of the National
contract number 123E138. AcademyofSciences,vol.115,no.50,pp.12668–12673,2018.
[20] O.Sirin,A.Barrea,P.Lefe`vre,J.-L.Thonnard,andC.Basdogan,
REFERENCES “Fingerpad contact evolution under electrovibration,” Journal of
theRoyalSocietyInterface,vol.16,no.156,p.20190166,2019.
[1] L. Skedung, M. Arvidsson, J. Y. Chung, C. M. Stafford, B.
[21] B.N.Persson,“Thedependencyofadhesionandfrictiononelec-
Berglund,andM.W.Rutland,“Feelingsmall:Exploringthetactile
trostatic attraction,” The Journal of Chemical Physics, vol. 148,
perceptionlimits,”ScientificReports,vol.3,no.1,pp.1–6,2013.
no.14,p.144701,2018.
[2] E. AliAbbasi, V. Aydingul, A. Sezgin, U. Er, S. Turkuz, and C.
[22] B. N. Persson, “General theory of electroadhesion,” Journal of
Basdogan, “Tactile perception of coated smooth surfaces,” IEEE
Physics:CondensedMatter,vol.33,no.43,p.435001,2021.
TransactionsonHaptics,vol.16,no.4,pp.586–593,2023.
[23] C. D. Shultz, M. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate, “On the electrical
[3] C. W. Carpenter, C. Dhong, N. B. Root, et al., “Human ability
characterization of electroadhesive displays and the prominent
to discriminate surface chemistry by touch,” Materials Horizons,
interfacial gap impedance associated with sliding fingertips,” in
vol.5,no.1,pp.70–77,2018.
IEEEHapticsSymposium(HAPTICS),IEEE,2018,pp.151–157.
[4] C. Basdogan, F. Giraud, V. Levesque, and S. Choi, “A review of
[24] Y. Vardar and K. J. Kuchenbecker, “Finger motion and contact
surface haptics: Enabling tactile effects on touch surfaces,” IEEE
by a second finger influence the tactile perception of electrovi-
TransactionsonHaptics,vol.13,no.3,pp.450–470,2020.
bration,”JournaloftheRoyalSocietyInterface,vol.18,no.176,
[5] O.Bau,I.Poupyrev,A.Israr,andC.Harrison,“Teslatouch:Elec-
p.20200783,2021.
trovibrationfortouchsurfaces,”inProceedingsofthe23rdAnnual
[25] E. AliAbbasi, Ø. G. Martinsen, F.-J. Pettersen, J. E. Colgate,
ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
and C.Basdogan, “Experimental estimationof gap thicknessand
2010,pp.283–292.
electrostatic forces between contacting surfaces under electroad-
[6] D.J.Meyer,M.A.Peshkin,andJ.E.Colgate,“Fingertipfriction
hesion,”AdvancedIntelligentSystems,p.2300618,2024.
modulationduetoelectrostaticattraction,”inIEEEWorldHaptics
[26] B.N.Persson,“Theoryofrubberfrictionandcontactmechanics,”
Conference(WHC),IEEE,2013,pp.43–48.
TheJournalofChemicalPhysics,vol.115,no.8,pp.3840–3861,
[7] O.Sirin,M.Ayyildiz,B.Persson,andC.Basdogan,“Electroadhe-
2001.
sionwithapplicationtotouchscreens,”SoftMatter,vol.15,no.8,
[27] K. A. Kaczmarek, K. Nammi, A. K. Agarwal, M. E. Tyler, S. J.
pp.1758–1775,2019.
Haase, and D. J. Beebe, “Polarity effect in electrovibration for
[8] E. AliAbbasi, M. A. Sormoli, and C. Basdogan, “Frequency-
tactile display,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
dependent behavior of electrostatic forces between human finger
vol.53,no.10,pp.2047–2054,2006.
and touch screen under electroadhesion,” IEEE Transactions on
[28] Y. Vardar, B. Gu¨c¸lu¨, and C. Basdogan, “Effect of waveform on
Haptics,vol.15,no.2,pp.416–428,2022.
tactileperceptionbyelectrovibrationdisplayedontouchscreens,”
[9] R. H. Osgouei, J. R. Kim, and S. Choi, “Improving 3d shape
IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.10,no.4,pp.488–499,2017.
recognition withelectrostatic friction display,” IEEE Transactions
[29] Y. Vardar, B. Gu¨c¸lu¨, and C. Basdogan, “Tactile masking by
onHaptics,vol.10,no.4,pp.533–544,2017.
[10] Y.Vardar,A.˙Is¸leyen,M.K.Saleem,andC.Basdogan,“Roughness electrovibration,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 11, no. 4,
pp.623–635,2018.
perception of virtual textures displayed by electrovibration on
[30] I. Ozdamar, M. R. Alipour, B. P. Delhaye, P. Lefevre, and C.
touchscreens,”inIEEEWorldHapticsConference(WHC),IEEE,
Basdogan, “Step-change in friction under electrovibration,” IEEE
2017,pp.263–268.
[11] A. ˙Is¸leyen, Y. Vardar, and C. Basdogan, “Tactile roughness per- TransactionsonHaptics,vol.13,no.1,pp.137–143,2020.
[31] X.Li,C.Choi,Y.Ma,etal.,“Electrowetting:Aconsiderationin
ceptionofvirtualgratingsbyelectrovibration,”IEEETransactions
electroadhesion,” IEEE Transactions on Haptics, vol. 13, no. 3,
onHaptics,vol.13,no.3,pp.562–570,2019.
pp.522–529,2020.
[12] R. F. Friesen, R. L. Klatzky, M. A. Peshkin, and J. E. Colgate,
[32] S. Chatterjee, Y. Ma, A. Sanghani, M. Cherif, J. E. Colgate,
“Building a navigable fine texture design space,” IEEE Transac-
andM.C.Hipwell,“Preferentialcontaminationinelectroadhesive
tionsonHaptics,vol.14,no.4,pp.897–906,2021.
touchscreens: Mechanisms, multiphysics model, and solutions,”12
Advanced Materials Technologies, vol. 8, no. 16, p. 2300213, [53] T.Andre´,P.Lefe`vre,andJ.-L.Thonnard,“Acontinuousmeasure
2023. offingertipfrictionduringprecisiongrip,”JournalofNeuroscience
[33] Y. Vardar, B. Gu¨c¸lu¨, and C. Basdogan, “Effect of waveform in Methods,vol.179,no.2,pp.224–229,2009.
hapticperceptionofelectrovibrationontouchscreens,”inInterna-
tional Conference on Human Haptic Sensing and Touch Enabled
ComputerApplications,Springer,2016,pp.190–203.
[34] Ø.G.Martinsen,S.Grimnes,andJ.Karlsen,“Electricalmethods
forskinmoistureassessment,”SkinPharmacologyandPhysiology,
vol.8,no.5,pp.237–245,1995.
[35] Ø. G. Martinsen and S. Grimnes, “On using single frequency
electrical measurements for skin hydration assessment,” Innov.
Techn.Biol.Med.,vol.19,no.5,pp.395–499,1998.
[36] Ø. G. Martinsen, S. Grimnes, J. K. Nilsen, et al., “Gravimetric
method for in vitro calibration of skin hydration measurements,”
IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering, vol. 55, no. 2,
pp.728–732,2008.
[37] S.R.Tripathi,E.Miyata,P.B.Ishai,andK.Kawase,“Morphology
ofhumansweatductsobservedbyopticalcoherencetomography
andtheirfrequencyofresonanceintheterahertzfrequencyregion,”
ScientificReports,vol.5,no.1,pp.1–7,2015.
[38] S.GrimnesandØ.G.Martinsen,BioimpedanceandBioelectricity
Basics,3rded.AcademicPress,2015.
[39] W.KuangandS.Nelson,“Low-frequencydielectricpropertiesof
biologicaltissues:Areviewwithsomenewinsights,”Transactions
oftheASAE,vol.14,no.1,pp.173–184,1968.
[40] H.Schwan,“Electrodepolarizationimpedanceandmeasurements
in biological materials,” Annals of the New York Academy of
Sciences,vol.148,no.1,pp.191–209,1968.
[41] R. K. Sivamani, G. C. Wu, N. V. Gitis, and H. I. Maibach,
“Tribological testing of skin products: Gender, age, and ethnicity
onthevolarforearm,”SkinResearchandTechnology,vol.9,no.4,
pp.299–305,2003.
[42] S.M.Pasumarty,S.A.Johnson,S.A.Watson,andM.J.Adams,
“Frictionofthehumanfingerpad:Influenceofmoisture,occlusion
andvelocity,”TribologyLetters,vol.44,pp.117–137,2011.
[43] Y.Zhu,S.Song,W.Luo,P.Elias,andM.Man,“Characterization
of skin friction coefficient, and relationship to stratum corneum
hydration in a normal chinese population,” Skin Pharmacology
andPhysiology,vol.24,no.2,pp.81–86,2011.
[44] B. Persson, “Capillary adhesion between elastic solids with ran-
domly rough surfaces,” Journal of Physics: Condensed Matter,
vol.20,no.31,p.315007,2008.
[45] S.Tomlinson,R.Lewis,X.Liu,C.Texier,andM.Carre´,“Under-
standing the friction mechanisms between the human finger and
flat contacting surfaces in moist conditions,” Tribology Letters,
vol.41,pp.283–294,2011.
[46] O.Dinc¸,C.Ettles,S.Calabrese,andH.Scarton,“Someparameters
affecting tactile friction,” Journal of Tribology, vol. 113, no. 3,
pp.512–517,1991.
[47] C.Pailler-MatteiandH.Zahouani,“Studyofadhesionforcesand
mechanicalpropertiesofhumanskininvivo,”JournalofAdhesion
ScienceandTechnology,vol.18,no.15-16,pp.1739–1758,2004.
[48] C.Pailler-Mattei,S.Nicoli,F.Pirot,R.Vargiolu,andH.Zahouani,
“Anewapproachtodescribetheskinsurfacephysicalproperties
in vivo,” Colloids and Surfaces B: Biointerfaces, vol. 68, no. 2,
pp.200–206,2009.
[49] S.BiswasandY.Visell,“Emergingmaterialtechnologiesforhap-
tics,”AdvancedMaterialsTechnologies,vol.4,no.4,p.1900042,
2019.
[50] T. Andre´, P. Lefe`vre, and J.-L. Thonnard, “Fingertip moisture
is optimally modulated during object manipulation,” Journal of
Neurophysiology,vol.103,no.1,pp.402–408,2010.
[51] T. Andre´, V. Le´vesque, V. Hayward, P. Lefe`vre, and J.-L. Thon-
nard, “Effect of skin hydration on the dynamics of fingertip
gripping contact,” Journal of the Royal Society Interface, vol. 8,
no.64,pp.1574–1583,2011.
[52] M. J. Adams, B. J. Briscoe, and S. A. Johnson, “Friction and
lubrication of human skin,” Tribology Letters, vol. 26, no. 3,
pp.239–253,2007.13
EasaAliAbbasireceivedthePh.D.degreeinCom- Cagatay Basdogan received the Ph.D. degree in
putationalSciencesandEngineeringfromKocUni- mechanical engineering from Southern Methodist
versity, Istanbul, Turkey in 2023. He is a post- University.Heisafacultymemberinthemechanical
doctoral researcher at Max Planck Institute for In- engineering and computational sciences and engi-
formatics, Saarbrucken, Germany. He received his neering programs at the College of Engineering,
B.Sc. degree in Electrical and Electronics Engi- Koc University, Istanbul. Before joining to Koc
neering from Azad University in 2014 and M.Sc. University, he worked at NASA-JPL/Caltech, the
degreeinMechatronicsEngineeringfromUniversity Massachusetts Institute of Technology, and North-
of Tabriz in 2017. His research interests include western University Research Park. His research in-
haptics, human-computer interaction, mechatronics, terests include haptic interfaces, robotics, mecha-
andphysics-basedmodeling. tronics,biomechanics,medicalsimulation,computer
graphics, and multi-modal virtual environments. In addition to serving in
editorialboardsofseveraljournalsandprogrammecommitteesofconferences,
hechairedtheIEEEWorldHapticsConferencein2011.
MuhammadMuzammilreceivedtheM.Sc.degree
in Energetic Materials Engineering and the B.Sc.
degree in Avionics Engineering from the National
University of Sciences and Technology, Islamabad,
Pakistanin2019and2010,respectively.Heiscur-
rentlyworkingtowardthePh.D.degreeinCompu-
tational Sciences and Engineering program of Koc
University, Istanbul, Turkey. His research interests
include haptic interfaces, tactile perception, and
MEMS.
Omer Sirin received his Ph.D. degree from Me-
chanicalEngineeringDepartmentofKocUniversity
in Istanbul, Turkey in 2019. He was awarded the
prestigious TUBITAK BIDEB fellowship for his
doctoral studies. He received his B.Sc. degree in
MechatronicsEngineeringfromBahcesehirUniver-
sityin2012andhisM.Sc.degreeinBiomedicalEn-
gineeringfromClevelandStateUniversityin2013.
Hisresearchinterestsarehaptics,mechatronics,and
contactmechanics.
Philippe Lefe`vre graduated as an Electrical En-
gineer in 1988 and obtained his PhD in Applied
Sciencesin1992fromUCLouvain.DuringhisPhD,
he spent one year at McGill University in the De-
partmentofBiomedicalEngineering.Hethenspent
two years (postdoc) as a Visiting Fellow at the
LaboratoryofSensorimotorResearch,NEI,National
Institutes of Health, MD Bethesda. In 1997 he ob-
tainedapermanentpositionasaResearchAssociate
from FNRS at UCLouvain. From 2003 to 2004 he
spent a sabbatical and was appointed as a Visiting
ScientistattheNationalEyeInstitute,NIH,Bethesda.In2011hebecameFull
Professor of Biomedical Engineering at UCLouvain. His research interests
include the interaction between vision and the neural control of movement,
modeling of the oculomotor and motor systems, experimental and clinical
studyofeye,headandlimbmovements,eye-handcoordination,biomechanics
offingerobjectinteractionanddexterousmanipulationinmicro-gravity.
ØrjanGrøttemMartinsenisaprofessorofphysics
and electronics at the Department of Physics, Uni-
versity of Oslo, Norway. He is also a senior re-
searcher at the Oslo University Hospital. Martin-
sen is head of the “Oslo Bioimpedance and Med-
ical Technology Group”, where the main focus is
on electrical bioimpedance theory and applications
withinmedicine.Heistheco-authorofthetextbook
“Bioimpedance and Bioelectricity Basics”, and he
is the founding editor-in-chief of the Journal of
ElectricalBioimpedance.Supplementary Materials
Tactile Perception of Electroadhesion: Effect of DC versus AC Stimulation and Finger
Moisture
Easa AliAbbasi1, Muhammad Muzammil1, Omer Sirin1, Philippe Lef`evre2,3, Ørjan Grøttem
Martinsen4,5, and Cagatay Basdogan1,
∗
1 College of Engineering, Koc University, Istanbul 34450, Turkey
2 Institute of Information and Communication Technologies, Electronics and Applied
Mathematics (ICTEAM), Universit´e catholique de Louvain, Brussels and Louvain-la-Neuve,
Belgium
3 Institute of Neuroscience, Universit´e catholique de Louvain, Brussels and Louvain-la-Neuve,
Belgium
4 Department of Physics, University of Oslo, Sem Sælands vei 24, 0371 Oslo, Norway
5 Department of Clinical and Biomedical Engineering, Oslo University Hospital, 0424 Oslo,
Norway
E-mail: cbasdogan@ku.edu.tr
∗SI. 1 RESULTS OF TACTILE PERCEPTION EXPERIMENT
SI. 1 Results of Tactile Perception Experiment
a b
1.5 1.5
1 1
0.5 0.5
0 0
0 10 20 30 40 0 5 10 15 20 25
Trial Number Trial Number
c d e
0.03
0.02
0.01
0
100 200 300 400 500 100 200 300 400 500 100 200 300 400 500
Frequency (Hz) Frequency (Hz) Frequency (Hz)
Supplementary Figure S1. An exemplar staircase data obtained by the threshold experiments under
a) AC and b) DC conditions for participant S2. FFT analysis of the tangential force under AC
condition for the c) 3rd and d) 12th trials and under DC condition for e) 7th trial.
1
)002/
V(
edutilpmA
TFF
pp
)7.07/
V(
edutilpmA
smrSI. 2 RESULTS OF FRICTION MEASUREMENTS
SI. 2 Results of Friction Measurements
Supplementary Figure S2. Change in coefficient of friction (CoF) as a function of displacement for
all 9 sessions (3 sessions/day x 3 days) under the nominal finger condition when EA=OFF. The solid,
dashed, and dotted curves represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd trials respectively in each session.
2SI. 2 RESULTS OF FRICTION MEASUREMENTS
Supplementary Figure S3. Change in coefficient of friction (CoF) as a function of displacement for
all 9 sessions (3 sessions/day x 3 days) under the nominal finger condition when EA=ON. The solid,
dashed, and dotted curves represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd trials respectively in each session.
3SI. 2 RESULTS OF FRICTION MEASUREMENTS
Supplementary Figure S4. Change in coefficient of friction (CoF) as a function of displacement for
all 9 sessions (3 sessions/day x 3 days) under the moist finger condition when EA=OFF. The solid,
dashed, and dotted curves represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd trials respectively in each session.
4SI. 2 RESULTS OF FRICTION MEASUREMENTS
Supplementary Figure S5. Change in coefficient of friction (CoF) as a function of displacement for
all 9 sessions (3 sessions/day x 3 days) under the moist finger condition when EA=ON. The solid,
dashed, and dotted curves represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd trials respectively in each session.
5SI. 2 RESULTS OF FRICTION MEASUREMENTS
Supplementary Figure S6. Change in tangential force as a function of displacement for all 9 sessions
(3 sessions/day x 3 days) under the nominal finger condition when EA=OFF. The solid, dashed, and
dotted curves represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd trials respectively in each session.
6SI. 2 RESULTS OF FRICTION MEASUREMENTS
Supplementary Figure S7. Change in tangential force as a function of displacement for all 9 sessions
(3 sessions/day x 3 days) under the nominal finger condition when EA=ON. The solid, dashed, and
dotted curves represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd trials respectively in each session.
7SI. 2 RESULTS OF FRICTION MEASUREMENTS
Supplementary Figure S8. Change in tangential force as a function of displacement for all 9 sessions
(3 sessions/day x 3 days) under the moist finger condition when EA=OFF. The solid, dashed, and
dotted curves represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd trials respectively in each session.
8SI. 2 RESULTS OF FRICTION MEASUREMENTS
Supplementary Figure S9. Change in tangential force as a function of displacement for all 9 sessions
(3 sessions/day x 3 days) under the moist finger condition when EA=ON. The solid, dashed, and dotted
curves represent 1st, 2nd and 3rd trials respectively in each session.
9SI. 3 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SKIN
SI. 3 Electrical Impedance Measurements for Finger Skin
Supplementary Figure S10. Change in skin impedance as a function of frequency for day 1
(repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
10SI. 3 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SKIN
Supplementary Figure S11. Change in skin impedance as a function of frequency for day 2
(repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
11SI. 3 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SKIN
Supplementary Figure S12. Change in skin impedance as a function of frequency for day 3
(repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
12SI. 4 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR TOUCHSCREEN
SI. 4 Electrical Impedance Measurements for Touchscreen
Supplementary Figure S13. Change in touchscreen impedance as a function of frequency, measured
at location 1 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
13SI. 4 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR TOUCHSCREEN
Supplementary Figure S14. Change in touchscreen impedance as a function of frequency, measured
at location 2 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
14SI. 4 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR TOUCHSCREEN
Supplementary Figure S15. Change in touchscreen impedance as a function of frequency, measured
at location 3 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
15SI. 4 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR TOUCHSCREEN
Supplementary Figure S16. Change in touchscreen impedance as a function of frequency, measured
at location 4 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
16SI. 4 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR TOUCHSCREEN
Supplementary Figure S17. Change in touchscreen impedance as a function of frequency, measured
at location 5 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
17SI. 5 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SLIDING ON
TOUCHSCREEN IN NOMINAL CONDITION
SI. 5 Electrical Impedance Measurements for Finger Sliding on Touchscreen in Nom-
inal Condition
Supplementary Figure S18. Change in total impedance as a function of frequency for the finger
sliding on the touchscreen under the nominal condition for day 1 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b)
phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
18SI. 5 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SLIDING ON
TOUCHSCREEN IN NOMINAL CONDITION
Supplementary Figure S19. Change in total impedance as a function of frequency for the finger
sliding on the touchscreen under the nominal condition for day 2 (repeated ten times): a) impedance
magnitude, b) phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
19SI. 5 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SLIDING ON
TOUCHSCREEN IN NOMINAL CONDITION
Supplementary Figure S20. Change in total impedance as a function of frequency for the finger
sliding on the touchscreen under the nominal condition for day 3 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b)
phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
20SI. 6 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SLIDING ON
TOUCHSCREEN IN WET CONDITION
SI. 6 Electrical Impedance Measurements for Finger Sliding on Touchscreen in Wet
Condition
Supplementary Figure S21. Change in total impedance as a function of frequency for the finger
sliding on the touchscreen under the wet condition for day 1 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b)
phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
21SI. 6 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SLIDING ON
TOUCHSCREEN IN WET CONDITION
Supplementary Figure S22. Change in total impedance as a function of frequency for the finger
sliding on the touchscreen under the wet condition for day 2 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b)
phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
22SI. 6 ELECTRICAL IMPEDANCE MEASUREMENTS FOR FINGER SLIDING ON
TOUCHSCREEN IN WET CONDITION
Supplementary Figure S23. Change in total impedance as a function of frequency for the finger
sliding on the touchscreen under the wet condition for day 3 (repeated ten times): a) magnitude, b)
phase, c) resistance, and d) capacitance.
23