AI-Driven Strategies for Reducing Student
Withdrawal
A Study of EMU Student Stopout
Yan Zhao∗, Amy Otteson ∗
∗Eastern Michigan University, USA
Abstract—Noteveryonewhoenrollsincollegewillleavewitha • Q2: Can these common characteristics be used to
certificate or degree, but the number of people who drop out or predict the risk of student withdrawal?
takeabreakismuchhigherthanexpertspreviouslybelieved.In
For Q1, the analysis includes various factors such as aca-
December 2013, there were 29 million people with some college
education but no degree. That number jumped to 36 million by demic performance, demographics, admission criteria, finan-
December of 2018, according to a new report from the National cial status, and other relevant characteristics to understand
Student Clearinghouse Research Center[1]. the predictors of student withdrawal. In order to quantify the
It is imperative to understand the underlying factors con-
stopout group, retention rates are used as metrics. Retention
tributing to student withdrawal and to assist decision-makers
rates measure the percentage of first-time undergraduate stu-
to identify effective strategies to prevent it. By analyzing the
characteristics and educational pathways of the stopout student dents who return to school in subsequent years. For Q2, the
population, our aim is to provide actionable insights that can study examines whether the common characteristics identified
benefit institutions facing similar challenges. inQ1canbeutilizedtopredicttheriskofstudentwithdrawal.
Eastern Michigan University (EMU) faces significant chal-
By leveraging machine learning techniques, predictive models
lenges in student retention, with approximately 55% of its
are developed to identify students at high risk of stopping
undergraduate students not completing their degrees within six
years. As an institution committed to student success, EMU out. These models use identified predictors, such as academic
conducted a comprehensive study of student withdrawals to performance, demographics, institutional factors, engagement
understandtheinfluencingfactors.Andthepaperrevealedahigh levels, and financial aid status, to assess the likelihood of
correlationbetweencertainfactorsandwithdrawals,eveninthe
student withdrawal. The goal is to provide actionable insights
earlystagesofuniversityattendance.Basedonthesefindings,we
that enable EMU to implement targeted interventions and
developed a predictive model that employs artificial intelligence
techniques to assess the potential risk that students abandon support strategies to improve student retention and success.
theirstudies.Thesemodelsenableuniversitiestoimplementearly ThedatadrawnfromEMU’senrollmentanddegreerecords
intervention strategies, support at-risk students, and improve between Fall 2013 and Fall 2017 provide a foundation for
overall higher education success.
exploring these questions. The insights gained from this anal-
I. INTRODUCTION ysisareexpectedtoinformstrategiesthatcanimprovestudent
retention rates, not only at EMU but also at other institutions
Student withdrawal from college is a critical issue that
facing similar challenges.
significantly impacts higher education institutions across the
United States. Despite growing enrollment rates, a consider- II. RELATEDWORK
ablenumberofstudentsleavecollegewithoutcompletingtheir
The issue of college student withdrawal has significant
degrees. This trend has raised concerns among educational
implications for both students and educational institutions.
policy makers and institutions.
Extensive research has been conducted to understand the
Addressing the issue of student withdrawal is essential for
factorsthatcontributetostudentattritionandidentifyeffective
improving graduation rates and ensuring student success. By
strategies to improve retention rates. This section reviews the
identifying the underlying factors that contribute to student
relevant literature and previous studies on various dimensions
withdrawal and developing strategies to address these factors,
of student withdrawal.
institutions can better support their students. This study aims
Previousresearchconsistentlyshowsthatdemographicchar-
to provide a comprehensive analysis of the stop-out student
acteristicsandacademicperformancearecriticalpredictorsof
population at Eastern Michigan University (EMU) to under-
student withdrawal. Tinto [2] emphasized the importance of
standthecharacteristicsandeducationalpathwaysthatleadto
academic integration, suggesting that students who perform
withdrawal.
well academically and feel integrated into the academic com-
Specifically, this study focuses on two primary research
munityarelesslikelytowithdraw.Herzog[3]foundthatGPA
questionsconcerningnewFirst-TimeInAnyCollege(FTIAC)
andcredithourscompletedaresignificantpredictorsofstudent
students.
persistence.
• Q1: Which students are most likely to withdraw from
Astin’s theory of student involvement [4] and Kuh et al.’s
school, and what common characteristics do they
emphasis on high-impact educational practices [5] highlight
share?
1
4202
guA
5
]GL.sc[
1v89520.8042:viXrathe importance of student engagement in retention. Astin’s • Term Earned SCH:Numberofcredithourscompletedin
theoryofstudentinvolvement[4]andKuhetal.’semphasison the first fall term, categorized into four ranges: >12, 9-12,
high-impacteducationalpractices[5]highlighttheimportance 6-9, and <3.
of student engagement in retention. • ACT Scores: Composite scores categorized into four
Ourstudyextendsthisbyintegratingcorrelationanalysisto ranges: >30, 24-29, 18-23, and 12-17.
offer a holistic understanding of student withdrawal, combin- • Decision GPA: High school GPA used for college admis-
ing quantitative rigor with qualitative depth. And instead of sions.
focusing on one single factor, our research utilizes a compre- • AvgFall#2:theaverageproportionsoffreshmenentering
hensive dataset from Eastern Michigan University (EMU) to in Fall 2013 through Fall 2017 at EMU who returned in
explore the interplay between academic performance, demo- the second year.
graphic characteristics, and admission criteria.
Stratton, O’Toole, and Wetzel [6] found that students are
IV. CORRELAITONEXPERIMENTS
mostvulnerabletowithdrawalduringtheirfirstyearofcollege. This section presents our investigation for the first research
PascarellaandTerenzini[7]notedthatthefirstyearisessential questions RQ1. we will first introduce the study method and
to establish academic habits and social connections. then describe the results of our experiment.
Unlike previous studies, our research incorporates a predic- RQ1: Which students are most likely to withdraw from
tivemodeltoanalyzetheriskofstudentwithdrawalattheearly school, and what common characteristics do they share?
stage of university attendance, providing valuable information
A. Pearson Correlation Coefficient Calculation
on potential at-risk students.
Thesecomprehensiveapproachesofferspecificinsightsthat
ThePearsoncorrelationcoefficient,denotedasr,quantifies
can directly inform policy and practice at EMU and have the linear relationship between variables:
broader applications for similar institutions. (cid:80) (X −X¯)(Y −Y¯)
Zhao [8] utilized Markov Chain models for enrollment r = i i
prediction, demonstrating the potential of advanced analytical (cid:112)(cid:80) (X i−X¯)2(cid:80) (Y i−Y¯)2
techniques in educational research. While this research is CalculatingthePearsoncorrelationcoefficientprovidessev-
useful for identifying early warning trends of withdrawal, it eral key benefits:
does not provide the capability to pinpoint individual at-risk
• Quantifies Relationships: It gives a precise measure of
students.
thestrengthanddirectionoftherelationshipbetweenterm
III. DATACOLLECTION GPA and retention rates.
This study aims to analyze the factors that contribute to • Statistical Validation: Provides formal statistical valida-
tion of observed trends.
the withdrawal of students from Eastern Michigan University
(EMU)andtoidentifycommoncharacteristicsamongstudents • Standardized Comparison: Allows for consistent com-
parison across different studies and datasets.
who are more likely to leave without completing their degree.
We use retention rates as metrics to determine whether • Confidence Intervals: Offers insights into the reliability
and precision of the correlation estimate.
studentsstayorleavetheschool,ratherthanrelyingondegree
completion rates. Retention rates measure the percentage of • Objective Assessment: Minimizes bias by providing an
objective, mathematical assessment of the relationship.
first-time undergraduate students who return to school in
subsequent years. Avg FA #2, Avg FA #3, Avg FA #4, Avg B. Academic Standing (GPA and SCH)
FA #5, and Avg FA #6 represent the average proportions of
Academic standing is a significant predictor of whether
freshmen entering in Fall 2013 through Fall 2017 at EMU
studentsarelikelytostopout.Wemeasuredacademicstanding
who returned in the second, third, fourth, fifth and sixth fall,
using two categories: term GPA and term-earned SCH in the
respectively.Wechosenottousefinaldegreecompletionrates
first fall.
directly because our goal is to identify at-risk students as
1) TermGPAandRetentionRateData: Figure1showsthe
early as possible. By doing so, the university can implement
retention rates in different termGPAranges over the first four
timely interventions to support these students and improve
years:
their chances of success.
Meanwhile,we collect data regarding academic perfor- • 89%, 80%, and 74% for students with a term GPA > 3.5
mance, specifically term GPA and term earned Student Credit • 83%,70%,and63%forstudentswithatermGPAbetween
3.5 and 3.0
Hours (SCH), admission criteria like ACT score and decision
GPA and demographic information. • 73%,54%,and45%forstudentswithatermGPAbetween
3.0 and 2.0
Data were derived from EMU’s enrollment and degree
records between Fall 2013 and Fall 2017. • 43%,26%,and22%forstudentswithatermGPAbetween
2.0 and 1.0
• Retention Rates: Percentage of first-time undergraduate
students returning in subsequent years. • 13%,6%,and6%forstudentswithatermGPAbelow1.0
• TermGPA:AverageGPAofstudentscategorizedintofive Figure 2 shows the retention rates in the different term-
ranges: >3.5, 3.5-3.0, 3.0-2.0, 2.0-1.0, and <1.0. earned SCH groups over the next four years are as follows:
2Correlation between Term GPA and Retention Rates:
Pearson correlation coefficient: r =0.993
95% confidence interval: (0.979,1.008)
Correlation between Term Earned SCH and Retention
Rates: Pearson correlation coefficient: r =0.993
95% confidence interval: (0.974,1.012)
Thesehighcorrelationvaluesindicateaverystrongpositive
relationship between both term GPA and retention rates, and
term earned SCH and retention rates. This suggests that
higher term GPAs and higher term earned SCH are strongly
associated with higher retention rates at EMU. The rates at
which students returned to EMU increased with the quality
and amount of academic progress made during the first fall.
3) KeyInsights: Severalkeyinsightscanbegainedregard-
Fig. 1: Retention Rates over Six Years by Term GPA ing the relationship between academic standing and student
• 76%, 65%, and 58% for students who completed more retention rates over the first four years:
than 12 credit hours in the first fall • Higher GPA and SCH Correlates with Higher Reten-
• 65%, 49%, and 42% for students with term-earned SCH tion Rates: Students with higher term GPAs and SCH in
between 9 and 12 theirfirstfallsemesteraresignificantlymorelikelytostay
• 41%, 30%, and 26% for students with term-earned SCH enrolled in subsequent years.
between 6 and 9 • Declining Retention with Lower GPA and SCH: There
• 12%, 8%, and 9% for students with term-earned SCH is a clear stepwise decline in retention rates as the term
below 3 GPA and SCH decrease.
• Severe Drop in Retention for Lowest GPA Bracket:
Students with term GPAs between 2.0 and 1.0 have
markedlylowerretentionrates,withonly43%returningin
the second year. The situation is most critical for students
with a term GPA below 1.0, where retention rates are
dramatically low at 13% in the second year. Students with
SCH below 6 show the same trend.
These insights suggest that academic performance in the
first term is a strong predictor of student retention. Targeted
interventions could be especially beneficial for students with
GPAs below 2.0 or SCH below 6 to help improve their
academic standing and increase their likelihood of persisting
in their studies.
Fig. 2: Retention Rates over Six Years by SCH
Understanding these patterns can help universities allocate
2) CorrelationResults: Tocalculatethecorrelation,weuse resourcesmoreeffectively.Institutionscanprioritizeacademic
the following data points: support services for students identified as high-risk based on
• For Term GPA and Retention Rates: their first-term GPA and SCH.
In summary, the data in Figures 1 and 2 highlight the
– TermGPA:[4.0,3.25,2.5,1.5,0.5](representingGPA
critical importance of early academic success in predicting
ranges: >3.5, 3.5-3.0, 3.0-2.0, 2.0-1.0, <1.0)
student retention, underscoring the need for early intervention
– Second FAll Retention Rates: [0.89, 0.83, 0.73, 0.43,
strategies to support at-risk students and improve overall
0.13]
retention rates.
• For Term Earned SCH and Retention Rates:
Thedifferenceinretentionratesinthefifthandsixthfallsis
– Term Earned SCH: [13.5, 10.5, 7.5, 1.5] (representing
not as significant as in previous years because students with
SCH ranges: >12, 9-12, 6-9, <3)
higher term GPAs and more term earned SCH have higher
– Sencond Fall Retention Rates: [0.76, 0.65, 0.41, 0.12]
completion rates within four years.
Usingthesedatapoints,wecalculatethePearsoncorrelation
C. Admission Criteria (Test Scores and Decision GPA)
coefficients.
Test scores and decision GPA (high school GPA) are two
important college-admissions criteria.
3in different decision GPA groups. Specifically, we see that
the retention rates in the first four years are 83%, 74%,
and 67% for students with a decision GPA greater than 3.5,
decreasing to 72%, 60%, and 53% for students with decision
GPA between 3.0 and 3.5. For students with a decision GPA
between2.0and3.0,61%,45%,and40%wereretained.There
wasalargedropinretentionratesforstudentswithadecision
GPAof1.0to2.0:40%,27%and20%.Fromthefifthfall,the
retention rates are not consistent with previous years because
studentswithhigherACTCompositescoresorbetterdecision
GPA are more likely to earn their degree in four years.
Fig. 3: Retention Rates over Six Years of ACT Score Group
Correlation between Decision GPA and Retention
As shown in Figure 3. Specifically, 83% students with Rates: Pearson correlation coefficient: r =0.995
an ACT Composite score greater than 30 re-enrolled in the P-value: p=0.0049
second fall, while 78% students with ACT Composite score
between 24 and 29 were retained. Of the students whose
This very high Pearson correlation coefficient 0.995 and
composite ACT score was between 18 and 23, 73% of the
low p-value (< 0.05) indicate that the correlation between
students reenrolled. Conversely, only 64% students with ACT
decisionGPAandretentionratesinthefirstyearisstatistically
Composite score between 12 and 17 re-enrolled. They also
significant, strongly supporting the hypothesis that higher
keep the same trend in the next four fall terms. The retention
decision GPAs are associated with higher retention rates.
rates for the third fall were 75%, 67%, 59%, and 48% and
Based on these insights, institutions can design targeted
68%, 61%, 52%, and 49% for the fourth fall for the four
interventions to support students with lower ACT scores,
groups of undergraduate students, respectively.
potentiallyimprovingtheirretentionrates.Admissionpolicies
cantakethesefindingsintoaccounttoensurethatstudentswho
Correlation between ACT score and Retention Rates: may need additional support are identified early and provided
Pearson correlation coefficient: r =0.992 with the necessary resources to succeed and stay enrolled.
P-value: p=0.0075
D. Demographic Information
Thecorrelationcoefficientr=0.992indicatesaverystrong
positive correlation between the ACT composite scores and
retention rates for the second fall term. The p-value p =
0.0075 is well below the common significance threshold of
0.05, indicating that this correlation is statistically significant.
Fig. 5: Retention Rates over Six Years of Age Group
The vast majority of FTIAC students (84%) are between
the age of 18 and 20, with just 15 percent below 17 years of
age. Only one percent are older than 20 years. A closer look
at the retention rates of different age groups shows that there
is no difference between students below age 17 and students
age 18-20, with their retention rates (73% vs. 73% for the
second fall, 60% vs. 60% for the third fall, and 54% vs.54%
forthefourthfall).Studentsunder20yearsoldachievehigher
retention rates than students over 20, as seen below in Figure
5. The retention rates are 72% vs. 51% (second fall), 60% vs.
39% (third fall) and 54% vs. 33% (fourth fall), respectively.
Fig. 4: Retention Rates over Six Years by Decision GPA
Figure 4 below shows the distribution of retention rates
4models like XGBoost. XGBoost is a powerful and efficient
Correlation between ACT score and Retention Rates:
implementation of gradient boosting that often performs well
Pearson correlation coefficient: r =−0.866
on classification tasks, especially with imbalanced datasets.
P-value: p=0.333
1) Data Preparation: The dataset includes 13995 FTIAC
student records, and each record has the following feature:
The negative correlation coefficients of -0.866 suggest a
strong inverse relationship between age groups and retention • Term GPA: Term GPA in the first fall term.
rates,indicatingthatyoungerstudents(below20)tendtohave • Term Earned SCH:Numberofcredithourscompletedin
the first fall term.
higher retention rates compared to older students (over 20).
However,thep-valuesof0.333indicatethatthesecorrelations • ACT Scores: ACT composite scores.
are not statistically significant at the conventional alpha level • Decision GPA: High school GPA used for college admis-
sions.
of 0.05. This means that we cannot confidently conclude
that there is a significant correlation between age groups and The target variable is the second fall retention, with a value
retention rates based on these data. The evidence supporting of 1 indicating that a student is retained, and a value of 0
the influence of age as a factor is sufficient. indicating that a student has stopped out. Rows with missing
Wealsoanalyzedthevariablesofgenderandrace.Similarly values in the selected features and target were removed to
to age, their correlations with student withdrawal were not ensure clean data. The data was split into training (80%) and
statistically significant. testing (20%) sets to evaluate model performance.
2) ModelTrainingwithXGBoost: XGBoostisanadvanced
E. Finacial Status gradient boosting algorithm known for its efficiency and high
The dataset contains the following key variables: performance.Itisparticularlyeffectiveinhandlingimbalanced
LOWINCOME:Indicatorofwhetherastudentisfromalow- datasets through its ability to use various parameter tuning
income family (Y/N). options to handle class imbalance. Furthermore, the SMOTE
FA#2 to FA#6: Retention rates at different follow-up fall techniquewasappliedtoensurethattheminorityclass(reten-
semester. The data is summarized in Table I tion = 1) was adequately represented.
LOWINCOME FA#2 FA#3 FA#4 FA#5 FA#6
B. Results
Y 73.93 61.47 54.13 32.73 14.33
Themodelhasbeentrainedandevaluated.Theperformance
N 71.71 59.33 53.19 27.85 7.86
of the model is summarized in Table II.
TABLE I: Retension rates by Low Income Status
Class Precision Recall F1-Score Support
Contrary to some expectations and existing research, our 0 0.835 0.868 0.851 1716
1 0.588 0.523 0.553 616
dataset indicates that low-income students exhibit slightly
Accuracy 0.777 2332
higher retention rates at various follow-up points compared MacroAvg 0.711 0.696 0.702 2332
to their non-low-income peers. A plausible explanation for WeightedAvg 0.770 0.777 0.773 2332
this trend could be targeted support programs for low-income TABLE II: Classification Report for the Trained Model
students at Eastern Michigan University (EMU). For students
who receive financial aid, they are more inclined to maintain C. Model Performance
their aid by continuing their studies. The overall accuracy of the model is 77.7%, which reflects
Thisfactorisheavilyinfluencedbythespecificpoliciesand a balanced performance across both classes. The results
criteriaoffinancialaid,whichcanvarysignificantlyfromone indicate that the model performs well in identifying the
institution to another. As a result, it is difficult to generalize students who are retained (class 0), with high precision and
this finding to other schools. In the subsequent predictive recall values. For students who are not retained (class 1), the
models, we will exclude this factor due to its variability precision and recall are slightly lower, suggesting room for
and the challenges in applying it consistently across different improvement in accurately predicting this class.
educational contexts. The macro and weighted averages provide additional insight
into the model’s balanced performance across different
V. PREDICTIVEMODEL
metrics.
A. Model Development
The macro average provides an unweighted mean of the
Theobjectiveofthissectionistodeveloppredictivemodels precision,recall,andF1-scoreforeachclass.Thismetrictreats
for student retention, especially focusing on improving per- all classes equally, regardless of their support (the number
formance for students who are likely to drop out. This task of instances in each class). It is useful for understanding
is challenging due to the imbalanced nature of the dataset, the model’s performance on a per-class basis, without being
where the number of retained students is significantly greater influenced by class imbalance.
compared to the number of non-retained students. Imbalanced The weighted average takes into account the support of
datasets can lead to biased models that perform well on the each class, providing a mean that is weighted by the
majority class but poorly on the minority class. To address number of instances in each class. This metric is particularly
this, we employed various techniques including advanced useful in the presence of class imbalance as it reflects the
5model’s performance more accurately in terms of the overall D. Predictive Modeling
population.
The XGBoost model developed in this study effectively
predicts the likelihood of student withdrawal based on aca-
The choice of model and threshold significantly impacts the
demic performance metrics and admission criteria. The high
recall and precision rates for students who are not retained
accuracy, precision and recall values of the model indicate its
(class 1). By selecting different thresholds, we can adjust
robustness in identifying at-risk students.
thebalancebetweenrecallandprecisiontosuitvariousneeds:
VII. IMPLICATIONSFOREMUANDSIMILAR
• High Precision Model: Useful for targeted interventions
INSTITUTIONS
where resources are limited and must be used efficiently. Theinsightsgainedfromthisstudycaninformstrategiesto
• High Recall Model: Suitable for broad preventive improve student retention rates at EMU and other institutions
measures aiming to cover as many at-risk students as facing similar challenges. By identifying the key predictors of
possible. student withdrawal, universities can allocate resources more
effectively and implement early intervention strategies to sup-
port at-risk students.
D. Implementation
These strategies may include the following:
We used data from Eastern Michigan University (EMU)
• Providing academic support services such as tutoring and
to develop our predictive model, but other universities can
academic advising to students with low-term GPA and
adapt and implement this model to identify students at high
earned SCH.
risk of withdrawal. By leveraging this model, institutions can
• Offering financial aid counseling to ensure that students
deploy early intervention strategies, offering targeted support
receive adequate financial support.
services such as academic advising, tutoring, financial aid
• Designingengagementprogramstohelpintegratestudents
counseling, and engagement programs, ultimately aiming to
intotheacademiccommunity,particularlyduringtheirfirst
improve student retention rates.
year of college.
VI. CONCLUSION
VIII. FUTURERESEARCHDIRECTIONS
This study demonstrates the feasibility of using data-driven
While this study provides a comprehensive analysis of
approaches to understand student withdrawal. By leveraging
student withdrawal at EMU, future research could explore
academic performance metrics, demographic information, and
additional factors that may influence student retention, such
admission criteria, EMU can develop effective strategies to
as finance, social integration, and external commitments (e.g.,
identify at-risk students in early stage and enhance overall
employment). Longitudinal studies could also examine the
student success.
long-term impact of early interventions on student success.
Theanalysisofthecharacteristicsandeducationalpathways
In conclusion, this study highlights the importance of data-
of the stopout student population at Eastern Michigan Univer-
driven approaches in understanding student withdrawal. By
sity(EMU)hasyieldedvaluableinsights.Theprimaryfindings
leveragingpredictivemodelingandexplainableAItechniques,
of this study are as follows.
EMU and other higher education institutions can develop
A. Academic Performance as a Predictor of Retention effective strategies to support at-risk students and improve
There is a strong positive correlation between academic overall student success. The findings from this research pro-
performancemetrics(suchastermGPAandtermearnedSCH) vide a solid foundation for ongoing efforts to enhance student
and student retention rates. Students with higher term GPAs retentionandensurethatmorestudentsachievetheiracademic
and earned SCH in their first fall semester are significantly goals.
more likely to stay enrolled in subsequent years. This finding
REFERENCES
underscores the critical importance of early academic success
in predicting student retention. [1] N. S. C. R. Center, “Some college, no degree: A 2019 snapshot
for the nation and 50 states,” 2019. [Online]. Available: https:
B. Impact of Admission Criteria //nscresearchcenter.org/wp-content/uploads/SCND_Report_2019.pdf
[2] V. Tinto, Leaving College: Rethinking the Causes and Cures of Student
Higher ACT scores and decision GPAs are associated with Attrition. UniversityofChicagoPress,1993.
higher retention rates. This correlation indicates that students [3] S.Herzog,“Measuringdeterminantsofstudentreturnvs.dropout/stopout
vs.transfer:Afirst-to-secondyearanalysisofnewfreshmen,”Research
who perform well in standardized tests and high school are
inHigherEducation,vol.46,no.8,pp.883–928,2005.
more likely to persist in their studies at EMU. [4] A. W. Astin, “Student involvement: A developmental theory for higher
education,”Journalofcollegestudentpersonnel,vol.25,no.4,pp.297–
C. Demographic Factors 308,1984.
[5] G.D.Kuh,High-impacteducationalpractices:Whattheyare,whohas
Age, gender and race did not show statistically significant
accesstothem,andwhytheymatter. AssociationofAmericanColleges
correlations with student withdrawal. These results suggest andUniversities,2008.
that targeted interventions may not be necessary for older [6] L.S.Stratton,D.M.O’Toole,andJ.N.Wetzel,“Dropout,stopout,and
transfer: The impact of attendance patterns on college student success,”
students or a specific gender to help improve their retention
ResearchinHigherEducation,vol.48,no.4,pp.433–465,2007.
rates.
6[7] E. T. Pascarella and P. T. Terenzini, How College Affects Students: A [8] Y.ZhaoandA.Otteson,“Apracticeinenrollmentpredictionwithmarkov
ThirdDecadeofResearch. Jossey-Bass,2005. chainmodels,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2405.14007,2024.
7