Strategic Deployment of Honeypots in
Blockchain-based IoT Systems
1st Daniel Commey 2nd Sena Hounsinou 3rd Garth V. Crosby
Multidisciplinary Engineering Computer Science & Cybersecurity Engineering Technology & Industrial Distribution
Texas A&M University Metro State University Texas A&M University
Texas, USA Minnesota, USA Texas, USA
dcommey@tamu.edu sena.houeto@metrostate.edu gvcrosby@tamu.edu
Abstract—This paper addresses the challenge of enhancing deployment of honeypots in BIoT systems strengthens the
cybersecurityinBlockchain-basedInternetofThings(BIoTs)sys- overall security posture and addresses pressing privacy con-
tems,whichareincreasinglyvulnerabletosophisticatedcyberat-
cerns [4].
tacks.ItintroducesanAI-poweredsystemmodelforthedynamic
Numerousstudieshaveexploredusinghoneypotsinvarious
deploymentofhoneypots,utilizinganIntrusionDetectionSystem
(IDS)integratedwithsmartcontractfunctionalitiesonIoTnodes. settings, leveraging game theory to optimize their effective-
This model enables the transformation of regular nodes into ness. La et al. [5] and Diamantoulakis et al. [6] investigated
decoysinresponsetosuspiciousactivities,therebystrengthening the deployment of honeypots in IoT networks and smart grid
the security of BIoT networks. The paper analyses strategic
systems to counteract DDoS attacks using Bayesian games
interactions between potential attackers and the AI-enhanced
of incomplete information. Li et al. [7] proposed using hon-
IDSthroughagame-theoreticmodel,specificallyBayesiangames.
Themodelfocusesonunderstandingandpredictingsophisticated eypots in smart grids to monitor cyber penetration, applying
attacks that may initially appear normal, emphasizing strategic stochasticgamestounderstandthecomplexdynamicsofthese
decision-making, optimized honeypot deployment, and adaptive environments.
strategies in response to evolving attack patterns.
In the context of Advanced Persistent Threats (APTs),
Index Terms—Blockchain, Internet of Things, Honeypots, AI-
Tian et al. [8] introduced prospect theoretic games to as-
powered Intrusion Detection System, Game Theory
sess bounded rational behavior when deploying honeypots
I. INTRODUCTION in Software-Defined Networks (SDNs) within the Industrial
Internet of Things (IIoT). Wang et al. [9] focused on honey-
The Internet of Things (IoT) has revolutionized numerous
pot deployment in Advanced Metering Infrastructure (AMI)
sectors through its vast network of interconnected devices.
networks to strategize against DDoS attacks using Bayesian
However,therapidexpansionoftheIoTintroducessignificant
games.
security and privacy concerns, as these devices often have
Shi et al. [10] contributed a three-party evolutionary game
limited computational resources, making them vulnerable to
model for array honeypot systems, introducing a novel aspect
attacks [1]. Traditional security solutions, which sometimes
to honeypot strategy. Carroll [11] reviewed game-theoretic
rely on centralized systems, encounter scalability issues and
approachesincybersecurity,highlightingtheroleofdeception
introduce further vulnerabilities [1], [2].
insecuringnetworksthroughsignalingandBayesianrepeated
Blockchaintechnologyhasemergedasapromisingsolution
games. Li et al. [12] explored distributed honeypot schemes
to enhance the security and privacy of IoT systems. Its
andgametheorymodelslikeBayesianandevolutionarygames
decentralizednaturefacilitatessecure,transparent,andtamper-
to address network security challenges in IoT, Unmanned
resistant transactions, effectively mitigating the challenges as-
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs), and cloud computing.
sociated with the IoT’s growth [1]–[3]. Integrating blockchain
Boumkheld et al. [13] focused on honeypots in smart grids
and IoT, offers a more secure and resilient framework for IoT
forSecurityInformationandEventManagement(SIEM)train-
systems. However, BIoT systems still face unique cybersecu-
ingandpost-incidentanalysis,applyingaBayesiangamewith
rity challenges, necessitating the development of innovative
complete but imperfect information. Tian et al. [14] and Lee
defense mechanisms [1].
et al. [15] explored honeypot applications in Cyber-Physical
Honeypots have proven to be an effective tool in the fight
Systems (CPS) and industrial control systems, proposing
against cyber threats. By acting as decoys, honeypots attract
game-theoretical models to optimize defense against APTs,
and analyze cyberattacks, providing valuable insights into the
considering honeypot allocation costs and human analysis.
methods and strategies employed by attackers. The strategic
Florea and Craus [16] reviewed network security tactics,
©2024 IEEE. Personal use of this material is permitted. Permission from including honeypots in software-defined networks, discussing
IEEE must be obtained for all other uses, in any current or future media, cyber deception games and honeypots as cyber camouflage
includingreprinting/republishingthismaterialforadvertisingorpromotional
methods.
purposes,creatingnewcollectiveworks,forresaleorredistributiontoservers
orlists,orreuseofanycopyrightedcomponentofthisworkinotherworks. Despite the extensive research on honeypot deployment in
4202
yaM
12
]RC.sc[
1v15921.5042:viXravariousdomains,thereremainsagapintheliteratureregarding A. System Architecture
the strategic deployment of honeypots in BIoT systems. The
As depicted in Figure 1, the IDS dynamically changes
unique characteristics of BIoT environments, such as the
the status of IoT nodes within the system, isolating them
decentralized architecture and smart contracts, necessitate the
from the main network when suspicious activity is detected.
developmentoftailoreddefensemechanismsthatcanadaptto
This isolation allows suspicious traffic to be redirected to a
the evolving threat landscape.
honeypot server, which can be safely analyzed without com-
We propose an AI-powered model for strategically deploy- promising the main network’s integrity. Meanwhile, normal
ing honeypots in BIoT systems to address this gap. Our traffic continues to flow seamlessly, ensuring uninterrupted
modelleveragesgame-theoreticprinciplestooptimizedefense service.
mechanismsagainstsophisticatedcyberthreats,contributingto
the field with a deceptive defense solution designed to secure
BIoT environments and enhance their resilience.
smart contract
The main contributions of this paper are as follows:
IoT Node
1) We introduce an AI-powered system model for the
dynamic deployment of honeypots in BIoT systems, Normal User IDS IDS Suspiscious User
Normal Services Blockchain Isolated Services
utilizinganIntrusionDetectionSystem(IDS)integrated
with smart contract functionalities on IoT nodes.
Honeypot Server
2) We develop a game-theoretic model, specifically
Bayesian games, to analyze the strategic interactions Fig.1:SystemModelofBIoTswithIDS
between potential attackers and the AI-enhanced IDS,
focusing on understanding and predicting sophisticated The proposed system architecture consists of the following
attacks that may initially appear normal. key components:
3) We conduct simulations to evaluate the effectiveness of 1) IoT Nodes: These are the smart devices connected to
various honeypot deployment strategies in a BIoT secu- theBIoTnetwork,performingvarioustaskssuchasdata
rity context, considering the trade-off between detecting collection, monitoring, and actuation.
attacks and minimizing false positives. 2) Blockchain Network: The BIoT system is built on a
4) We provide insights and recommendations for develop- blockchainnetworkthatensuressecure,transparent,and
ing more sophisticated intrusion detection systems that tamper-proof transactions among the IoT nodes. Smart
optimize the balance between security and operational contractsaredeployedontheblockchaintofacilitatethe
costs in BIoT environments. autonomous execution of predefined rules and actions.
3) AI-powered IDS: The Intrusion Detection System is a
Theremainderofthispaperisorganizedasfollows:Section
critical component of the proposed model. It leverages
II outlines our proposed AI-powered system model for the
machine learning algorithms to analyze network traffic
dynamic deployment of honeypots in BIoT systems; Section
patterns and detect suspicious activities. The IDS is
III discusses the game-theoretic model and its analysis; Sec-
trained on a diverse dataset of normal and malicious
tion IV presents the simulation setup and results; Section V
trafficpatternstoenhanceitsaccuracyandeffectiveness.
concludes the paper and outlines future research directions.
4) Honeypot Server: The honeypot server is a dedicated
system that hosts various honeypots designed to attract
II. PROPOSEDMODEL and trap attackers. When the IDS detects suspicious
traffic, it redirects it to the honeypot server for further
Blockchain-based Internet of Things (BIoT) networks com- analysis.Thehoneypotsmimicvulnerabilitiesandentice
priseinterconnectedsmartdevicescrucialforservicedelivery. attackers to reveal their tactics and intentions.
These devices, including smart home appliances, health mon- 5) Smart Contracts: Smart contracts play a vital role
itors, and environmental sensors, perform data collection and in automating the deployment of honeypots and the
real-time monitoring autonomously through smart contracts. isolationofcompromisednodes.WhentheIDSdetectsa
Their critical role and blockchain connectivity make them potentialthreat,ittriggersasmartcontractthatautomat-
attractive targets for cyber attackers. ically reconfigures the network topology, isolating the
We propose a multi-layered security strategy incorporating suspiciousnodeandredirectingitstraffictothehoneypot
honeypots as a proactive defense mechanism to address these server.
security challenges. Inspired by the work of La et al. [5], our
B. Workflow
model integrates an AI-powered Intrusion Detection System
(IDS) with smart contract capabilities to scrutinize incoming The workflow of the proposed model can be summarized
network traffic. Suspicious traffic is rerouted to honeypots as follows:
for analysis, while legitimate traffic continues uninterrupted, 1) TheAI-poweredIDScontinuouslymonitorsthenetwork
ensuring continuous service. traffic of each IoT node in the BIoT system.2) When the IDS detects suspicious traffic patterns, it lenges. The accuracy and effectiveness of the IDS heavily
triggers a smart contract on the blockchain network. depend on the quality and diversity of the training dataset.
3) The smart contract automatically isolates the suspicious Obtaining a comprehensive dataset that covers a wide range
node from the main network and redirects its traffic to ofattackscenarioscanbedifficultandtime-consuming.Addi-
the honeypot server. tionally,thedynamicnatureofthehoneypotdeploymentraises
4) The honeypot server analyzes the redirected traffic to questions about the optimal strategies for both defenders and
identifytheattacker’stactics,techniques,andprocedures attackers. Defenders must decide when and where to deploy
(TTPs). honeypots based on the perceived threat level, while attackers
5) Based on the analysis, the system updates its threat may adapt their strategies to avoid detection and maximize
intelligence and refines the IDS’s detection models to their chances of success.
improve its accuracy and effectiveness. To address these challenges, we propose a game-theoretic
6) The isolated node remains in the honeypot environment approach to model the strategic interactions between the
until it is deemed safe to reintegrate into the main defenders(i.e.,theBIoTsystemequippedwiththeAI-powered
network. IDS) and the attackers. Game theory provides a mathematical
7) Normal traffic continues to flow uninterrupted, ensuring framework for analyzing the decision-making processes of
the availability and functionality of the BIoT system. rational agents in strategic situations. By modeling the incen-
Integrating smart contracts with an AI-powered IDS en- tives, costs, and benefits of different strategies, game theory
ables our BIoT security model to leverage smart contracts’ can help us derive optimal defense mechanisms that consider
self-executing capabilities for enforcing and automating se- the attackers’ potential actions.
curity protocols. Smart contracts enable decentralized and Inourcontext,thegame-theoreticanalysiswillfocusonthe
autonomous actions, such as real-time rerouting of suspicious following challenges:
networktraffictohoneypots,basedontheAI’sanalysisofdata 1) Optimal honeypot deployment: Determining the best
patterns and anomalies. The AI component employs machine strategies for deploying honeypots based on the per-
learning algorithms to continuously analyze network traffic ceived threat level and the cost-benefit trade-offs.
patterns and compare them against known threat signatures 2) Adaptive defense mechanisms: Developing defense
and anomalies, while smart contracts ensure the automatic strategies that can adapt to the evolving strategies of
deployment of honeypots upon anomaly detection. the attackers, taking into account the potential for so-
The proposed model offers several advantages over tradi- phisticated attacks that may initially appear normal.
tional security approaches. By dynamically isolating suspi- 3) Balancing security and performance: Identifying the
cious nodes and redirecting their traffic to honeypots, the sys- optimalbalancebetweenmaximizingthesecurityofthe
tem can effectively contain potential threats and prevent them BIoT system and minimizing the performance overhead
from spreading across the network. Smart contracts enable introduced by the honeypot deployment and IDS oper-
automated and rapid response to detected anomalies, reducing ations.
the response time and minimizing the potential impact of an
attack. Furthermore, the AI-powered IDS continuously learns III. GAMEMODEL
and adapts to new threat patterns, enhancing the system’s
A. Scenario Description
resilience against evolving attack vectors.
One of the key advantages of our proposed model is its dy- We analyze the dynamics between defenders and potential
namichoneypotdeploymentstrategy.Traditionalhoneypotde- attackers in a BIoT system. Attackers aim to exploit these
ploymentapproachesoftenintroduceadditionalcomputational networks, employing tactics from naive, basic methods to so-
overhead and resource consumption by dedicating specific phisticated strategies designed to mimic legitimate operations.
nodes as permanent honeypots, which may impact the overall Sophisticated attackers, in particular, present a significant
performance of the BIoT system and increase operational challenge; their deep understanding of the BIoT environ-
costs. In contrast, our approach dynamically changes the state ment allows them to carefully plan their activities to avoid
of normal nodes to honeypots when suspicious activity is detection, often behaving indistinguishably from legitimate
detected. This dynamic adaptation allows for more efficient users to infiltrate the system. Defenders, equipped with AI-
resourceutilization,asthenodescancontinuetoperformtheir powered IDS and smart contracts, monitor network activities
regular tasks when not acting as honeypots. By temporarily to distinguish between legitimate operations and potential
isolating suspicious nodes and redirecting their traffic to the threats, deploying honeypots as a strategic countermeasure to
honeypotserver,ourmodelminimizestheperformanceimpact entrap attackers. The IDS’s activity assessment influences the
on the overall BIoT system while still providing effective deployment decision, with a higher probability of honeypot
threat detection and analysis capabilities. This dynamic ap- use as the risk of sophisticated attack increases.
proach also leads to cost savings, as it eliminates the need for In the BIoT security game, defenders and attackers have
dedicatedhoneypothardwareandreducestheoverallresource distinctactions.Defenderscaneitherdeployahoneypot(D ),
h
consumption of the security infrastructure. aimingtotrapattackersbysimulatingvulnerabilitiesorchoose
However, the proposed model also presents some chal- not to (D ). Attackers, on the other hand, decide to either
nlaunch an attack (A t) or abstain (A b). Sophisticated attackers −Ch,0 Bd,s−Ch,−Cd,s
might attack discreetly, while naive attackers are more likely
Dh
Sophisticated
Dh
Ab At
to be readily detected. The decision to abstain reflects a
strategic choice to avoid engagement under potentially risky Dn Dn
conditions. For instance, sophisticated attackers, appearing as
0,0 p(S) −Ca,s,Ba,s
normal users, might attack with only a 50% probability to Defender Nature Defender
minimize suspicion, whereas naive attackers, easily identified
assuspicious,mayattackwitha100%probabilityduetotheir −Ch,0 1−p(S) Bd,n−Ch,−Cd,n
Dh Dh
less cautious approach.
Ab
Naive
At
B. One-shot Game Dn Dn
0,0 −Ca,n,Ba,n
We model the attack and defense scenario in the BIoT
system as a one-shot, sequential game between an attacker Fig.2:GametreefortheBIoTsGameModel
(A) and a defender (D), concluding after a single round of
actions [5].
• Actions:
Table I presents the notation used in the game model to
– Defender: Deploy honeypot (D ) or not (D ). For-
clarify the symbols and their meanings for the reader. h n
mally, the action set is D ={D ,D }.
a h n
TABLE I: Notation for the game model – Attacker:Attack(A )orabstain(A ).Theactionset
t b
is A ={A ,A }.
Symbol Description a t b
Da Defenderactions:{D h,Dn},deployornotdeployhoneypot • Payoffs: U i(θ,a D,a A), where i stands for player type
Aa Attackeractions:{At,A b},attackorabstain (defender or attacker).
θA Attackertypes:{Sophisticated,Naive}
C h Costofdeployingahoneypot D. Equilibrium Analysis
Ca,s Costtodefenderforasuccessfulattackbysophisticatedattacker
(nohoneypot) We define the Bayesian Nash Equilibrium (BNE) concept
Ca,n Cost to defender for a successful attack by naive attacker (no
to analyze the game’s equilibria.
honeypot)
Ba,s Benefittosophisticatedattackerfromasuccessfulattack Definition(BNE):Astrategyprofile(σ∗,τ∗),accompanied
Ba,n Benefittonaiveattackerfromasuccessfulattack by a belief system µ∗, forms a BNE if, under µ∗, σ∗ and
C d,s Cost to sophisticated attacker for being detected (attacking τ∗ represent the best response strategies for the attacker and
honeypot)
C d,n Costtonaiveattackerforbeingdetected(attackinghoneypot) defender, respectively.
B d,s Benefittodefenderfordetectingasophisticatedattacker 1) Pure Strategy BNE: In the BIoT game, a pure strategy
B d,n Benefittodefenderfordetectinganaiveattacker BNE arises when the defender opts to deploy a honeypot
Pn Penaltyformisidentifyinganormaluser
p(S) Probabilitythattheattackerissophisticated (τ∗ = D h) with probability 1 if the expected utility of such
deploymentexceedsthatofnon-deployment,factoringinboth
Figure 2 depicts the game tree for the BIoT security game. the cost of honeypot deployment and the benefits of attacker
The game begins with Nature deciding the attacker’s type, detection.
introducinguncertainty.Theattacker’sbehavioriscategorized Proof: The defender’s deployment decision hinges on
as either Sophisticated (S) or Naive (N). To capture this whethertheexpectedutilityofdeployingahoneypotsurpasses
uncertainty, the game defines two primary information sets: abstaining based on beliefs µ about the attacker’s type. The
N ={(N|S),(N|N)}andS ={(S|S),(S|N)}.Inthesesets, defender prefers deployment (D ) over non-deployment (D )
h n
the first element represents the defender’s perception based if:
on the observed signal, while the second element denotes the
C <p p (B +C )+(1−p )p (B +C ),
actual type of the attacker. h S At|S d,s a,s S At|N d,n a,n
(1)
C. Game Formulation
indicating that honeypot deployment is the defender’s best
We formulate the game as a Bayesian game to capture strategy under these conditions.
the uncertainty regarding the attacker’s type. The defender 2) Mixed Strategy BNE: A mixed-strategy BNE, where
must decide whether to deploy a honeypot based on the both parties randomize their strategies, emerges when neither
perceived threat level, influenced by the IDS’s accuracy. At- canjustifyapurestrategybasedonexpectedcostsandbenefits
tackers choose their actions based on their type and perceived alone.
defensive measures. Proof:Foramixed-strategyBNE,weconsiderthedefender
Table II presents the game’s payoff matrix, detailing each deploying a honeypot with probability β and the attacker
player’s utilities under different action profiles and attacker choosing to attack based on their type with probabilities α
S
types. and α . Equilibrium requires indifference in strategy choice
N
• Players: The Defender (D) and the Attacker (A). The forbothparties,leadingtoequilibriumprobabilitiesβ,α S,and
attacker can be either sophisticated (S) or naive (N), α ,contingentonthegame’sparameters.Toachieveamixed-
N
formally captured as a type θ ∈{S,N}. strategyBNE,thefollowingindifferenceconditionsmusthold:TABLE II: Payoff Structure of the Game
SophisticatedAttacker NaiveAttacker
Defender/Attacker Attack(At) Abstain(A b) Attack(At) Abstain(A b)
DeployHoneypot(D h) (B d,s−C h,−C d,s) (−C h,0) (B d,n−C h,−C d,n) (−C h,0)
NotDeploy(Dn) (−Ca,s,Ba,s) (0,0) (−Ca,n,Ba,n) (0,0)
Defender’s Indifference: The defender must be indifferent The utility calculation for each event in the simulation was
between deploying (D ) and not deploying (D ): formulated as follows:
h n
Let U (e) be the defender’s utility for an event e, which
D
EU (β)=EU (β). (2)
D,h D,n can be a legitimate event, a sophisticated attack, or a naive
attack.
Attackers’ Indifference: Each attacker type must be indif-
For a legitimate event:
ferent between attacking (A ) and abstaining (A ):
t b

−P , if honeypot is deployed
EU (α )=EU (α ) (sophisticated), (3)
 n
A,S|At S A,S|Ab S U D(e)= (false positive), (5)
EU A,N|At(α N)=EU A,N|Ab(α N) (naive). (4) 0,
otherwise.
Expanding these expected utilities in terms of the game’s For a sophisticated attack:
parameters and solving the resulting system of equations for

β
d Ee
q,
t
uaα
ii
llS
ie
b,
d
ria
m
an ,ad
rth
eα
fe
emN
ra tt
ow
ic
[i al 1ll
7f
]y
r
.aie mld ewt oh re km foi rx ae nd a-s lytr za it ne ggy BaB yN esE ia. nF No ar sha B −d C,s h,−C h, i
a
i
bf
fn
udh
h
to
o
aan
n
tt
te
et
aay
y
ccp
p
kko
o
nt
td
oi ies
s
tte
dd
dc
ee
et
tep
p
edl
l
co
o,
ty
y
ee
e
dd
d
,
IV. SIMULATION U D(e)= (6)
t ah
BeW
Ie
oe
f
Tfc eo
c
setn
i
cd
v
uu
e
rnc itt
e
ye sd
s
coa
o
nfs te
v
er
a
xi re
ti
.s
o
Tuo hsf es hi oom bnu
je
el
y
ca
p
tt ii
o
vo
t
en
d
we ex
p
ap sloe tyr oi mm
oe
pe
n
tn itt ms
st
it
r
zo
a
ete
e
tv hga eil eu bsa ait lne
-
− 0,C a,s, i
(
i
af
fa nt
dh htao
oc
nn
nk
oe ey
ys
ap
pu
tto
oc
at
tc
cei
i
kss
ss
on
nf
cuo
o
clt
t)
u,d
d
rse
e
.p pl lo oy ye ed
d
ance between detecting attacks (both naive and sophisticated)
and minimizing the misidentification of legitimate traffic as For a naive attack:
malicious (false positives). 
B −C , if honeypot is deployed
c
e
nya ar
p
iT
ve
oh
f
etue
l adl
tys
e
ti apm
c cloh
ku
yo
ela
m
rst sei ,eo
n
nn
att
n,op dta hrr
te
e
ha flm
ele
ice
k
ptt
e
ee
l
rr
t
i
fhs
h
o,
e
o ro
ma
c
ds
o as
ns
ot
ch
-
f
ebo
e
fw
a
onn
c
fe ifi
n
ti
t
hgn
ea
sT
n
o
Ia
a
Dpb
ly
h
Sle
s isi ss
tI
i
ycI soI
a
t,
f
t ee
mw
h
doe
n
o
ir ne
-
r
−d C,n
h,
h
a
i
bfn ud
h to
aa
n
tt tet aa
y
cc
p
kk
o
ntd oie
s
tte ddc eet te
p
ed
l
co,
ty ee dd
,
detecting these attacks. The rationale behind each parameter U D(e)= (7)
v sca elu ne ari is osp .rovi Td Aed Bt Lo Een Is IIu :re Sit mhe uls ai tm iou nla Pti ao rn amal eig ten rs swithrealistic
− 0,C a,n, i
(
i
af
fa nt
dh htao
oc
nn
nk
oe ey
ys
ap
pu
tto
oc
at
tc
cei
i
kss
ss
on
nf
cuo
o
clt
t)
u,d
d
rse
e
.p pl lo oy ye ed
d
Parameter Value Rationale
The average utility for a strategy overa trial was calculated
Ca,s,Ca,n 50,30 Attacks by sophisticated actors likely have
a higher impact, thus the higher cost. Naive as:
attackersarepresumedtocauselessdamage.
B d,s,B d,n 10,8 Detectingasophisticatedattackmaybemore 1 (cid:88)N
valuable due to their potentially higher im- U = U (e ), (8)
pactandsubtlety. D N D i
C h 2 Honeypot deployment should be relatively i=1
inexpensivecomparedtoattackcosts. where N is the total number of events in the trial.
Pn 1 This specific value allows for exploring the
impact of different penalty levels for false A. Simulation Setup and Implementation
positives.
p sophisticated 0.4 Indicatesthelikelihoodthatagiven’attack’ The simulation began by initializing a set of honeypot
isfromasophisticatedactor. deployment strategies, including fixed threshold strategies
p attack soph, 0.5, Naive attackers are modeled as more likely (FS50, FS60, FS70, FS80, FS90) and a variable strategy (VS)
p attack naive 0.9 to attack than sophisticated ones, reflecting
lesscautiousbehavior. that adapted the deployment probability based on the IDS’s
TPR soph, 0.6, Reflects the notion that the IDS is better at F1-score. Each simulated trial represented a day of network
TPRnaive 0.9 detecting unsophisticated attacks, which are
operation with a mix of legitimate activity and a smaller,
lesscomplex.
FPR 0.05 Afairlylowfalsepositiverateisusedforthis defined percentage of attacks from both sophisticated and
simulationtorepresentawell-tunedIDS. naive types.The simulation iterated through the events, categorizing
them and determining the deployment strategy for each event
based on the IDS’s F1-score. Fixed strategies deployed a
honeypot if the F1-score exceeded a set threshold, while the
variable strategy adjusted the deployment probability dynam-
ically.
The utility was calculated for each event to assess whether
an attack was detected or missed, and the average utility
achieved by each strategy was determined at the end of each
trial.
B. Simulation Experiments and Results
We conducted three main simulation experiments to eval-
uate the effectiveness of the proposed honeypot deployment
strategies:
1) Comparison of deployment strategy utilities with and
Fig. 4: Impact of Varying Cost of Deployment and Penalties on Strategy
without false positive penalties (Figure 3): This ex-
Utility
periment assessed the performance of each strategy in
scenarios where false positives were penalized and not
penalized. The variable strategy (VS) consistently per-
formedbetter,suggestingitseffectivenessinminimizing
false positives and associated costs.
Fig.5:ComparisonofDeploymentStrategyUtilitieswithAttackRate
Fig.3:ComparisonofDeploymentStrategyUtilitieswithoutandwithFalse the specific operational environment and the potential costs
PositivePenalties
associatedwithsecuritybreachesandfalsealarms.Theresults
demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed AI-powered
2) Impact of varying cost of deployment and penalties on
dynamic honeypot deployment approach in optimizing the
strategy utility (Figure 4): This experiment explored the
balance between security and operational efficiency in BIoT
effects of varying the cost of honeypot deployment and
systems.
the penalties for false positives on the utility of each
strategy. The results showed that increasing deployment
V. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSION
costs reduced utility, but the strategies demonstrated
resilience to cost changes. ThispaperintroducedanAI-poweredmodelforstrategically
3) Comparison of deployment strategy utilities with vary- deploying honeypots in Blockchain-based Internet of Things
ing attack rates (Figure 5): This experiment evaluated (BIoT) systems. By leveraging game-theoretic principles and
the performance of the strategies under different attack dynamic adaptation based on the perceived threat level, our
rates. The variable strategy exhibited a stable, gradual approachenhancesthesecurityandresilienceofBIoTsystems
decreaseinutilityastheattackrateincreased,suggesting while minimizing the performance overhead associated with
itsrobustnesstovariationsinattackrates,whilethefixed traditional honeypot deployment strategies.
strategies showed inconsistent utility fluctuations. The game-theoretic analysis provided valuable insights into
These simulation experiments provide insights into the the strategic interactions between defenders and attackers,
effectiveness of different honeypot deployment strategies in revealing the conditions under which pure and mixed strategy
various BIoT security scenarios. They highlight the impor- equilibria emerge. The simulation results demonstrated the
tance of selecting the appropriate defense strategy based on effectiveness of our proposed AI-powered dynamic honeypotdeployment approach in optimizing the balance between se- (IEEE AICAS 2024).
curity and operational efficiency, particularly when compared
to fixed deployment strategies.
However, our study has some limitations that should be ac- REFERENCES
knowledged.First,whilebasedoncarefullychosenparameters
andrationale,thesimulationexperimentsmaynotfullycapture
[1] R.Alajlan,N.Alhumam,andM.Frikha,“CybersecurityforBlockchain-
the complexity and diversity of real-world BIoT systems. BasedIoTSystems:AReview,”APPLIEDSCIENCES-BASEL,vol.13,
Futureresearchcouldinvolvemorecomprehensivesimulations no.13,Jul.2023.
[2] F. Erfan, M. Bellaiche, and T. Halabi, “Game-theoretic Designs for
or real-world experiments to validate the performance of our
Blockchain-based IoT: Taxonomy and Research Directions,” in 2022
proposed approach in more complex and realistic settings. FOURTH IEEE INTERNATIONAL CONFERENCE ON DECENTRAL-
Second, the game-theoretic model assumes that attackers IZED APPLICATIONS AND INFRASTRUCTURES (DAPPS 2022).
IEEE;IEEECompSoc,2022,pp.27–37.
and defenders are rational agents with complete information
[3] P.Sandner,J.Gross,andR.Richter,“ConvergenceofBlockchain,IoT,
about the game’s parameters. Attackers and defenders may
andAI,”FRONTIERSINBLOCKCHAIN,vol.3,Sep.2020.
have bounded rationality and incomplete information, which [4] M. Ul Hassan, M. H. Rehmani, and J. Chen, “Privacy preservation in
could impact their decision-making processes. Future work blockchainbasedIoTsystems:Integrationissues,prospects,challenges,
andfutureresearchdirections,”FUTUREGENERATIONCOMPUTER
could explore more complex game-theoretic models, such as
SYSTEMS-THEINTERNATIONALJOURNALOFESCIENCE,vol.97,
Bayesian games with incomplete information or evolutionary pp.512–529,Aug.2019.
games, to capture these real-world considerations. [5] Q.D.La,T.Q.S.Quek,J.Lee,S.Jin,andH.Zhu,“DeceptiveAttack
Third,whilethesimulationresultsprovidevaluableinsights and Defense Game in Honeypot-Enabled Networks for the Internet of
Things,”IEEEInternetofThingsJournal,vol.3,no.6,pp.1025–1035,
intotheeffectivenessofdifferenthoneypotdeploymentstrate-
Dec. 2016, conference Name: IEEE Internet of Things Journal.
gies,theyarebasedonspecificparametersettingsandassump- [Online].Available:https://ieeexplore.ieee.org/document/7442780
tions. Further sensitivity analysis and robustness tests could [6] P. Diamantoulakis, C. Dalamagkas, P. Radoglou-Grammatikis, P. Sari-
giannidis, and G. Karagiannidis, “Game Theoretic Honeypot Deploy-
be conducted to assess the proposed approach’s performance
mentinSmartGrid,”Sensors,vol.20,no.15,Aug.2020.
under various parameter configurations and assumptions. [7] B. B. Li, Y. X. Shi, Q. L. Kong, C. Zhai, Y. K. Ouyang, and
Despite these limitations, our study makes significant con- Ieee,“Honeypot-EnabledOptimalDefenseStrategySelectionforSmart
tributions to BIoT security. By introducing an AI-powered Grids,”ser.IEEEGlobalCommunicationsConference,Dec.2021.
[8] W.Tian,M.Du,X.P.Ji,G.J.Liu,Y.W.Dai,andZ.Han,“Honeypot
modelforthestrategicdeploymentofhoneypotsandanalyzing
Detection Strategy Against Advanced Persistent Threats in Industrial
the problem through a game-theoretic lens, we provide a InternetofThings:AProspectTheoreticGame,”IeeeInternetofThings
foundation for developing more sophisticated and adaptive Journal,vol.8,no.24,pp.17372–17381,Dec.2021.
[9] K.Wang,M.Du,S.Maharjan,andY.F.Sun,“StrategicHoneypotGame
defense mechanisms in BIoT systems.
ModelforDistributedDenialofServiceAttacksintheSmartGrid,”Ieee
Futureresearchdirectionscouldincludeincorporatingmore TransactionsonSmartGrid,vol.8,no.5,pp.2474–2482,Sep.2017.
advanced machine learning techniques, such as deep rein- [10] L. Y. Shi, X. R. Wang, and H. W. Hou, “Research on Optimization
forcement learning, to enable the AI-powered IDS to contin- of Array Honeypot Defense Strategies Based on Evolutionary Game
Theory,”Mathematics,vol.9,no.8,Apr.2021.
uously adapt its detection models and honeypot deployment
[11] T.E.CarrollandD.Grosu,“Agametheoreticinvestigationofdeception
strategies based on real-time feedback and evolving threat in network security,” Security and Communication Networks, vol. 4,
patterns;investigatingtheintegrationofourproposedapproach no.10,pp.1162–1172,Oct.2011.
with other security mechanisms, such as blockchain-based [12] Y. Li, L. Y. Shi, and H. J. Feng, “A Game-Theoretic Analysis for
DistributedHoneypots,”FutureInternet,vol.11,no.3,Mar.2019.
access control or secure multi-party computation, to create a
[13] N. Boumkheld, S. Panda, S. Rass, and E. Panaousis, “Honeypot Type
more comprehensive defense framework for BIoT systems; Selection Games for Smart Grid Networks,” ser. Lecture Notes in
exploring the scalability and performance of the proposed ComputerScience,vol.11836,Nov.2019,pp.85–96.
[14] W.Tian,X.P.Ji,W.W.Liu,J.T.Zhai,G.J.Liu,Y.W.Dai,andS.H.
approach in large-scale BIoT networks with a high volume
Huang, “Honeypot game-theoretical model for defending against APT
of devices and traffic; and conducting user studies to assess attackswithlimitedresourcesincyber-physicalsystems,”EtriJournal,
the usability and acceptability of our proposed approach from vol.41,no.5,pp.585–598,Oct.2019.
the perspective of BIoT system administrators and end-users. [15] S. Lee, K. Cho, S. Kim, and Ieee, “Do You Really Need to Disguise
Normal Servers as Honeypots?” ser. IEEE Military Communications
ACKNOWLEDGMENT Conference,Dec.2022.
[16] R. Florea and M. Craus, “A Game-Theoretic Approach for Network
This paper was presented at the 6th IEEE International
SecurityUsingHoneypots,”FutureInternet,vol.14,no.12,Dec.2022.
Conference on Artificial Intelligence Circuits and Systems [17] D.FudenbergandJ.Tirole,Gametheory. MITpress,1991.