1
The Relationship Between Time and Distance
Perception in Egocentric and Discrete Virtual
Locomotion (Teleportation)
Matthias Wo¨lwer, Daniel Zielasko
Abstract—Travelingdistancesintherealworldinherentlyinvolvestime,asmovingtoadesiredlocationisacontinuousprocess.This
temporalcomponentplaysarolewhenestimatingthedistancecovered.However,invirtualenvironments,thisrelationshipisoften
changedorabsent.Commonteleportationtechniquesenableinstantaneoustransitions,lackinganytemporalelementthatmightaidin
distanceperception.Sincedistancesarefoundtobecommonlyunderestimatedinvirtualenvironments,weinvestigatetheinfluenceof
timeonthismisperception,specificallyintarget-selection-basedteleportationinterfaces.Ourfirstexperimentexploreshowintroducing
adelayproportionaltothedistancecoveredbyteleportationaffectsparticipants’perceptionofdistances,focusingonunderestimation,
accuracy,andprecision.Participantsarerequiredtoteleportalongapredefinedpathwithvaryingdelays.Asecondexperimentis
designedtodeterminewhetherthiseffectmanifestsinamoreapplication-specificscenario.Theresultsindicateasignificantreduction
indistanceunderestimation,improvingfrom27%to16.8%withadelayedteleportationmethod.Othersub-scalesofdistance
estimationhardlydiffer.Despitetargetedadaptationsofpreviousstudydesigns,participantshaveagainfoundstrategiessupporting
theminestimatingdistances.Weconcludethattimeisafactoraffectingdistanceperceptionandshouldbeconsideredalongsideother
factorsidentifiedintheliterature.
IndexTerms—VirtualReality,distanceestimation,teleportation,locomotion.
✦
1 INTRODUCTION
methodswithdiscretetransitions,asteleportationisthede
Target-selection-based teleportation (Teleportation) is factostandardlocomotionmethodinmanyapplicationsdue
one of the most common methods of locomotion in to its reduced influence on cybersickness. Specifically, we
VR applications. Since it is easy to use and not being investigate how distance perception changes when using
cybersickness-inducing it is a solid choice for numerous teleportationwithdifferenttemporalaspects.
applications. VR applications are becoming more relevant Teleportation consists of two main phases, which are a
in areas of research and training, as they allow the user’s target specification (selection) and transition [7]. While the
body and environment to be manipulated in ways that are change of the user’s position happens instantaneously and
difficulttoreproduceintherealworld[1].Especiallyforap- is the namesake for the methods, i.e., usually without any
plications,studyinghumanperceptionbutalsoapplications continuousmovement,thetargetspecificationprocessitself
likeviewingvirtualarchitecture[2]ormuseums[3]thatcon- does not necessarily need to be discrete, nor does the tran-
vey the size of historical places, one important cornerstone sition itself need to happen instantaneously after the target
when trying to transfer results and impressions gained in isspecified.Asimplefadeinandouttoblack,betweenthe
the virtual world to the real world, is correctly assessing changeofposition,forexample,isverycommon.Thus,itis
distances. Research shows that distances in VR are com- evident that time is an (often unnoticed) parameter in tele-
monlyunderestimated,onlyaveragingaround71%to73% port interfaces. Therefore, we want to tackle the following
oftheactualdistances[4],[5].Similarunderestimationsare researchquestionswiththiswork:
observedwhenestimatingdistancesusingteleportation[6]. RQ1Isthereanimpactofdelayedteleportationonthe
Factors contributing to this underestimation are numerous perceptionofvirtuallytraveleddistance?Inthefollowing,
[1] but so far no conclusive reason can be named. Looking we will attempt to answer this question by breaking it
atlocomotion,onepotentialreasonfortheunderestimation downfurther:RQ1.1Isthereadifferencebetweenadistance
ofdistancesthathasbeenneglectedinresearchsofaristhe proportionaldelaythatmatcheshumanwalkingspeedand
time that passes when moving the user from their initial a delay that is proportional but faster than this? RQ1.2 Is
to their desired point in the virtual world. To close this there a difference when the target specification process is
gap,weaimtoshedlightondistanceperceptionunderthe discretevscontinuous?
influenceoftimeduringlocomotion.Whileananalysisofa In order to answer the research questions we evaluate
temporal component seems intuitive for locomotion meth- different delays of the teleportation process. As a baseline
odswithacontinuoustransitionlikesteeringweinvestigate for RQ1, we use a standard target-selection-based teleport
interface, also referred to as Point & Teleport, where the
user discretely selects a target point and is transitioned
• M.Wo¨lwerandD.ZielaskoarewiththeUniversityofTrier,Germany. instantaneously after a quick fade-to-black animation. To
E-mail:woelwerm@uni-trier.de,zielasko@uni-trier.de
evaluate RQ1.1 we delay the teleportation process by the
This work has been submitted to the IEEE for possible publication. Copyright may be
transferredwithoutnotice,afterwhichthisversionmaynolongerbeaccessible.
4202
nuJ
82
]CH.sc[
1v59891.6042:viXra2
speed of human walking through a simplified avatar, that point. Unfortunately, in about 30% of the papers we inves-
moves from the initial position to the target position and tigate the exact type of a transition is not specified, which
triggersaninstantaneoustranslationoftheuserafterreach- matchesobservationsofotherresearchinthisfield[16].We
ing the target. The use of walking speed is motivated assume that one reason for the missing information often
by aiming to make results gathered in the virtual world is that the transition occurs instantaneously, i.e., “nothing”
transferableintotherealworldwherewalkingspeedisthe happens. Even if we assume an instantaneous transition
mostfamiliarspeedoftravelforhumans.Thesamemethod only in cases where it is explicitly specified, the number
but with increased walking speed is used for comparison. ofsuchinstancesremainssubstantial[7],[9],[10],[12],[17]–
To answer RQ1.2 we move the delay caused by the avatar [34]. Another constant but distinct from zero transition, is
movement from the pre-travel information phase to the a fade-to-black effect between the two viewpoints. Lindal
target-specificationphase[7]. et al. set the total time to 1.6 s [35], Drogemuller et al. to
Finally, applications that allow the viewing of virtual 1.0 s [11], Rahimi et al. 1.5 s [36], and Freitag et al. do
architecture (c.f. [2], [3]) motivate us to examine if possible not specify the exact time [37]. We would also consider
effectsfromRQ1haveanimpactontheperceptionofroom walking through a portal as a constant time manipulation,
sizesthatuserscanwalkthrough.Thuswefurtherask:RQ2 as the distance traveled through the portal in no known
Is a potential effect also visible in applications, such as implementation correlates with the actual distance covered
roomsizeperception? [32], [38], [39]. Most animated view-point transitions tend
to exhibit a duration proportional to the distance covered:
2 RELATED WORK Bolte et al. move the user with 5.56 m/s [8], Bhandari et
al. and Adhikari et al. 10 m/s [40], [41], Habgood 5 m/s
Tothebestofourknowledge,thereisnopriorworkexplic-
[42], Lai et al. 1.44 m/s [28], and Rahimi et al. use 10, 25
itly investigating the effects of time on distance estimation
and50m/s[36].Thelatterwork,furthermore,investigates
in discrete virtual locomotion techniques. However, time is
the impact of 3-5 intermediate jumps, however, this is not
often implicitly and in various manifestations a factor in
relatedtothedistancecovered.Someworksdonotprovide
differentstagesoftheteleportationprocess,whichwewant
precisedetailsonmovementspeeds[15],[43].Finally,Leeet
to discuss in Section 2.1. Furthermore, distance estimation
al.employavariablespeedthatdependsontheimmediate
in the context of VR and locomotion is an established field
environment [44], therefore, it does not behave proportion-
ofresearch,whichwewanttotouchoninSection2.2.
allytothedistance.
Post Travel Feedback: For the post-travel feedback, we
2.1 TemporalAspectsinTeleportation onlyfindBimbergetal.[29]visualizinganout-fadingrota-
Weissker et al. propose dividing the teleportation process tionaxisover0.5s.
into4stages[7]:targetspecification,pre-travelinformation, The works of Rahimi et al. [36] and Lai et al. [28]
transition,andpost-travelfeedback.Wewouldliketofollow implicitly deal with different implementations of time in
this model and, in the following, work out how in prior teleportation(seeabove).However,theirfocusislimitedto
researchthedifferentstagesconsiderorintentionallyimple- aspectsofspatialawareness,cybersickness,cognitiveloads,
mentthefactoroftime. andusabilityratherthandistanceperception.
Target Specification: The selection of the teleportation
2.2 DistancePerception
target is primarily implemented through pointing in most
cases, hence the commonly used term ’Point & Teleport. Existing studies on distance perception in VR reveal that
Although there are various implementations (e.g., ray vs. when using Head-Mounted Displays (HMDs), distances in
parabola),selectingatargetpointitselfisalwaysatemporal virtualenvironmentsaretypicallyunderestimated.Ameta-
factorasitrequirestimetopointthecontroller(ordiffering study by Waller and Richardson [4] reveals that estimated
methodsofinput)towardthedesiredtargetpoint. distances in virtual environments average only 71% of the
Besides this unavoidable temporal factor, implementa- actualdistance.Similarly,Renneretal.[5]findthatdistance
tions are adding a constant dwell time as part of the selec- estimation averages only about 73% of the actual distance.
tion: We find Bolte et al. adding 0.5 s [8] and Bozgeyikli MessingandDurgin[45]finddistancestoaverage77%.Es-
et al. with 2 s [9]. Methods that employ some kind of timationsinanon-virtualenvironmentresultinanaccuracy
cursor steered toward the target location (iterative process) of96%[45]andgoupto99.9%[4].
introduceadelayproportionaltothetraveleddistance[10], Factors affecting distance perception include technical
[11].Griffinetal.utilizeaspeedof6m/s[12]andWeissker (hardware and parameters), compositional (environmental
et al. allow for a maximum speed of 3 m/s by explicit features), human (psychological traits), and measurement-
selectionfromacontinuousrange[13]. related factors [5]. These factors collectively impact the
Pre-TravelInformation:Feedbackextendingbeyondthe accuracy of distance perception and estimation. Moreover,
selectionprocessisrarelyencounteredininterfaces.Bolteet research by Creem-Regehr et al. [1] identifies cues for ad-
al.visualizeatargetindicatorthatgrowsover2sbeforethe justing size perception in virtual environments. Cues to
transition[8] andRupp et.alanimate changesbetweenthe calibratetheperceptionofscaleinvirtualenvironmentsare
selection and the current frame [14]. Cmentowski et al. use influenced by user-related experiences like familiarity with
an avatar that moves to the target position for a delay that thevirtualenvironment,virtualavatars,maintainingcorrect
isproportionaltothecovereddistance[15]. eye level, and experience of movement. On a technological
Transition: During the transition phase the user effec- side the field of view and HMDs weight influence per-
tively “moves” from the starting point to the destination ception [1], [45]–[47]. Furthermore distances are perceived3
studies were preregistered online 1. The study received
approval from the local ethics board. The objective of the
first study is to assess the impact of temporally delayed
teleportation on distance perception. To isolate potential
effectsweextendanexistingtaskdesignfromKeiletal.[6]
in an artificial but very controlled distance estimation task
(seeSection4).Inasecondstudy,wetrytorevealpotential
effectsinamorenaturalapplicationofdistanceestimation,
i.e., the size perception of rooms much like it is of interest
duringanarchitecturalwalkthrough,apartmentviewing,or
furniturearrangement(seeSection5).
3.1 Hypotheses
Fig. 1. Virtual environment of the distance estimation and distance
repetitiontaskwithacapsulerepresentingtheusers’movementonthe
While the realm of temporal influence on distance percep-
pathwhenusingthedelayedteleportationmethods.
tion during teleportation remains unexplored, the findings
ofrelatedstudiesallowfortheformulationofhypotheses:
differently when viewing objects right in front of the user
H1 A proportional delay of the teleportation (matching
versusonthesideinthevirtualenvironment[48].
thetimeitwouldtakeahumanwithaveragewalking
Renner et al. [5] also provide an overview of common
speed to cover the distance of teleportation) will in-
measurement techniques used to quantify distance percep-
crease the performance in distance estimation when
tion.Verbalestimation,adjustmenttasks,andblindwalking
comparedtoclassicteleportationwithoutadelay.
are enumerated. Jamiy and Marsh [49] present a similar
H2 A delay of the teleportation oriented on human
categorizationofmethodsincludingmatchingtasks,verbal
walking speed will lead to a higher estimation of
reports, bisection tasks, and blind walking. In addition,
distance when compared to a still proportional but
they present experiments highlighting the limitations of
fasterdelay.
these methods, with blind walking providing imprecise
H3 A continuous target specification process (oriented
estimations beyond 20 meters, verbal reports tending to
on walking speed) will differ in performance in dis-
underestimate, and the accuracy of estimations using the
tance estimation when compared to a discrete and
bisection task varying based on the virtual environment.
delayed(orientedonwalkingspeed)specification.
Furthermore, Bruder et al. [50] study distance perception H4 A proportional delay of the teleportation will in-
inimmersiveprojectionenvironments,revealingthatscreen crease the performance in the estimation of room
distance and parallax significantly impact distance estima- sizes compared to classic teleportation without a
tion, emphasizing the importance of relative positions of delay.
usersandvirtualobjects.
AstudybyKeiletal.[6]exploreshowdifferentmethods A rationale for the hypotheses primarily arises from
of locomotion in VR affect distance estimation. Two loco- psychologicalinsights.Thehypothesisthataproportionally
motion methods are compared regarding distance estima- delayed teleportation improves distance estimation com-
tion: instantaneous teleportation with target specification pared to instantaneous teleportation (H1) is grounded in
via pointing a parabolic ray and a hand-directed steering various research findings. Various studies indicate, dis-
method allowing forward and backward movement with a tancesinvirtualspaceareunderestimatedbyapproximately
speed of 1.39 m/s. Findings show that distance estimates 27% [4], [5]. The rationale for H1 follows from this knowl-
were more accurate when using the teleportation method. edge, considering the Tau Effect. The Tau Effect can be
Keil et al [6], however, note that counting strategies for es- described as the impact of time on distance perception,
timatingdistance,eitherbycountingsecondsofmovement whereindifferencesinthedurationofatimeunitunderthe
duringsteeringorcountingequal-sizedteleportationjumps, same conditions directly affect spatial estimation [51, p.14].
caninfluenceestimations,especiallyafterparticipantswere Helson and King [52] observe in an estimation experiment
trained with a reference size. This experiment by Keil et that the stimulation of three equidistant points p1, p2, and
al. [6] is particularly relevant to the present work as it p3 at time points t1, t2, and t3, respectively, with different
represents the only known investigation of the effects of durations||t2−t1||>||t3−t2||leadsparticipantstoperceive
teleportationondistanceestimation. the distance between p1 and p2 as longer than between
p2 and p3 [53]. Thus, the perception of a longer duration
results in a longer perception of distance. Based on the
3 METHOD
general underestimation in virtual space, this suggests that
To address the research questions we manipulate the tem- a delayed time to reach the destination point leads to a
poral behavior of different stages in a Point & Teleport longerperceptionofthedistancetraveled.Wehypothesize,
interface (see Section 3.2). To clarify the central parameters thatittherebyimprovesdistanceestimationperformanceby
of the implementation regarding its temporal behavior, we reducing underestimation. Hence, we expect the underesti-
conduct a preliminary study as a first step and describe mationobservedinvirtualenvironmentsofaround27%to
thisinSection3.3.Subsequently,weconducttwoempirical
studies. The study design and our hypotheses before the 1.https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/VEK3W4
Target Specification Pre-Travel Information Transition Post-Travel Feedback to a third method that works identically but with a delay
that is still proportional but faster. Lastly, we develop a
tn
a tsn method to compare one of the delayed methods (that has
I 0.3s a discrete target selection) with a method that is equally
delayed but implements this delay via a continuous target
5
9 1 selection.
T- 1.95 m/s 0.3s To introduce a delay we decided on two central param-
5 eters:first,asadistance-dependent(proportional)delay,we
7
8
4 T-
4.875 m/s 0.3s
use the speed of human walking, second, we add a fade-
to-black transition lasting a constant duration. The fade-to-
la blacktransitionisimplementedinallteleportationmethods
tib
rO
1.95 m/s 0.3s
and functions as a visualizer for the transition process. To
implementwalkingspeedasaproportionaldelay,different
phases of the teleportation process can be used. As our
Fig.2.Individualcomponentsoftheteleportationprocessforallinter-
facesusedinourexperiments. hypothesis H3 requires an explicit comparison of a delay
implementedinthetargetspecificationphaseandadifferent
phase, the choice remains between the pre-travel informa-
come closer to the underestimation of 4% [45] observed in
tion and the transition phase. The first thing that likely
real-worldenvironments.
comes to mind is manipulating the transition phase. There
The rationale for H2 is not only based on an analogous
are two possibilities here: 1) One can change the instant
application of the Tau Effect, which suggests that a shorter
transition of teleportation into a continuous one. However,
delay causes a correspondingly shorter distance perception
there is a risk of cybersickness, so we decided against this
comparedtoalongerdelaybutisalsosupportedbyinsights
solution. 2) One can manipulate the duration of the fade
fromtheworkofFrenzandLappe[54].Theauthorsinvesti-
transition.Wealsodecidedagainstthissolutionbecausewe
gateegocentricsimulatedmovementandfind,inthecontext
donotwanttheusertowaitfortheirtransitionwithablack
of two experiments, that the duration of movement influ-
screen,nordowewantalongfadingtransitionthatwould
encesdistanceperception.Accordingtothework,distances
interfere with subsequent interactions. Thus, we actively
that are reached in less than 3 seconds are more likely to
decidedagainstmanipulatingthetransitionphasebetween
be underestimated, and distances that require a movement
conditions. Instead, a virtual representative is chosen to
longerthanthisaremorelikelytobeoverestimated.
visualize a delay during the target specification or the pre-
H3 is based on the assumption that continuous target
travel information phase. This leaves the user stationary
selection differs in its application in various factors from
while exocentrically watching their representative move
discontinuous target selection. Continuous target selection
toward the target. The use of a delay oriented on walking
requiresamoreprecisefocusonthedistancetobecovered
speed and a fade-to-black transition is further motivated
than a simple selection of targets at a certain distance and
and suitable parameter choices are determined through a
wouldthereforejustifyanimprovementindistancepercep-
preliminarystudydescribedinSection3.3.Theresultsshow
tion. At the same time, it can be assumed that continuous
thatexocentricwalkingspeedisperceivedas1.95m/sand
target selection leads to an increased focus on the use of
adurationof0.3sispreferredforafade-to-blackanimation.
the teleportation method itself, thereby reducing attention
FollowingtheschemaofWeisskeretal.[7],wedescribe
to distance perception. In this case, a poorer estimation is
the teleportation methods along the four phases target
tobeexpected.Itisforthesereasonsthatwedonotexpect
specification, pre-travel information, transition, and post-
a particular direction for H3, as we do not know how both
travel feedback. Before elaborating on the individual tele-
considerations will influence the performance in distance
portation methods, we give a brief overview of the pos-
perception.
sible implementations of these phases. Target specification
H4 follows from the argumentation of H1. If distance
is implemented either discretely (no delay) or continuously
perception is improved, it can be assumed that this also
(delayed proportionally to the distance covered). The pre-
has positive effects on the perception of space that a user
travel information phase is solved in one of three ways.
traverses. Thus, we expect a better performance in the
Either with no delay, with a delay proportional to the distance
perceptionofroomsizes.
oriented on the speed of human walking, and thirdly again a
delay proportional to the distance but oriented on an increased
3.2 Interfaces
walkingspeed.Thetransitionphaseisalwaysthesamefade-
To evaluate the formulated hypotheses, a total of four tele- to-black animation for all methods. Lastly, the post-travel
portation methods are developed, modulating time differ- feedback phase is always omitted. Fig. 2 visualizes the
ently. As a baseline for hypothesis H1, we use a common individualcomponentsforourfinalinterfaces.
Point & Teleport interface that allows users to discretely
selectatargetpointandtransitioninstantaneously.Asecond 3.2.1 InstantTeleportation
method is developed to compare the instant teleportation The first and fundamental teleportation method moves the
with one that works similarly in terms of discrete target user instantaneously (except for the duration of a fade-to-
selection but introduces a delay that is proportional to the black animation). Target specification: Users hold a con-
distancecoveredbytheteleport.ToevaluatehypothesisH2, troller from which a parabolic ray emerges when a button
we use this proportionally delayed method and compare it is pressed. Fink et al. [55] suggest enhancing the parabola5
with a component enabling orientation specification. How- user discretely selects a target point and then the delay is
ever, for our purposes, a standard parabola is sufficient introduced by our virtual representative which moves in
and avoids the small delay introduced by this additional a straight line without stopping or taking any detours to
specification. With this, a target point at a maximum dis- the target point and triggers the transition upon arrival. To
tance of 11 m from the current location can be selected. replicate this temporal component as closely as possible,
This distance corresponds to the maximum teleportation we decided to not allow any kind of stopping or taking a
range chosen by Bhandari et al. [40] and is used similarly detourduringthecontinuousselectionaswell.Wetherefore
in other implementations. Unfortunately, research papers do not implement the continuous target selection through
rarely specify the maximum distance. Further exceptions steering of the virtual representative as one might expect
are Freitag et al. using 7 m [37], Simeone et al. 10 m [56], but through a more limited approach. When a button is
and Weissker et al. 180 m [7]. The target point is indicated pressed, a capsule starts moving forward from the user’s
by a flat circle on the ground. Releasing the button selects position. To allow moving the capsule to the left and right
the currently marked point as the target. The pre-travel withintheboundofthepath(asonecoulddowiththeother
information phase is omitted. Transition: The screen fades teleportation methods), we place the capsule on an imagi-
to black and the user is set to the target position. The narycirclearoundtheuser.Whilethebuttonispressedthis
screen then fades back to clear vision. The total duration circle continuously enlarges without a maximum limit and
ofthisanimationis0.3s.Thepost-travelfeedbackphaseis pointing the controller in a direction places the capsule on
omitted.Thus,theteleportationmethodincludesaconstant the intersection with the circle. The speed of enlargement
delay of ∆t = 0.3 s. In the following text, we refer to this (or forward movement of the capsule) was again chosen
teleportation method as instant teleportation, Instant, or IN as 1.95 m/s. Releasing the button selects the point where
forbrevity. the capsule is located at that time as the target point. This
allowstheusertofreelyselectatargetpointasthediscrete
3.2.2 TeleportationatWalkingSpeed methods would allow. Reducing the radius of the circle
or temporarily stopping without selecting a target point is
Thesecondmethodintegratesadistance-proportionaldelay,
not possible, as it would not be possible for the discrete
with its speed aligned with the perceived walking speed
methods to stop the capsule while moving. Any kind of
of an average physically unimpaired person. Target speci-
confirmation or possibility of restart would prolong the
fication: Users discretely select a target point as described
temporal component and therefore make it incomparable
fortheinstantteleportationmethod.Pre-travelinformation:
to the discrete methods. The pre-travel information phase
After selecting a target point, a body-sized capsule (see
is omitted. Transition: A fade-to-black animation identical
Fig. 1), intended to represent an avatar of the user, moves
to all other methods. The post-travel feedback phase is
from the current location to the selected target point in a
straight line with a constant speed of 1.95 m/s. Once the omitted. This results in a distance-proportional delay with
continuoustargetselection.Foradistanced(inmeters)from
capsule reaches the target point, the pre-travel information
the starting point to the target point, the delay is given by
phase ends. Transition: A fade-to-black animation is iden-
∆t= d +0.3.Inthefollowing,thisteleportationmethod
tical to the instant method. The post-travel feedback phase 1.95
is omitted. For a distance d (in meters) from the starting is primarily referred to as the Orbital method, or OR due to
thecapsule’sorbitaroundtheuser.
point to the target point, the delay of this method is given
by ∆t = d s+0.3 s. In the following, this teleportation
1,95
method is referred to as teleportation at walking speed or 3.3 Prestudy:Fade-to-Black&WalkingSpeed
brieflyinreferencetoitsspeedasT-195orT1.
To evaluate the influence of temporal modulations on dis-
tance perception, different parameters regarding the dura-
3.2.3 TeleportationatIncreasedWalkingSpeed
tion of a teleportation method need to be established. As
The functionality of the third teleportation method is iden-
Creem-Regheretal.[1]describe,oneofthemainreasonsfor
tical to teleportation at walking speed. The only difference
requiringcorrectdistanceperceptionisthetransferabilityof
is that the speed of the capsule during the pre-travel in-
results,fromthevirtualtotherealworld.Itisthereforerea-
formation phase has been increased by a factor of 2.5. We
sonabletobasethechoiceofatimemanipulationonaspects
chose the factor of 2.5 as we found it suitable in prior
thatarefamiliartohumansfromtheirnaturalenvironment.
internal testing having two main advantages: 1) it is no-
The duration of a delay is therefore sensibly chosen if it is
ticeably faster than the original delay while 2) not being
proportional to the distance covered. It can be argued that
too fast and therefore too similar to the instant transition
aperson’swalkingspeedisanaturalchoicesinceithasev-
on short distances. For a distance d (in meters) from the
eryday applications. Several works investigate whether the
starting point to the target point, the delay is given by
averagewalkingspeedintherealworldisalsoperceivedas
∆t = d s+0.3 s = d s+0.3 s. In the following,
2.5·1.95 4.875 thisinthevirtualworld.Bohannon[57]showsthatthemean
thismethodisreferredtoasteleportationatincreasedwalking comfortable walking speed lies in the range of 1.27 m/s to
speed,T-4875orT4. 1.46 m/s with a maximum recorded speed of 2.53 m/s,
Janeh et al. [58] and Fink et al. [59] find that users physical
3.2.4 TeleportationwithContinuousTargetSelection
walkingspeedgenerallydecreasesinvirtualenvironments.
Targetspecification:Unlikethetargetspecificationphaseof Otherthanthis,onecouldalsoconsidercalibratingwalking
the previous methods, here the target point is determined speedbasedonparticipantswalkingspeedinadvanceofthe
throughacontinuousprocess.Inthepreviousmethods,the study.Thisideaandfurtherideasproposedintheliterature,6
however, only consider egocentrically perceived walking capsuleisremovedandafade-to-blackanimationisadded
speed. In our teleportation technique, the user stays still duringthetransitionphase.Participantsareagainaskedto
and watches a virtual representative move instead of mov- move freely and engage in adjusting the duration of the
ing themselves. We, therefore, see the need to assess how animation. The duration is initially set to 0.4 s, as this was
people perceive walking speed when observing a virtual perceivedbestinaninternaltestphase.The0.4sconsistsof
representationfromanoutsideperspective(exocentrically), a fade-out and a fade-in taking up half of the time each.
rather than the egocentric perspective used in previous The duration can be adjusted in steps of ±0.1 s with a
studies. Another aspect is the visualization of a transition minimumdurationof0.1s.Onceapreferreddurationisset,
when using teleportation. Instead of abruptly transferring theapplicationisterminated,andthesurveyends.
users to a new, selected target position, a quick fade helps
withasmoothertransitionbetweenpositions[9]andatthe 3.3.2 Participants
sametimeprovidestheuserwithfeedbackthatamovement Within the possibilities of a prestudy, we tried to keep the
has taken place, which is not given in the case of discrete sample as diverse as possible, taking into account factors
teleportation [60]. A fade-to-black animation is often used such as age, experience with VR, and gender. This led to a
for this purpose. The duration of this transition method total of 9 participants (5 male, 4 female) between the ages
representsanotherintegrationoftimeintotheteleportation of 25 and 67 years (M = 39.5 years, SD = 15.9) being re-
process.However,thisdurationisnotstandardizedandhas cruitedforthestudy.Allparticipantswerereachedthrough
beenmodeleddifferentlywithintheresearch.Examplesare thepersonalandprofessionalnetworksoftheexperimenter.
L´ındal et al. [35], with a duration of 1.6 s or Rahimi et al. A normal or corrected vision was a prerequisite for par-
[36] with a duration of 1.5 s. This motivated us to run a ticipation in the study. There was no compensation for
preliminary study on the evaluation of these parameters, participation. Of the nine participants, six reported having
to answer the following research questions: P-RQ1: When alotofexperiencewithvirtualreality,onepersonreported
exocentrically observing a virtual representative moving at occasionaluse,andtwopeoplereportednoexperience.
different speeds, which speed is perceived as equivalent to
the average human walking speed? P-RQ2: What duration 3.3.3 Results
is most preferred for a fade-to-black transition when using
In response to question P-RQ1, the perceived speed of
Point & Teleport? The apparatus for this study is the same
the capsule, the following values are aggregated: M =
astheoneforthemainStudyI(Section4.5).
1.93m/s,SD = 0.998,Md = 1.95m/s,Min = 0.87m/s,
Max = 3.25 m/s. This represents an increase compared
3.3.1 Procedure&Task
to the preset speed of 1.3 m/s. Regarding question P-RQ2,
In the beginning, participants are asked to indicate their
the preferred duration for the fade-to-black animation, the
gender, age, and experience level with VR. Participants
following results are gathered: M = 0.31 s, SD = 0.13 s,
are then immersed in a virtual environment similar to the
Md = 0.30 s, Min = 0.10 s, Max = 0.70 s. In additional
one used in Study I (see Fig. 1) and can freely explore it
comments, three participants expressed a preference for a
using a target selection-based teleportation method. The
duration of 0 s if it was possible. One person finds a too-
teleportation method differs depending on the question
fast animation bothersome during frequent teleportation,
to be answered. In both cases, the target specification is
while a long waiting time is also perceived as bothersome.
solved by a parabolic ray with a maximum range of 11 m.
Another person finds a too-long animation uncomfortable
To evaluate question P-RQ1, the teleportation method is
because it triggers blinking. The participants who prefer a
supplemented with a moving capsule that is exactly the
duration of 0 s also confirm an observation of impatience
height of the participant and has a horizontal diameter of
by Bozgeyikli et al [9]. As a result of this prestudy, we use
0.8 m (see Fig. 1) during the pre-travel information phase.
awalkinganimationspeedof1.95m/sandafade-to-black
The capsule moves from the user’s position to the selected
animationtimeof0.30s.
target point and triggers an immediate transition upon
Parts of the prestudy were published as an extended
arrival. Participants are asked to manipulate the capsule’s
abstractandpresentedasaposteratIEEEVR’24[61].
movement speed until it corresponded to their perceived
walking speed. The speed of movement can be adjusted
with an initial speed of 1.3 m/s and increments of ±50%. 4 STUDY I: DISTANCE PERCEPTION
Theinitialspeedischosenaccordingtotheaveragehuman
In this first study, we want to evaluate the temporal influ-
walking speed. Once participants confirm the speed they
enceofdelayedteleportationmethodsontheperceptionof
perceive as walking speed, the application is terminated.
distances to answer research question RQ1. We therefore
We are aware that users potentially have different under-
conduct an experiment employing a within-subject design,
standings of walking speed, e.g., when walking through
aimedatcomparingdistanceperceptionwithchangingtele-
a park or when trying to catch a bus. Such interpretation
portationmethods.
of the meaning of walking speed is left to the individual
participantbuttheforest-themedenvironmentandabsence
4.1 Task
of an actual task other than parameter specification likely
haveanimpact. Theexperiment’staskdesignisbasedonastudybyKeilet
Followingthecompletionofthistask,thesecondappli- al.[6],whichincludesfourkeytasks:practicinglocomotion,
cation for manipulating the duration of the fade-to-black reachingandestimatingavisibletarget,replicatingaknown
transition is started (P-RQ2). For this task, the moving distance, and training distance estimation. All tasks occur7
on a straight path, providing clear movement direction TABLE1
andensuringcomparabilityunderparticipantsbyrequiring Possibleoptionsfortheplacementofintermediategoals(IG)andthe
finaltargetpoint(Target)inmetersfromthestartingpoint
them to walk the same path. As Peillard et al. [48] show,
objects (e.g. target points) placed on the side of the user’s
fieldofviewcanbeperceivedtobefartheraway.Therefore, Option IG1 IG2 IG3 Target
having participants move the same straight path ensures 1 15 30
2 13 34
comparability. For our purposes, we exclude training in
3 13 26 39
distance estimation, as it is not one of our goals. Initially, 4 14 28 43
5 15 34 47
participantsareassignedalocomotionmethodandpractice
6 16 29 50
by reaching a nearby red target. The primary task involves 7 13 28 50
reaching a visible target between 90 and 120 meters from 8 18 34 53
9 14 28 42 57
thestart.Afterreachingthetarget,participantsestimatethe 10 15 34 47 61
distanceandproceedtothenexttask,whichinvolvesrepli- 11 16 32 50 66
12 18 35 49 70
catingthejust-traveleddistancewithoutavisibletarget.
We made adaptations with our integration of time pro-
portional to distance in mind. To address fatigue from
thepath.Thefinaltargetpointisrepresentedbyaredpillar,
coveringlongdistancesrepeatedly,wereducedpathlengths
clearly distinct from the intermediate goals. Proper object
to [30,70] m. In the original study, longer distances were
scalingiscrucialforaccuratedistanceperception.Therefore,
chosen to make the target initially invisible and thereby
the trees are set to a height of approximately 30 m, which
preventpurelyvisualestimates.Tokeepthisadvantage,we
corresponds to the average tree height in Central Europe.
visualizethetargetonlywhenparticipants(ortheiravatars)
Other objects, including branches on the ground, rocks,
are within the maximum teleportation range. Additionally,
mushrooms, plants, and flying birds, are also scaled to
intermediate points are irregularly spaced and visible only
average sizes, corresponding to the environment familiar
when participants are nearby, aiming to avoid counting
tothelocallyrecruitedparticipants.Toenhanceimmersion,
strategies,i.e.participantstryingtoalwayscoverequalsteps
forestsoundssuchasbirdchirpingareplayed.Fig.1depicts
of,e.g.,10minlength.
thestartingpointoftheenvironment.
The final task design includes a short practice phase, a
distance estimation task, and a repetition task. Each task
begins with textual instructions presented through a sign 4.3 Procedure
in the virtual environment. The practice phase familiarizes Participants are informed about the study and asked to
participants with the teleportation method by requiring sign a consent form. Participants complete an initial demo-
them to reach an exemplary intermediate and final target graphic questionnaire before proceeding to the VR setup.
point. In the main distance estimation task, participants TheyaretheninstructedonhowtoweartheHMDanduse
progress through intermediate goals and finally the main the controller. They initiate the distance perception experi-
target point. Successfully reaching any target point is indi- ment using one of the teleportation methods (experimental
catedbyitsremovalandashortsound.Possibleplacements conditions) introduced in Section 3.2. The order of condi-
of target points are presented in Table 1. Targets were tionsisbalancedusingLatinSquare.Eachtaskisexplained
chosen fixed per sequence of conditions and with overall through integrated text, and in the initial repetitions, the
similardistancescoveredperteleportationmethodamongst experimenter provides additional verbal explanations to
participants.Afterreachingthetarget,participantsestimate avoid misunderstandings. For each teleportation method,
thedistancebyinputtingtheirestimateinavirtualnumber there are three measurement repetitions. After completing
field. This concludes the task and immediately starts the alltaskswithoneteleportationmethod,participantsfillout
next task at the user’s current position. This subsequent aspecificquestionnairerelatedtothatcondition.Theythen
repetition task begins again with an information text. Par- resume the VR setup for the next teleportation method,
ticipants must independently retrace the previous distance and the procedure is repeated for all teleportation meth-
fromthestarttothefinaltargetpointwithoutintermediate ods. Upon finishing the tasks with the fourth teleportation
goalsorthetargetpointitselfvisible.Theystopwhenthey method, Study II (Section 5) commences. The total average
believe they have covered the distance and confirm their duration for both studies is 60 minutes, with variations of
estimation. ±15minutesdependingontheparticipant.
4.2 VirtualEnvironment 4.4 Measurements
The virtual environment consists of a total path size of To address the research questions, various measurements
650m×5m.Thegroundisrepresentedasaflatplane,with are taken during the experiment. Central data of interest
a1mwidecobblestonetextureinthemiddleandgrasstex- are the estimated distance d e and the distance to be es-
turesontheleftandrightsidesofthecobblestone(seeFig. timated d t. For each participant, measurement repetition,
1). Objects are placed off the cobblestone path to improve task, and teleportation method we calculate a normalized
reorientation after teleportation. The objects are chosen to error e = de−dt. The main measures for the analysis
dt
resemble a forest walk theme. The intermediate goals are originate from formal descriptions of distance estimation
visuallymatchedtothetheme.Theyarerepresentedasover- errors that are described in the following. To quantify par-
sizedpineconesrotatingontheverticalaxisinthemiddleof ticipants’ estimation performance, we use Bias, Precision,8
TABLE2
Descriptivestatistics(M=mean,SD=standarddeviation)foreachmeasureandtask.
DistanceEstimation(DT) DistanceRepetition(RT)
Instant T-195 T-4875 Orbital Instant T-195 T-4875 Orbital
M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD M SD
Accuracy 35.3 20.8 33.9 20.0 36.5 26.1 33.9 22.8 7.91 4.88 7.89 6.70 6.98 5.05 8.96 6.17
Bias -27.0 30.5 -16.8 34.2 -18.5 41.1 -14.3 37.5 -1.96 8.41 0.39 8.68 -0.19 6.57 -2.21 9.75
Precision 9.40 8.82 13.8 14.8 11.4 12.6 13.2 12.7 6.00 3.35 7.69 8.20 7.59 6.61 6.62 4.72
and Accuracy. Bias represents a systematic measurement
error [62]. We quantify it using the mean normalized error
(MPE[63])oftheerrorse 1,e 2,e 3 forthethreemeasurement
repetitionsofataskaparticipantmakeswithateleportation
method. Precision, which reflects the agreement between
measurements obtained from repetitions of the same task
[62], is measured using the Standard Deviation (SD) of the
normalizederrors[63].Accuracy,describingtheagreement
betweenmeasuredandtruevalues[62],isquantifiedusing
themeanabsolutenormalizederror(MAPE[63]).
4.5 Apparatus
Fig.3.MeanAbsoluteNormalizedError(Accuracy)forallteleportation
The study was implemented using the Unity game engine methodsforthedistanceestimationandrepetitiontask.
inversion2021.3.Further,theXRInteractionToolkitpackage
in version 2.3.1 was utilized including a basic version of
instant teleportation. The package was extended with the
teleportation methods used in the experiments. Hardware-
wise,thestudywasconductedusingtheMetaQuest.Study
participantswererequiredtouseoneofthetwocorrespond-
ingcontrollersbasedontheirdominanthandforinteraction.
4.6 Participants
A total of 32 participants (19 male, 13 female) with ages
ranging from 19 to 64 years (M = 27.4 years, SD = 9.63)
were recruited. Participants were reached through internal Fig.4.MeanNormalizedError(Bias)forallteleportationmethodsforthe
distributionchannelsattheUniversityandthepersonalnet- distanceestimationandrepetitiontask.
work of the experimenters. Inclusion criteria for participa-
tionwerenormalorcorrectedvisionandaminimumageof
18years.Participantsreceivedcompensationof10€.Among
the participants, 18 reported prior experience with Virtual
Reality,while14reportedhavingnopriorexperience.Before
thestudy,participantsratedtheirabilitytoestimatephysical
distancesonaseven-pointscalefrom1=ˆ “Verypoor”to7
=ˆ “Verygood”,withanaverageofM = 4.41(SD = 1.24).
Thisdata isfor exploratorydata analysisonlyand wasnot
usedforfurtheranalysis.
4.7 Results
Fig. 5. Standard deviation (Precision) of normalized errors for all tele-
The descriptive statistics of the distance estimation mea- portationmethodsforthedistanceestimationandrepetitiontask.
surescanbefoundinTable2andarevisualizedinFig.3-5.
Section4.7.1describesthehypotheses-basedanalysisofthe
collecteddata,whilethefollowingSection4.7.2describesan data is also not symmetrical a Sign-Test is used. A signifi-
exploratoryanalysis. cancelevelofα = .05ischosenforthisanalysis[64].Effect
sizes are assessed according to Cohen [65]. The complete
4.7.1 Hypotheses-basedAnalysis inferentialstatisticsarelistedbyhypothesesinTable3.
The inferential statistical analysis of the data is conducted TotestH1,whichpredictsapositiveimpactondistance
using Paired-Sample t-tests. In case the assumption of nor- estimation, when the teleportation is delayed, we test our
mality is violated or outliers are in the data, we use a non- threeperformancemeasures(Accuracy,Precision,andBias)
parametric Wilcoxon signed rank test, instead. In case the over the two experimental tasks: distance estimation and9
TABLE3
Pairwise(ConditionAvs.B)inferentialstatisticalanalysisofthehypotheses,whereHyp.specifiesthehypothesisnumber,Task(DT=distance
estimation,RT=repetitiontask,SE=spaceestimation),DVthedependentvariable,Dir.denotesthedirectionofthehypothesis,followedbythet
orZstatistics.Inthelattercase,i.e.,whenanon-parametrictestwasperformed,SDsanddfarenotspecified.S.-Wilkreportsthep-valueforthe
Shapiro-Wilktestregardingnormallydistributedresiduals.
Pair Hyp. Task DV Cond.A M/Mdn SD Dir. Cond.B M/Mdn SD S.-Wilk t/Z df p d/r
1 DT Accuracy 35.3 20.8 > 33.9 20.0 .12 0.39 31 .35 0.069
2 DT |Bias| |-27.5| - > |-20.1| - .071 2.41 - .008 0.43
3 DT Precision 5.83 - > 8.35 - <.001 -1.81 - .97 0.32
1 IN T1
4 RT Accuracy 6.51 - > 5.26 - .063 0.22 - .42 0.039
5 RT |Bias| |-1.96| 8.41 > |0.39| 8.68 .20 1.40 29 .090 0.26
6 RT Precision 5.21 - > 5.11 - < .001 0 - .50 0
7 DT Bias -16.8 34.2 > -18.5 41.1 .080 0.57 31 .29 0.10
2 T1 T4
8 RT Bias -0.71 8.91 > -0.38 6.54 .42 -0.18 30 .43 0.032
9 DT Accuracy 30.0 - ̸= 28.2 - .003 0.62 - .54 0.11
10 DT |Bias| |-20.2| - ̸= |-18.5| - .010 0.43 - .67 0.076
11 DT Precision 8.35 - ̸= 7.26 - .039 0.17 - .87 0.029
3 T1 OR
12 RT Accuracy 7.96 6.60 ̸= 9.65 7.00 .20 -1.16 31 .26 0.21
13 RT |Bias| |-0.20| 8.79 ̸= |-3.32| 10.7 .23 -1.58 31 .13 0.28
14 RT Precision 5.11 - ̸= 5.34 - .001 -0.94 - .35 0.17
15 SE Accuracy 28.2 15.6 > 27.9 16.1 .051 0.14 30 .45 0.025
16 4 SE |Bias| IN |-17.5| - > T1 |-17.0| - .28 0.73 - .23 0.13
17 SE Precision 15.2 13.4 > 14.5 10.4 .073 0.24 30 .41 0.042
distance repetition. To compensate for the test of multiple TABLE4
null hypotheses we use a Bonferroni correction and adjust SummaryofExploratoryDataAnalysis:DVdenotesthedependent
the significance level to α = 0.0083. With the Bias signif-
variable,Task(DT=distanceestimation,RT=repetitiontask),df bthe
between-groupsdegreesoffreedom.IncaseswhereaRepeated
icantly (p = 0.008) smaller in the delayed condition T1, MeasuresANOVAwasperformed,dfwdenotesthewithin-groups
we find a medium-sized correlation (r = .43) with fewer degreesoffreedom.Thevalue-inthiscolumnindicatesthata
FriedmanTestwasperformedinstead.F/χ2denotestheF-statistic
underestimations compared to the instantaneous method
whenanANOVAwasperformedortheChi-squaredstatisticwhena
(IN).Wedonotfindsignificanteffectsintheothermeasures
FriedmanTestwasperformed.Thep-valueisgivenfortherespective
of Accuracy and Precision (see Table 3, Hyp. 1), which test.Effectsizesη2aregivenwhenanANOVAwasperformedand
p
we will further reflect on in the discussion. Altogether we Kendall’sWrespectivelywhenaFriedmantestwasperformed.
observeasignificantimprovementregardingBiasevenafter
applying the Bonferroni correction without detecting ad- Pair DV Task dfb dfw F /χ2 p η p2/W
verseimpactsonanyothermetric.Thus,wearguethatthe
1 Accuracy DT 3.00 93.0 0.24 .89 0.008
delayedmethodcontributestoanenhancementindistance 2 Bias DT 2.36 73.2 3.00 .047 0.088
3 Precision DT 3.00 - 4.39 .22 0.046
estimationoverall,validatingH1.
4 Accuracy RT 3.00 87.0 0.84 .47 0.028
H2 predicts that a larger delay (T1 vs. T4) leads to 5 Bias RT 3.00 87.0 1.05 .37 0.035
6 Precision RT 3.00 - 1.10 .78 0.013
systematically higher distance estimations. We test the Bias
over the two experimental tasks: distance estimation and
distance repetition. To compensate for the test of multiple
null hypotheses we use a Bonferroni correction and adjust
thesignificanceleveltoα=0.025.Inbothtasks,wedonot
normalsamplingdistributiontobemetbasedonthecentral
find a difference (see Table 3, Hyp. 2) and we thus cannot limit theorem given the sample size of N = 32 [66]. In in-
confirmH2. stanceswhereextremeoutliersarepresent,anon-parametric
H3 predicts a difference in distance estimation perfor- Friedman test is conducted instead. Sphericity is assessed
mance when a delay happens in the target specification using Mauchly’s test. The Greenhouse–Geisser adjustment
process with the user actively involved (OR) instead of the is applied to correct for any violations of sphericity when
passive phase of pre-travel information (T1). As in H1, we (ϵ>.75).Post-hoctestsareBonferronicorrected.
test our three performance measures. To compensate for
the test of multiple null hypotheses we use a Bonferroni The results are presented in Tabel 4. A statistically sig-
correctionandadjustthesignificanceleveltoα=0.0083.In nificantdifferenceisfoundfortheperformancemeasureof
bothtasks,wedonotfindadifference(seeTable3,Hyp.3) Bias (F = (2.36,73.2) = 3, p = .047, η2 = .088) in the
andwethuscannotconfirmH3. distanceestimationtask.Otherperformancemeasuresshow
nosignificantdifferences.
4.7.2 ExploratoryAnalysis
The pairwise post-hoc tests for Bias in the distance
Based on our hypotheses, it made no sense to compare estimation task show no significant differences between
all the different methods with each other as they differ in teleportation methods: IN vs. T1: M Diff = −10.2, 95%-
multiplefactorsiftheyarenotconsideredinpairs.However, CI[−22.3,1.93], p = .15, IN vs. T4: M Diff = −8.53, 95%-
such a comparison can be interesting depending on the CI[−23.4,6.35], p = .70, IN vs. OR: M Diff = −12.7, 95%-
situation and application. For this reason, we conclude an CI[−28.3,2.86], p = .17, T1 vs. T4: M Diff = 1.67, 95%-
exploratory analysis of the collected data using a repeated CI[−6.57,9.91],p = 1.00,T1vs.OR:M Diff = −2.51,95%-
measureANOVAwiththesinglefactor,method(Instant,T- CI[−13.6,8.62],p = 1.00,T4vs.OR:M Diff = −4.18,95%-
195, T-4875, Orbital). We do assume the assumption of the CI[−16.9,8.56],p=1.00.10
Fig.8.PerformanceMeasures(Accuracy,Bias,andPrecision)forboth
teleportationmethodsforthesizeestimationtask.
Fig.6.Virtualenvironmentofthesizeestimationtask.Exemplaryview
intoroomcombination1.
the two rooms contains a starting point, while the second
room contains a target point. All rooms also contain fur-
niture, including cabinets, shelves, beds, sofas, side tables,
and lamps. The walls are textured with wallpaper, while
theflooristexturedwithlaminate.Thefurniturepiecesand
textures offer participants a reference size for estimating
room dimensions and enhancing realism. An overview of
the floor plans of all rooms can be found in Fig. 7. The
Fig. 7. Room combinations used with sizes 81 m2(Room 1),
size of the room combinations is selected in the interval
30m2(Room2),44m2(Room3),68m2(Room4)andtheirrespective
[30,81] m2, covering a range of various apartment sizes
startingpoint(S)andtargetpoint(T).Userrotationatthestartofthe
taskisindicatedbyanarrowonthestartingpoint. familiar to users. An exemplary section of the interior of
roomcombination1isshowninFig.6.
5 STUDY II: APPLICATION
5.3 Procedure
InthecontextofresearchquestionRQ2,asecondstudyfol-
Participants use two of the familiar teleportation methods
lowing a within-subject experimental design is conducted.
for this experiment, instant teleportation (Instant) and tele-
Theaimistoinvestigatewhetherapotentialeffectoftempo-
portation at walking speed (T-195) (see Section 3.2). The
rallydelayedteleportationistransferredtotheperceptionof
method order is balanced between participants. The esti-
spaceinvirtualworlds.Thisstudyisconductedinconjunc-
mation task is repeated twice for a teleportation method.
tion with and following Study I. Therefore the apparatus
Thesequenceofroomsisbalancedtoprovidedifferent-sized
(see Section 4.5) and the participants (see Section 4.6) are
combinations to users in different sequences of conditions.
the same. Regarding this experiment, users assessed their
Participants fill out a corresponding questionnaire after
abilitytoestimateroomsizeswithanaverageofM = 4.13
completing estimations with a teleportation method. They
(SD = 1.39) on a seven-point scale from 1 =ˆ “Very poor”
then perform the estimation task twice more using the sec-
to7=ˆ “Verygood”.SimilarlytoStudyIthisdataisusedfor
ond teleportation method and complete the questionnaire
exploratoryanalysisonly.
afterward.
5.1 Task
5.4 Results
The participants start in a room and have to reach a target
The distance estimation measures from Study I (Accuracy,
point in an adjacent room. They are prompted to freely
Precision, and Bias) are used analogously. The descriptive
explore both rooms. Participants are encouraged by the
statistics are visualized in Fig. 8. The inferential statistical
experimenter to rely on intuitive estimation and reference
analysisrunsanalogouslytoStudyI.Thecompleteinferen-
objects provided, rather than counting the length of walls
tialstatisticsarelistedbyhypothesesinTable3.
and calculating square meters. Once participants feel they
To test H4, which predicts a positive impact on space
have obtained sufficient information, they must reach a
estimation, when the teleportation is delayed, we test our
target point to provide their estimation of the room combi-
threeperformancemeasures(Accuracy,Precision,andBias)
nationsizeinsquaremeters.Uponenteringthetargetpoint,
in the described room size estimation task. To compen-
participants are teleported to an estimation environment
sate for the test of multiple null hypotheses we use a
andpromptedviaanumberfieldtoprovidetheirestimation
Bonferroni correction and adjust the significance level to
insquaremeters.
α = .017. Results show that for all three performance
measures, users generally performed slightly better with
5.2 VirtualEnvironment
the delayed teleportation method, manifesting in a smaller
Thevirtualenvironmentconsistsoffourdifferentlysizedin- normalizedabsoluteerror(Accuracy),asmallernormalized
dependentpairsofrooms.Eachroomcombinationconsists underestimation (Bias), and more normalized precise esti-
of one rectangular-shaped and one L-shaped room. One of mations(Precision).Theseimprovements,however,turnout11
TABLE5 Thedatacollectedthroughthesequestionnairesmayhelpin
Answerstothequestion“Didyoufollowaspecificstrategytosolvethe explaining. Taking a look at the strategies listed in Table 5
tasks?Ifyes,didthestrategydifferdependingontheteleportation
for solving the tasks shows that the most commonly used
method?Ifyes,how?”duringthefinalquestionnairesplitinto
categoriesvisual(V),temporal(T),diverse(D).Frequencyofresponse strategy is to repeat small, uniform distances. One effect of
inparentheses. thisisthatnaturaldistanceperceptionisbypassed,andthe
taskissystematized.Thisallowsformorepreciseestimates.
Strategies Nearlytwo-thirdsofparticipantsreportusingthisstrategy.
V Repetitionofsmall,uniformdistances(21) Theapplicationofsuchastrategywasalreadysuspectedby
Utilizationoffurnitureasareferencesize(7) Keiletal.[6]butcouldnotbeconfirmedthroughsystematic
Orientationbasedonthesizeofenvironmentalobjects(5)
questioning.Tobetterpreventsuchstrategies,intermediate
Estimationofthelengthoftheparabola(3)
Utilizationofthetargetpointindicatorasareferencesize(2) goalsareplacedinourexperiment.Theeffectivenessofthis
Estimationofthedistancebetweenthecapsuleandone’sownposition method therefore remains to be discussed. Another reason
(1)
Utilizationofthecapsuleasareferencesize(1) for the lack of an effect is noted by Jones and Huang [67].
T Countingthetimeofmovement(9) In justifying Hypothesis H1, the Tau effect was mentioned.
Countingthemetersduringthecapsule’smovement(2)
Repetitionofidenticaltimeintervals(1) Jones and Huang [67] point out that participants can con-
D Unspecifieddifferencesbetweentheteleportationmethods(3) sciouslychoosenottopayattentiontothetemporalcontext
Nodifferencebetweentheteleportationmethods(2)
Pureintuition(1) and can thus provide an unaffected estimate. In the case
ofdiscretetargetspecification,thisisespeciallyconceivable
to be non-significant (see Table 3, Hyp. 4) in any of the since the destination point is chosen before any movement
performancemeasuresandwethuscannotconfirmH4. and thus any temporal influence occurs. If participants
estimatethedistancealreadywhenselectingthedestination
6 DISCUSSION point,theyarenotinfluencedbythetimedelay.
An effect regarding H2 can not be demonstrated. The
In the following sections, various aspects of this work are
assumptionthatalongerdelayleadstoafurtherestimation
discussed.InSection6.1,thecollectedresultsareinterpreted
is reflected in both the distance estimation and replication
with respect to research question RQ1, and in Section 6.2,
taskbyaslightlyhighermeanestimationofdistanceswith
the results regarding research question RQ2 are discussed.
thewalkingspeedmethod,butthesedifferencesturnoutto
Section 6.3 places the results in the state of prior research.
benon-significant.SimilartothejustificationforHypothesis
Furthermore,inSection6.4,themethodologyforevaluating
H1,countingstrategiesandavoidanceoftemporalinfluence
the research question is reflected upon. Finally, Section 6.5
through estimation before actual teleportation are conceiv-
discusses the limitations of the results of this work and
ablehere.Anotherreasonmightbethattheeffectobserved
considerstheirimplications.
byFrenzandLappe[54],thatashorterdurationoflessthan
threeseconds,asoftenoccurswiththeteleportationmethod
6.1 Effects of delayed teleportation on distance per-
atincreasedwalkingspeed,onlyoccursinconjunctionwith
ception
an egocentrically perceived movement. Since there is no
RegardingH1,asignificantlyimprovedperformanceindis- movement of the users themselves during teleportation,
tance estimation can be observed through the performance but only of the preceding capsule, the effect may not be
measure of Bias. This is a particularly important result observable.AnexploratorycomparisonoftheconditionsT4
as Bias is the only measure actively making a statement and IN reveals that the teleportation at increased walking
about the degree of underestimation. Hence a significantly speed does not significantly improve the Bias compared to
improved Bias is crucial to the further discussion of our instantteleportation,z =1.44,p=.15,r =0.25.
research. For the distance repetition task as well as Ac- AconfirmingeffectforH3isnotobserved.Adifference
curacy and Precision, no significant improvement can be between the discrete and continuous target point selection
observed.Performancestaysrelativelyequalforthesemea- methods only shows insignificant differences when con-
sures. Based on these fairly similar performances but the sidering Accuracy, Precision, and Bias. Nevertheless, it is
significantly improved performance in Bias we argue, that noticeable that the method with continuous target point
in total an improved performance can be confirmed. It is, selection (Orbital) tends to yield better results for the dis-
however,evident,thatimprovementdoesnotshowinallthe tanceestimationtask,whilethemethodwithdiscretetarget
measures.Ourinterpretationoftheseresultsiscomplex.In point selection tends to yield better results for distance
general,therearetwopossibleinterpretationsoftheresults repetition. The collected responses to the questionnaire in
we gather: (1) there is no difference between instantaneous regards to the Orbital method show that even with the
and delayed teleportation regarding these measures or (2) continuous target selection, users reported being able to
the effect was covered by confounding factors. While there reproduceshortdistanceswellandusedslowmovementto
not being an observable effect would be beneficial in argu- convert its duration into a metric value. This suggests that
ing for instant teleportation as an easy and efficient way countingstrategies,aslistedinTable5,arealsousedhere.In
of travel, we believe that different strategies used to solve additiontothemostfrequentlyreportedstrategy,repeating
the tasks influence our results. We had participants fill out short distances, the answers suggest that the second most
questionnaires throughout the experiments, specifically af- commonly chosen strategy, counting the duration of the
terusingeachteleportationmethodandaconcludingques- movement, has an influence. This also explains the almost
tionnaire,inquiringgeneralfeedbacksuchasstrategiesused identical values of both methods, as the capsules moved at
to solve the tasks or preferences for teleportation methods. the same speed and thus the duration of movement is the12
same. 6.3 Positioningoftheresultsinthestateofresearch
In conclusion, based on the significant reduction of
A body of work has explored distance perception in VR,
underestimation with the delayed method as compared to
althoughfewerstudieshavefocusedontheimpactoftime.
the instant method, we argue that Hypothesis H1 can be
Nevertheless, it is worthwhile to discuss the results in the
confirmed. From this it concludes that there is an impact
contextofexistingresearch.
of delayed teleportation on perceived distances, answering
Acommonalityinourcollectedresultsacrossalltelepor-
RQ1. By answering RQ1 we primarily show that time is
tation methods is the tendency to underestimate distances.
a factor worth considering when a more verdical distance
This aligns with previous research findings. Studies con-
judgment is required. This contributes a novel insight into
ducted by Waller and Richardson [4] and Renner et al. [5]
thesystematicinvestigationofunderestimationinvirtualre-
revealed an average distance underestimation of approxi-
alityandaddstothelistprovidedbyCreem-Regehretal.[1]
mately 29% and 27%, respectively, when using HMDs. In
wheretimeisnotyetconsidered.Theseresults,however,do
the case of instant teleportation, our results strongly align
notofferageneralguidelineontheusageoftemporaldelay
with prior research findings, showing an underestimation
fordistanceperceptionimprovement.Sub-questionsRQ1.1
of approximately 27%. However, the results of the time-
and RQ1.2, cannot be answered conclusively. While the
delayedteleportationmethodsrepresentanimprovementin
performance in distance estimation significantly improved
thistendency,withtheT-195methodsignificantlyreducing
whenusingdelayedteleportation,wedonotseeadifference
theunderestimationto16.9%(andnon-significantimprove-
among the delayed teleportation methods. Generally, the
ments to 14.3% (Orbital) and 18.5% (T-4875)). This shows
delayedmethodsexhibitalowertendencytounderestimate
thatwhileunderestimationisnotentirelycompensatedfor,
than the immediate method, but show consistent absolute
improvementsofroughly10%aremade.Tothebestofour
errors,indicatingapropensitytooverestimateinstead.
knowledge, this is the first time that such an improvement
through the integration of time in teleportation interfaces
hasbeenshown.
6.2 Effects of delayed teleportation on spatial percep-
The literature identifies different groups of influencing
tion
factors that affect distance perception and estimation [1],
The influence of temporally delayed teleportation methods [5]. Temporal influences and their effects can be classified
ontheperceptionofspatialdimensionsisempiricallyeval- into a group of human factors since the perception of time
uated in Study II (Section 5). The conducted experiment is a cognitive process. Through the use of teleportation,
aims to address RQ2 – asking for the impact on room size two of the cues for accurate distance perception described
estimations. Within the context of this research question, by Creem-Regehr et al. [1] are significantly limited. These
Hypothesis H4 is formulated. However, the results do not are the factors of experiencing motion and the presence in
confirmtheformulatedhypothesis. the virtual world as cues for accurate distance perception.
Hypothesis 4 predicts an improvement in spatial size Usersusingdiscreteteleportationmethodsfeellesspresent
perception when employing a temporally delayed telepor- in their environment, as observed by Bowman et al. [17].
tation method. The normalized absolute error values show Therefore, the fact that underestimations are still measured
a slightly improved estimation when using teleportation at isnotsurprisingandrepresentsanothermanifestationofthe
walking speed, but these differences are found to be non- studiedmisperceptionsinvirtualspace.
significant.SimilarcharacteristicsareobservableintheBias Because the conducted experiment on distance percep-
andPrecisionresults.Participantsusingthedelayedmethod tion was significantly inspired by that of Keil et al. [6], a
exhibitanon-significanttendencytounderestimatelessand comparison of the results is of particular interest. How-
to be slightly more precise. It can be argued that the lack ever, it is important to note that the authors of the pre-
of confirmation for hypothesis H4 is a continuation of the vious study used different target distance ranges. Keil et
relatively equal performance measurements in hypothesis al. report a mean absolute error (MAE) of M = 37.6 m
H1. While we confirm H1, many of the recorded perfor- (SD = 26.8m)forinstantteleportationbeforethetraining
mance measures do not show significant improvement. It phaseandduringthedistanceestimationtask.Inourstudy,
is therefore feasible that an increasingly complicated task instant teleportation resulted in an MAE of M = 18.7 m
overshadowstheseimprovementsevenmore. (SD = 12.0 m). The observed difference can be largely
In addition, some qualitative results gathered through attributed to the distances being estimated. The tendency
questionnaires indicate influencing factors, such as the to underestimate distances by around 27% (among others,
parabolic ray from the controller to the target point, the [5])leadstoanexpectedMAEof 90+120 ·0.27=28.4mfor
2
target point indicator, and the size of the capsule. Con- thetargetdistanceintervalchosenbyKeiletal.([90,120]m).
sequently, both methods possess aspects that participants Basedontheactualresults,thiscorrespondstoanormalized
used for orientation that are not solely attributable to the mean absolute error of 37.6 = 1.324 = 32.4%. This value
28.4
examined temporal aspect. A central factor is also the closelymatchesournormalizedabsoluteerrorvalueforthe
participants’ orientation to furniture as indicated in the instant teleportation method of 35.3%. It indicates that the
strategytable.Whilethisorientationchoiceisintentionalfor useofinstantteleportationproducednearlyidenticalresults
external validity reasons, it possibly overshadows an effect inbothexperiments.Thissimilarityissurprising,especially
of temporal modulation. These findings also suggest that considering the addition of objects in the virtual environ-
Research Question 2 cannot be answered conclusively and ment.Anenvironment-relatedcontextisoftencitedasacue
requiresfurtherinvestigations. formoreaccuratedistanceestimation[1],[5].Acomparison13
oftheresultsofbothexperimentsraisesquestionsaboutthis bemuchclosertothemoreapplication-relevantquestionof
point.OnepossibleexplanationissuggestedbyMurgiaand subconsciousestimates.Howsuchanexperimentwouldbe
Sharkey:theauthorsfindthatunderestimationofdistances designedremainsopen.
occurs similarly in both sparsely and densely equipped Potentially confounding to the results gathered could
environments [68]. For the distance replication task, Keil et also be the environmental objects placed throughout the
al. report a MAE of M = 7.73 m (SD = 6.93 m) before world. As participants indicate in Table 5 objects such as
training when using teleportation. The experiment in our trees or branches were used during their execution of both
study yields an MAE of M = 8.20 m (SD = 4.29 m). It studies to help them in estimating distances. This was,
is notable that in both cases, distances are replicated much however, intended as we see a need for the inclusion of
better than they were estimated in the distance estimation such objects for multiple reasons. One reason that applies
task. to both the path and the room environment is the increase
in external validity. We want our results to be applicable
in real-world applications rather than study environments
6.4 Reflectionontheinvestigationscarriedout
and therefore decided on a more realistic environment.
The overall results show a high degree of consistency with Moreover, in the path environment, these objects allow for
researchfindingsregardinginstantteleportation.Theinflu- better comparability of the instant and the delayed meth-
enceofatemporalcomponentisonlyevidentinasub-scale ods. While the delayed methods provide the user with an
of the performance measures used and there are complex environmental distance cue, the virtual representative, the
reasonsforthis.Theabsenceofpotentialeffectsmayalsobe instant method is missing such a component. Hence, in a
attributed to the design of the study. Therefore, a critical sparsely equipped environment, the instant teleportation
examination of the advantages and disadvantages of the method would be disadvantaged and incentivize users to
experimentaldesigniswarranted. apply counting strategies since there are no other orien-
Key aspects justifying a replication of the distance per- tation cues. Because of the intentional placement of the
ception experiment by Keil et al. [6] include the high environmentalobjects,thefrequencyofpeoplereportingto
reliability due to precise measurement of estimated and use them for distance estimation (Table 5) is in fact lower
actual errors and the mandatory use of the locomotion than what could be expected. This, however, might come
method to solve the task. A central drawback of the ex- as a result of subconscious use or participants simply not
periment, as suspected by the authors themselves, is the reportingit.
applicability of counting strategies. When designing the
experiment conducted in our work, special attention was
6.5 Limitations
therefore paid to limiting such tactics. One solution to this
is the irregular placement of intermediate goals. Forcing Along with the results, we have already discussed a series
participants to actively estimate differing distances gives of limitations, such as the issue of counting strategies.
us stronger results reflecting actual distance estimates. The Furthermore, the visualization of temporal delay as an
qualitativelyevaluatedresultsofthequestionnairessuggest avatar-like representation through a moving capsule can
twoconclusionsinthisregard:(1)theassumptionmadeby have an impact on the experiment as well. Creem-Regehr
Keil et al. [6] regarding the application of counting tactics et al. [1] identify experiencing an avatar as an influencing
can be confirmed, and (2) the adjustments made in the factor on the correct perception of distances. The effect of
experimental design could not entirely prevent their appli- usingvirtualrepresentativesontheresults,especiallyinthe
cation. Nevertheless, a reduction in their effectiveness can comparison of immediate and delayed teleportation, is not
be assumed. In the original experiment, participants used specificallyexaminedintheconductedexperiments.There-
teleportation to estimate distances, fixing their controller’s fore, it cannot be ruled out that there are influences from
positiontoreplicateadistanceuntiltheyreachedthetarget this representation. The objects placed in the environments
point.Onlyreachingthefinaltargetpointrequiredadiffer- behave similarly. Renner et al. [5] identify compositional
entestimate.Ourintermediategoalsrequireregularreorien- factors,inadditiontohumanfactors,asinfluencingdistance
tationofthecontrollerandachangedestimation.Therefore, perception. In the conducted experiments, the objects are
anewestimationofthedistanceisrequiredfrequently.This intentionally placed with the aim of increasing external
represents an improvement in the experiment design. It validity and comparability. However, both investigations
should be noted in every respect that the application of only aim to observe human perception. The compositional
such strategies is difficult to avoid and is inherent to the factorsarisingfromtheobjectsarenotconsidered.Another
nature of teleportation. Just as steps can be counted when limitation is the low number of repetitions per condition.
estimatingdistancesintherealworld,jumpscanbecounted For a perceptual study, more trials would be beneficial.
inthevirtualworldwhenusingteleportation.Tocompletely Our first study repeats each task three times per telepor-
avoid this, there are two evaluation possibilities. On the tationmethod,whilethesecondstudyisrepeatedtwiceper
onehand,thecharacteristictargetselectionofteleportation method. Due to the number of teleportation methods and
couldbe changed(e.g. so that users cannot explicitlyselect tasks, this was the maximum number of repetitions that
atargetpointthemselvesbutareratherteleportedtoapoint could be fit within a 60-minute study. However, a longer
selectedbythesystem).However,thepracticalrelevanceof study could also induce fatigue in participants. Lastly, our
suchaninvestigationisquestionable.Ontheotherhand,an investigation into teleportation is highly motivated by the
experiment could be designed to measure distance percep- lack of cybersickness caused by it. Comparing our delayed
tionwithoutparticipantsbeingawareofit.Thiswouldalso teleportation methods with steering techniques that imple-14
ment a similar temporal component but allow for the per- [9] E.Bozgeyikli,A.Raij,S.Katkoori,andR.Dubey,“Point &Tele-
ceptionofmotionflowwouldbeaninterestingcontinuation port Locomotion Technique for Virtual Reality,” in Proc. of ACM
Symposium on Computer-Human Interaction in Play. ACM, 2016,
ofthiswork.OtherthantheworkbyKeiletal.[6]thiswould
pp.205–216.
simulateanequaltemporalcomponentandthereforeallow
[10] N.N.GriffinandE.Folmer,“Out-of-bodyLocomotion:Vectionless
aninvestigationintootherfactorscontributingtoadiffering NavigationwithaContinuousAvatarRepresentation,”inProc.of
distanceestimation. ACMSymposiumonVirtualRealitySoftwareandTechnology. ACM,
2019,pp.1–8.
[11] A. Drogemuller, A. Cunningham, J. Walsh, B. H. Thomas,
7 CONCLUSION M.Cordeil,andW.Ross,“ExaminingVirtualRealityNavigation
Techniques for 3D Network Visualisations,” Journal of Computer
In summary, our research advances the understanding of Languages,vol.56,p.100937,2020.
distance misperception in VR, highlighting the influence [12] N. N. Griffin, J. Liu, and E. Folmer, “Evaluation of Handsbusy
of temporal factors. Our findings demonstrate a reduction vsHandsfreeVirtualLocomotion,”inProc.ofACMSymposiumon
in underestimation of distances, from 27% with instanta- Computer-HumanInteractioninPlay. ACM,2018,p.211–219.
[13] T.Weissker,P.Bimberg,A.S.Gokhale,T.Kuhlen,andB.Froehlich,
neous teleportation to 16.9% with a time-delayed method,
“Gaining the High Ground: Teleportation to Mid-Air Targets in
answering our primary research question of whether there ImmersiveVirtualEnvironments,”IEEETransactionsonVisualiza-
is an influence of time on distance perception. Since this tionandComputerGraphics,vol.29,no.5,pp.2467–2477,2023.
[14] D.Rupp,T.Kuhlen,andT.Weissker,“TENETvr:Comprehensible
temporalaspectremainslargelyunexploredintheliterature,
Temporal Teleportation in Time-Varying Virtual Environments,”
particularly in combination with teleportation, our studies
in Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on Mixed and Augmented
contribute new insights into factors influencing distance Reality,2023,pp.922–929.
underestimation. Future research should therefore try to [15] S.Cmentowski,A.Krekhov,andJ.Kru¨ger,“Outstanding:AMulti-
PerspectiveTravelApproachforVirtualRealityGames,”inProc.
provide more universal guidelines on how to incorporate
ofACMSymposiumonComputer-HumanInteractioninPlay. ACM,
timetoachieveamoreverdicaldistancejudgment.Simulta-
2019,pp.287–299.
neously, we are able to corroborate previous research find- [16] D. Zielasko and T. Weissker, “Stay Vigilant: The Threat of a
ings regarding the underestimation observed with instan- Replication Crisis in VR Locomotion Research,” Proc. of ACM
SymposiumonVirtualRealitySoftwareandTechnology,2023.
taneous teleportation specifically using modern hardware.
[17] D.Bowman,D.Koller,andL.Hodges,“TravelinImmersiveVir-
Regarding our second research question on the impact of
tual Environments: An Evaluation of Viewpoint Motion Control
time-delayed methods on room size estimations, the re- Techniques,” in Proc. of IEEE International Symposium on Virtual
sultsremaininconclusive.Despiteimprovinguponprevious Reality. IEEE,1997,pp.45–52.
task designs, our study cannot entirely eliminate counting [18] C. G. Christou and P. Aristidou, “Steering versus teleport loco-
motionforheadmounteddisplays,”inLectureNotesinComputer
strategies, simplifying distance estimation with teleporta-
Science. SpringerInternationalPublishing,2017,pp.431–446.
tion. However, systematic questioning confirms suspicions [19] E.Langbehn,P.Lubos,andF.Steinicke,“EvaluationofLocomo-
raised in prior research regarding their usage. Lastly, our tion Techniques for Room-Scale VR: Joystick, Teleportation, and
Redirected Walking,” in Proc. of the Virtual Reality International
pre-study investigates the preferred duration for fade-to-
Conference-LavalVirtual. ACM,2018.
black transitions, settling at 0.3 s, and adds understanding
[20] N. Coomer, S. Bullard, W. Clinton, and B. Williams-Sanders,
of exocentrically perceived walking speed in virtual envi- “EvaluatingtheEffectsofFourVRLocomotionMethods:Joystick,
ronmentswhichparticipantsjudgetobe1.95m/s. Arm-Cycling, Point-Tugging, and Teleporting,” in Proc. of ACM
SymposiumonAppliedPerception. ACM,2018.
[21] J.CliftonandS.Palmisano,“EffectsofSteeringLocomotionand
REFERENCES TeleportingonCybersicknessandPresenceinHmd-BasedVirtual
Reality,”VirtualReality,vol.24,no.3,pp.453–468,2019.
[1] S. H. Creem-Regehr, J. K. Stefanucci, and B. Bodenheimer, “Per-
[22] R. Paris, J. Klag, P. Rajan, L. Buck, T. P. McNamara, and B. Bo-
ceiving Distance in Virtual Reality: Theoretical Insights From
denheimer,“HowVideoGameLocomotionMethodsAffectNav-
ContemporaryTechnologies,”PhilosophicalTransactionsoftheRoyal
igation in Virtual Environments,” in Proc. of ACM Symposium on
SocietyB:BiologicalSciences,vol.378,no.1869,2022.
AppliedPerception. ACM,2019.
[2] P. Frost and P. Warren, “Virtual Reality Used in a Collaborative
[23] C. Boletsis, “The New Era of Virtual Reality Locomotion: A
ArchitecturalDesignProcess,”inProc.ofIEEEConferenceonInfor-
Systematic Literature Review of Techniques and a Proposed Ty-
mationVisualization. IEEEComput.Soc,2000,pp.568–573.
pology,”MultimodalTechnologiesandInteraction,vol.1,no.4,p.24,
[3] D. Zielasko, N. Feld, C. Flemming, P. Lungershausen, A. Mor-
2017.
genthal, S. D. Schmitz, T. Mattern, and B. Weyers, “Towards
[24] L. A. Cherep, A. F. Lim, J. W. Kelly, D. Acharya, A. Velasco,
PreservationandAvailabilityofHeterogeneousCulturalHeritage
E.Bustamante,A.G.Ostrander,andS.B.Gilbert,“SpatialCogni-
Research Data via a Virtual Museum,” in Proc. of GI VR/AR
tiveImplicationsofTeleportingThroughVirtualEnvironments,”
Workshop. Gesellschaftfu¨rInformatike.V.,2020.
JournalofExperimentalPsychology:Applied,vol.26,no.3,pp.480–
[4] D. Waller and A. R. Richardson, “Correcting distance estimates
492,2020.
by interacting with immersive virtual environments: Effects of
task and available sensory information,” Journal of Experimental [25] T.Weissker,A.Kulik,andB.Froehlich,“Multi-RayJumping:Com-
Psychology:Applied,vol.14,no.1,pp.61–72,2008. prehensibleGroupNavigationforCollocatedUsersinImmersive
[5] R.S.Renner,B.M.Velichkovsky,andJ.R.Helmert,“ThePercep- Virtual Reality,” in Proc. of IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and
tionofEgocentricDistancesinVirtualEnvironments-AReview,” 3DUserInterfaces,2019,pp.136–144.
ACMComputingSurveys,vol.46,no.2,2013. [26] T.Weissker,P.Bimberg,andB.Froehlich,“GettingThereTogether:
[6] J.Keil,D.Edler,D.O’Meara,A.Korte,andF.Dickmann,“Effectsof Group Navigation in Distributed Virtual Environments,” IEEE
VirtualRealityLocomotionTechniquesonDistanceEstimations,” TransactionsonVisualizationandComputerGraphics,vol.26,no.5,
InternationalJournalofGeo-Information,vol.10,no.3,p.150,2021. pp.1860–1870,2020.
[7] T. Weissker, A. Kunert, B. Frohlich, and A. Kulik, “Spatial Up- [27] E.Sayyad,M.Sra,andT.Ho¨llerer,“WalkingandTeleportationin
dating and Simulator Sickness During Steering and Jumping in Wide-area Virtual Reality Experiences,” in Proc. of IEEE Interna-
Immersive Virtual Environments,” in Proc. of IEEE Conference on tional Symposium on Mixed and Augmented Reality, 2020, pp. 608–
VirtualRealityand3DUserInterfaces. IEEE,2018,pp.97–104. 617.
[8] B.Bolte,F.Steinicke,andG.Bruder,“TheJumperMetaphor:An [28] C. Lai, X. Hu, A. A. Aiyaz, A. Segismundo, A. Phadke, and
EffectiveNavigationTechniqueforImmersiveDisplaySetups,”in R. P. McMahan, “The Cognitive Loads and Usability of Target-
Proc.ofIEEEofVirtualRealityInternationalConference,2011. basedandSteering-basedTravelTechniques,”IEEETransactionson15
VisualizationandComputerGraphics,vol.27,no.11,pp.4289–4299, inCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,ser.CHI
2021. ’22. ACM,Apr.2022.
[29] P. Bimberg, T. Weissker, A. Kulik, and B. Froehlich, “Virtual Ro- [48] E.Peillard,T.Thebaud,J.-M.Normand,F.Argelaguet,G.Moreau,
tationsforManeuveringinImmersiveVirtualEnvironments,”in and A. Lecuyer, “Virtual objects look farther on the sides: The
Proc.ofACMSymposiumonVirtualRealitySoftwareandTechnology. anisotropyofdistanceperceptioninvirtualreality,”in2019IEEE
ACM,2021,pp.1–10. Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR). IEEE,
[30] J. W. Kelly, M. Hoover, T. A. Doty, A. Renner, M. Zimmerman, Mar.2019.
K. Knuth, L. A. Cherep, and S. B. Gilbert, “Remote research on [49] F.E.JamiyandR.Marsh,“DistanceEstimationInVirtualReality
locomotioninterfacesforvirtualreality:Replicationofalab-based AndAugmentedReality:ASurvey,”inProc.ofIEEEInternational
studyonteleportinginterfaces,”IEEETransactionsonVisualization ConferenceonElectroInformationTechnology. IEEE,2019,pp.063–
andComputerGraphics,vol.28,no.5,pp.2037–2046,2022. 068.
[31] J.Hombeck,H.Voigt,T.Heggemann,R.R.Datta,andK.Lawonn, [50] G. Bruder, F. A. Sanz, A.-H. Olivier, and A. Lecuyer, “Distance
“TellMeWhereToGo:Voice-ControlledHands-FreeLocomotion EstimationinLargeImmersiveProjectionSystems,Revisited,”in
for Virtual Reality Systems,” in Proc. of IEEE Conference Virtual 2015IEEEVirtualReality(VR),2015,pp.27–32.
Realityand3DUserInterfaces. IEEE,2023,pp.123–134. [51] P.Fraisse,“PerceptionandEstimationofTime,”AnnualReviewof
[32] J.Liu,H.Parekh,M.Al-Zayer,andE.Folmer,“IncreasingWalking Psychology,vol.35,no.1,pp.1–37,1984.
inVRusingRedirectedTeleportation,”inProc.ofACMSymposium [52] H.HelsonandS.M.King,“TheTauEffect:AnExampleofPsycho-
onUserInterfaceSoftwareandTechnology. ACM,2018. logicalRelativity,”JournalofExperimentalPsychology,vol.14,no.3,
[33] E.Sayyad,M.Sra,andT.Hollerer,“Walkingandteleportationin pp.202–217,1931.
wide-area virtual reality experiences,” in 2020 IEEE International [53] G.BruderandF.Steinicke,“TimePerceptionDuringWalkingin
SymposiumonMixedandAugmentedReality(ISMAR). IEEE,Nov. VirtualEnvironments,”inProc.ofIEEEVirtualReality. IEEE,2014,
2020. pp.67–68.
[34] J. W. Kelly, M. Hoover, T. A. Doty, A. Renner, M. Zimmerman, [54] H. Frenz and M. Lappe, “Absolute Travel Distance From Optic
K. Knuth, L. A. Cherep, and S. B. Gilbert, “Remote research on Flow,”VisionResearch,vol.45,no.13,pp.1679–1692,2005.
locomotioninterfacesforvirtualreality:Replicationofalab-based [55] M. Funk, F. Mu¨ller, M. Fendrich, M. Shene, M. Kolvenbach,
studyonteleportinginterfaces,”IEEETransactionsonVisualization N. Dobbertin, S. Gu¨nther, and M. Mu¨hlha¨user, “Assessing the
andComputerGraphics,vol.28,no.5,p.2037–2046,May2022. Accuracy of Point & Teleport Locomotion with Orientation In-
dicationforVirtualRealityusingCurvedTrajectories,”inProc.of
[35] P. J. L´ındal, K. R. Jo´hannsdo´ttir, U. Kristja´nsson, N. Lensing,
ACMConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems. ACM,
A.Stu¨hmeier,A.Wohlan,andH.H.Vilhja´lmsson,“Comparison
ofTeleportationandFixedTrackDrivinginVR,”inProc.ofIEEE 2019.
International Conference on Virtual Worlds and Games for Serious [56] A. L. Simeone, N. C. Nilsson, A. Zenner, M. Speicher, and
Applications. IEEE,2018,pp.1–7. F. Daiber, “The Space Bender: Supporting Natural Walking via
OvertManipulationoftheVirtualEnvironment,”inProc.ofIEEE
[36] K.Rahimi,C.Banigan,andE.D.Ragan,“SceneTransitionsand
ConferenceonVirtualRealityand3DUserInterfaces,2020,pp.598–
Teleportation in Virtual Reality and the Implications for Spatial
606.
Awareness and Sickness,” IEEE Transactions on Visualization and
[57] R.W.Bohannon,“Comfortableandmaximumwalkingspeedof
ComputerGraphics,vol.26,no.6,pp.2273–2287,2020.
adultsaged20—79years:referencevaluesanddeterminants,”Age
[37] S.Freitag,B.Weyers,andT.W.Kuhlen,“InteractiveExploration
andAgeing,vol.26,no.1,p.15–19,1997.
Assistance for Immersive Virtual Environments Based on Object
[58] O. Janeh, E. Langbehn, F. Steinicke, G. Bruder, A. Gulberti, and
Visibility and Viewpoint Quality,” in Proc. of IEEE Conference on
M.Poetter-Nerger,“Walkinginvirtualreality:Effectsofmanipu-
VirtualRealityand3DUserInterfaces,2018,pp.355–362.
latedvisualself-motiononwalkingbiomechanics,”ACMTransac-
[38] S.Freitag,D.Rausch,andT.Kuhlen,“ReorientationinVirtualEn-
tionsonAppliedPerception,vol.14,no.2,p.1–15,Jan.2017.
vironmentsUsingInteractivePortals,”inProc.ofIEEESymposium
[59] P.W.Fink,P.S.Foo,andW.H.Warren,“Obstacleavoidancedur-
on3DUserInterfaces. IEEE,2014,pp.119–122.
ingwalkinginrealandvirtualenvironments,”ACMTransactions
[39] N.Feld,P.Bimberg,B.Weyers,andD.Zielasko,“Keepitsimple?
onAppliedPerception,vol.4,no.1,p.2,Jan.2007.
Evaluation of Transitions in Virtual Reality,” Proc. of ACM CHI
[60] B. E. Riecke and D. Zielasko, “Continuous vs. Discontinuous
ExtendedAbstracts,2023.
(Teleport)LocomotioninVR:HowImplicationscanProvideboth
[40] J. Bhandari, P. MacNeilage, and E. Folmer, “Teleportation with-
BenefitsandDisadvantages,”inProc.ofIEEEConferenceonVirtual
out Spatial Disorientation Using Optical Flow Cues,” in Proc. of
Realityand3DUserInterfacesAbstractsandWorkshops. IEEE,2021,
GraphicsInterface. CanadianHuman-ComputerCommunications
pp.373–374.
Society,2018,pp.162–167.
[61] M.Wo¨lwer,B.Weyers,andD.Zielasko,“HowLongDoIWantto
[41] A. Adhikari, D. Zielasko, I. Aguilar, A. Bretin, E. Kruijff,
FadeAway?TheDurationofFade-To-BlackTransitionsinTarget-
M. von der Heyde, and B. E. Riecke, “Integrating Continu-
Based Discontinuous Travel (Teleportation),” Proc. of IEEE VR
ous and Teleporting VR Locomotion Into a Seamless ‘Hyper-
AbstractsandWorkshops(BestPosterAward),pp.817–818,2024.
Jump’Paradigm,”IEEETransactionsonVisualizationandComputer
[62] BIPM,IEC,IFCC,ILAC,ISO,IUPAC,IUPAP,andOIML,“Interna-
Graphics,2022.
tionalvocabularyofmetrology—Basicandgeneralconceptsand
[42] M.J.Habgood,D.Wilson,D.Moore,andS.Alapont,“HCILessons associatedterms(VIM),”n.d.
FromPlayStationVR,”inProc.ofACMCHIPlayExtendedAbstracts. [63] B.A.WaltherandJ.L.Moore,“TheConceptsofBias,Precisionand
ACM,2017,pp.125–135. Accuracy, And Their Use in Testing the Performance of Species
[43] S. Chen, F. Miranda, N. Ferreira, M. Lage, H. Doraiswamy, Richness Estimators, With a Literature Review of Estimator Per-
C. Brenner, C. Defanti, M. Koutsoubis, L. Wilson, K. Perlin, and formance,”Ecography,vol.28,no.6,pp.815–829,2005.
C.Silva,“UrbanRama:NavigatingCitiesinVirtualReality,”IEEE [64] R.A.Fisher,StatisticalMethodsandScientificInference. Edinburgh,
Transactions on Visualization & Computer Graphics, vol. 28, no. 12, OliverandBoyd,1956.
pp.4685–4699,2022. [65] J.Cohen,StatisticalPowerAnalysisfortheBehavioralSciences. Aca-
[44] J.-I. Lee, P. Asente, and W. Stuerzlinger, “Designing Viewpoint demicpress,2013.
Transition Techniques in Multiscale Virtual Environments,” in [66] A. Field, Discovering Statistics Using IBM SPSS Statistics, 4th ed.,
Proc.ofIEEEConferenceVirtualRealityand3DUserInterfaces,2023, ser.6. London:SagePublications,2013.
pp.680–690. [67] B. Jones and Y. L. Huang, “Space-Time Dependencies in Psy-
[45] R.MessingandF.H.Durgin,“Distanceperceptionandthevisual chophysicalJudgmentofExtentandDuration:AlgebraicModels
horizoninhead-mounteddisplays,”ACMTransactionsonApplied oftheTauandKappaEffects,”PsychologicalBulletin,vol.91,no.1,
Perception,vol.2,no.3,p.234–250,Jul.2005.[Online].Available: pp.128–142,1982.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1145/1077399.1077403 [68] A.MurgiaandP.M.Sharkey,“EstimationofDistancesinVirtual
[46] J.W.Kelly,“Distanceperceptioninvirtualreality:Ameta-analysis EnvironmentsUsingSizeConstancy,”InternationalJournalofVir-
oftheeffectofhead-mounteddisplaycharacteristics,”IEEETrans- tualReality,vol.8,no.1,pp.67–74,2009.
actions on Visualization and Computer Graphics, vol. 29, no. 12, p.
4978–4989,Dec.2023.
[47] S.Masnadi,K.Pfeil,J.-V.T.Sera-Josef,andJ.LaViola,“Effectsof
fieldofviewonegocentricdistanceperceptioninvirtualreality,”