Fair Voting Outcomes with Impact and Novelty Compromises?
Unraveling Biases of Equal Shares in Participatory Budgeting
Sajan Maharjan1, Srijoni Majumdar1, and Evangelos Pournaras1
1School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK,
E-mails: {scsmah, S.Majumdar,E.Pournaras}@leeds.ac.uk
May 9, 2024
Abstract
Participatorybudgeting,asaparadigmfordemocraticinnovations,engagescitizensinthedistribution
ofapublicbudgettoprojects,whichtheyproposeandvoteforimplementation. Sofar,votingalgorithms
have been devised and studied in social choice literature to elect projects that are popular, while others
prioritizeonaproportionalrepresentationofvoters’preferences,forinstance,equalshares. However,the
anticipated impact and novelty in the broader society by the winning projects, as selected by different
algorithms, remains totally under-explored, lacking both a universal theory of impact for voting and a
rigorousframeworkforimpactandnoveltyassessments. Thispaperstacklesthisgrandchallengetowards
new axiomatic foundations for designing effective and fair voting methods. This is via new and striking
insights derived from a large-scale analysis of biases over 345 real-world voting outcomes, characterized
for the first time by a novel portfolio of impact and novelty metrics. We find strong causal evidence that
equal shares comes with impact loss in several infrastructural projects of different cost levels that have
been so far over-represented. However, it also comes with a novel, yet over-represented, impact gain in
welfare, education andculture. We discussbroader implicationsof theseresults andhowimpact losscan
bemitigatedatthestageofcampaigndesignandprojectideation.
1 Introduction
Participatory budgeting is nowadays one of the most promising paradigms of direct and digital democracy.
[1, 2, 3], with over 11,000 cases worldwide [4] and annual investments in the scale of €137M by countries
suchasPoland[5]. Inaparticipatorybudgetingprocess[6,7,8,9,10], citizensinitiallyproposetheirproject
ideas with estimated costs for implementation, given a total budget is made available by the city. These
proposals are evaluated by city officials (and often by citizens’ representatives) to put a number of them for
voting [11]. Subsequently, citizens express their preferences using an input voting method (e.g. approval,
cumulative, Knapsack [12]) and the final winning projects are calculated using a voting aggregation method
(e.g. utilitarian greedy [13], Phragmen’s sequential voting [13], equal shares [14]).
Fair voting outcomes with equal shares. Recently, the method of equal shares has been tested in real
world,forinstance,theCityIdeaprojectinAarau,SwitzerlandortheprojectsinWieliczka(GreenMillion)and
SwiecieinPoland. Thiscreatesasignificantmomentumforkeydemocraticinnovation[11]andabreakthrough
for fairer voting outcomes [14]. In contrast to the standard voting aggregation method of utilitarian greedy
1Correspondingauthor: SajanMaharjan,SchoolofComputing,UniversityofLeeds,Leeds,UK,E-mail: scsmah@leeds.ac.uk
1
4202
yaM
8
]AM.sc[
1v58050.5042:viXrathat simply selects the next most popular project (most received votes) as long as the available budget is not
exhausted, the method of equal shares selects projects that make the most people happy. This means that
equal shares provides a proportional representation by enabling every voter to decide about an equal part
of the budget. The full explanation of the method is out of the scope of this paper and it can be found in
related work [14, 15]. Nevertheless, in practice the method results in voting outcomes that may sacrifice a
large costly project that can be highly popular (among the ones with the top received votes), to ‘replace’
it with several smaller low-cost projects so that more voters are satisfied (yet, not to the same extent of
satisfaction). For instance, in the participatory budgeting campaign of Aarau, the method of equal shares
selected10moreprojectsthanutilitariangreedy(17vs. 7outof35),whilestrikingly,thethirdmostpopular
project is sacrificed [16].
Do fair voting outcomes come with a price? A large-scale systematic investigation of these particular
effectsisthemotivationandfocusofthispaper. Inparticular,wehypothesizethatthefairnessofequalshares
results in potential compromises of impact and novelty in the voting outcomes. This critical inquiry is not
made with the aim to claim any ineffectiveness or faulty design of equal shares on these aspects, although
alternative aggregation methods that optimize for other qualities are plausible. It is also not made to claim
thatfairnessisanyhowanecessaryconditionforimpactloss. Instead,withthisinquiryweaimtoprovidenew
insights to citizens, city authorities and designers of participatory budgeting campaigns about the proposed
projects and their selection to be put for voting such that voting outcomes by equal shares are even more
legitimate, impactful and mitigate for any potential (cost) biases, see Section 3. These insights, missing so
far, are critical and timely, and they are expected to significantly strengthen the adoption of methods that
promote fairness, such as equal shares. As Cho points out, political fairness is a complex phenomenon, and
requires compromise and balancing competing interests so that members of all groups are represented [17].
For instance, infrastructure planning and investments to meet net-zero targets in cities can be costly [18, 19].
To what extent is it likely for equal shares to disadvantage such projects because of their inherently costly
nature,resultinginbiasesaffectingsustainability? Orisitlikelythatmultiplesuchtypeofprojectshavemore
chancestomaterializewhentheyhaveamorelocalizedscopeandcollectivelybuild,inamorebottom-upway,
a sustainability impact at city scale? Do such biases over impact areas also affect in turn the voting turnout
within different groups? For instance, Stewart et al. have highlighted the case of participatory budgeting
held in Chicago’s 49th ward on how a biased voter-turnout resulted in the selection of low-priority projects
favouringonlyspecificpopulationdemographics[20]. Allthesearesomekeyquestionsthatthisstudytackles
for the first time and which come with significant policy implications.
On the challenge of measuring impact of voting outcomes. Measuringtheimpactandnoveltyofvot-
ing outcomes is by itself a complex long-standing challenge, and one that this paper addresses. The absence
of a standard for impact evaluations on the outcomes of participatory budgeting processes is expected given
the inherently ambiguous nature of the term impact. Impact is a multi-faceted concept and can be assessed
differentlybydifferentstakeholders. TheEuropeanCommissionunderscorestheimportanceofconductingim-
pact assessments for any public initiatives anticipated to yield substantial economic, social, or environmental
modifications[21]. Campbelletal. haveconductedascopingreviewontheimpactofparticipatorybudgeting
processes on health and well-being [22]. Beuermann and Amelina have presented their findings of experi-
mental evaluation of a participatory budgeting model carried out in Russia, reporting an increased citizens’
engagement in public decision making and raised revenue in the local tax collection [23]. Hajdarowicz has
conducted a qualitative analysis on the empowerment of women from participatory budgeting processes [24].
Cabannes presents case studies of participatory budgeting instances in four cities across Latin America on
the initiatives to involve children and young people in the local governance of their cities [25]. There is a
significant body of literature assessing the impacts of participatory processes [26, 27, 28, 29], however such
work has focused on the impact of overall participatory processes and no existing work evaluates the impact
loss or gain by the winning outcomes of different voting aggregation methods. A recent work by Nelissen on
the empirical analysis of the winning outcomes by equal shares and utilitarian greedy across 35 participatory
2budgetinginstancesheldinAmsterdam[30],isthemostpertinenttoourstudy. However,ourworkprovidesa
muchlargerandmorecomprehensiveempiricalanalysis,alongwithanovelimpactframeworktocharacterize
the voting outcomes of equal shares and several new revealing insights stemming from the application of this
framework.
A framework for measuring impact and novelty. We introduce a novel measurement framework of
impact and novelty of voting outcomes in participatory budgeting, see Figure 1. It consists of the following
elements: (i) The voting aggregation method that forms the voting outcomes. For this study, we focus on
the utilitarian greedy (popularity-oriented) and the equal shares (fairness-oriented) methods. (ii) A number
of impact areas (and beneficiaries) that characterize a proposed project. For instance, a new park with a
playground is likely to create impact on the urban greenery and public space development, in particular for
childrenandfamilies. (iii)Anumberofmetricsthatcharacterizedifferentqualitiesofvotingoutcomesrelated
to the cost utilization and frequency of certain projects in the winning set. By bringing these three elements
together, it becomes possible to assess a number of metrics for the winning projects of a certain impact area
and voting aggregation method. We also distinguish for a certain impact area the exclusive winning projects
of a particular aggregation method, these are, for instance, the projects of this impact area selected by equal
shares but not by utilitarian greedy. Based on this principle of exclusivity, we introduce novelty metrics that
can be applied to the cost and number of projects belonging in an impact area. For both impact and novelty
metrics, the loss (or gain) of equal shares over utilitarian greedy is measured as their difference.
Impact metrics. Theimpactmetricscharacterizethecostandfrequencyutilizationofthewinningprojects
in an impact area by a voting aggregation method. Two metrics focus on the winning projects set: the cost
andnumberofwinningprojectsinacertainimpactareaoutofthetotalcostandnumberofwinningprojects
(budget share and winning rate respectively). Two other metrics focus on the representation of the proposed
projectsfromanimpactareainthewinningset: thecostandnumberofwinningprojectsinacertainimpact
areaoutofthetotalcostandnumberofproposedprojectsinthisimpactarea(costrepresentation andproject
representation respectively). Last but not least, two metrics focus on the proportionality of projects of an
impact area in the set of winning and proposed projects: the cost and number of winning/proposed projects
inanimpactareaoverthecostandnumberofallwinning/proposedprojects(cost proportionality andproject
proportionality respectively). Mathematical formulations are given in Section 4.
Novelty metrics. They characterize how unique the winning projects of a voting aggregation method are.
Two notions of novelty are distinguished: within-impact-area novelty that measures the cost or number of
exclusivewinningprojectsinanimpactareabyavotingaggregationmethod,outofthetotalcostornumber
ofwinningprojectsinthisimpactarea. Incontrast,between-impact-areasnovelty measuresthecostornumber
of exclusive winning projects in an impact area by a voting aggregation method, out of the total cost or
number of exclusive winning projects in all impact areas. Mathematical formulations are given in Section 4.
Analysis of biases in 345 participatory budgeting elections. To acquire evidence for any potential
impact and novelty loss of equal shares, we apply the proposed framework to 345 out of 810 participatory
budgetingelectionsdatacollectedfromthePABULIB[31]repository. Theseparticipatorybudgetinginstances
are the ones that contain information about the impact areas and beneficiaries of the voted projects. Each
project has one or more labels for the following 9 impact areas: education, health, welfare, culture, public
transit and roads, public space, urban greenery, environmental protection, sport. Likewise, eachprojectcomes
with one or more labels for the following 8 beneficiaries: families with children, students, disabled people,
children, adults, animals, youth, elderly. To control for the factor of cost when assessing the impact and
novelty loss, the following additional labels are assigned to each project based on the cost quartile it belongs:
very cheap, cheap, expensive or very expensive. This allows us to distinguish between biases on project costs
onwhichthemethodofequalsharesreliesforitscalculationsandbiasesontheprojectimpactarea. Wealso
conduct a conjoint analysis [32] to explore causal evidence and explain how the impact areas represented in
the winning projects explain the voting outcomes by different voting aggregation methods.
Real-world case studies of equal shares for impact loss mitigation. Note that all the studied par-
3Figure1: Impact and novelty assessment framework for voting outcomes of participatory budgeting as a result
ofusingdifferentvotingaggregationmethods. Theframeworkconsistsofanumberofimpactmetricsappliedtodifferent
impact areas, project cost levels and beneficiaries. The metrics characterize the winning set (budget share and winning rate),
theproposalsset(costandprojectrepresentation)andboth(costandprojectproportionality). Thenoveltymethodsaredistin-
guishedbetweenwitinin-impact-areaandbetween-impact-areasmeasurements,seeSection4formoreinformation. Theimpact
assessments rely on non-exclusive winners, while the novelty assessments on exclusive winners between two voting aggregation
methods.
ticipatory budgeting elections used utilitarian greedy. It is likely that if another voting aggregation method
wasused,theprojectsandeventhechoicesofvoterswouldbedifferent,forinstance,lower-costprojectwould
be proposed and likely in different impact areas. To address this threat of validity, we pick up the public
votingoutcomes[16,33]oftworeal-worldparticipatorybudgetingprocessesdesignedtorunwiththemethod
of equal shares: (i) Green Million (Wieliczka) and (ii) City Idea (Aarau). We study these voting outcomes as
case studies and hypothesize that they mitigate part of the overall impact and novelty loss.
2 Results
Five key results are illustrated in this paper –(i)Equalsharesresultsinvotingoutcomeswithanimpact
loss in several infrastructural and sustainable development projects and an impact gain in welfare, education
and culture. Strikingly, impact loss for such infrastructural and sustainable development projects is more
frequent, while impact gain in welfare, education and cultural projects is larger in scale. (ii) Equal shares
results in novelty gain in terms of unique winning projects within each impact area. It also results in novelty
4gain for the unique winning projects of welfare, education and culture out of all unique winning projects. In
all other cases, equal shares shows novelty loss. (iii) Equal shares creates low under-representation for the
impactareaofpublictransitandanover-representationforeducationandculture. However,itcontributesto
asignificantreductionintheover-representationofurbangreenery,environmentalprotectionandpublicspace
by the utilitarian greedy. (iv) Equal shares results in impact loss that originates from both high and low cost
projects for the impact areas of infrastructural and sustainable development projects. Strikingly, high-cost
sport projects show impact loss, while low-cost ones show impact gain. (v) The application of equal shares
in two real-world participatory budgeting campaigns mitigates impact loss in public space, urban greenery,
sport and, for one of the campaigns, in public transit. Culture and education show lower impact gain than
anticipated.
2.1 Impact loss and gain of equal shares
Equalshareshasanimpactlossininfrastructuralandsustainabledevelopmentprojects. Figure2
showstheimpactlossfromutilitariangreedytoequalsharesmeasuredwiththefourmetricsdistinguishedby
different impact areas. Projects related to infrastructural and sustainable development such as public space,
publictransit,urbangreeneryandenvironmentalprotectionshowhigherimpactloss. Forinstance,thehighest
mean loss of budget share is 7% for public space, 6% for urban greenery and 5% for public transit projects.
The voting instances with the budget share losses are 54%, 36% and 38% respectively. The voting instances
with the winning rate loss are 57%, 60% and 48% respectively for these impact areas. For cost and project
representation, these are 56%, 40%, 41% and 8%, 15%, 14% respectively.
Equal shares has an impact gain for culture, education and welfare. Unlike infrastructural and
sustainable development projects, there is a net impact gain (as signified by negative values of mean loss)
for culture, education and welfare projects across all 4 impact metrics. For instance, the mean loss of cost
representation is -25%, -20% and -15% for welfare, culture and education. Moreover, the number of voting
instances with impact losses is as few as 4%, 9%, 16% respectively for both metrics of cost representation
and budget share in such impact areas. Similarly, the voting instances with winning rate losses and project
representationlossesare14%,14%and13%and1%,1%and2%respectively,whichisthelowestamongother
impact areas.
2.2 Novelty loss and gain of equal shares
Novelty gain of equal shares: Figure 3 illustrates the within and between novelty loss (and gain) across
differentimpactareas. Within-impactareanoveltygainisobservedacrossallimpactareas. Thewithinnovelty
gain is prominent for the impact areas of education, culture and welfare. For instance, in terms of winning
costs and winning projects, the within novelty loss is -39%, -52%, -75% and -48%, -56%, -76% respectively.
This means that of the winning costs that are allocated to these impact areas, an additional 39%, 52% and
75% of winning costs for respective impact areas can be attributed to exclusively winning projects by the
equalshareswhichultimatelyresultsinanetimpactgain. Equal shares also exhibits between novelty gain but
of lower magnitude for the same impact areas of education, culture and welfare i.e. in terms of winning costs
and winning projects, the novelty losses are -30%, -28%, -13% and -36%, -33% and -13% respectively.
5Figure2: Equalsharesresultsinvotingoutcomeswithanimpactlossininfrastructuralandsustainabledevelop-
ment projects and an impact gain in welfare, education and culture. Strikingly, for sustainable infrastructure
projectsimpactlossismorefrequent,whileimpactgainislargerinmagnitudeforculture,educationandwelfare
projects. For each of the four depicted impact metrics i.e. (A) budget share, (B) winning rate, (C) cost representation and
(D)projectrepresentation,positiveloss(Y-axis,UG - ES)inanimpactarea(coloredlines)showsoutperformancebyutilitar-
ian greedy (UG), while negative loss shows outperformance by equal shares (ES). The X-axis denotes election instances sorted
according to impact loss. A circular marker is placed for each line to easier distinguish the number of voting instances with
positive/negative loss. The four numbers next to each impact area denote the (i) % of voting instances with positive loss, (ii)
themean‘ ’,(iii)meanpositive‘+’and(iv)meannegative‘-’impactloss. Twoadditionalnumberswiththeprefixes’+’and
∼
’-’placedoneachofthemetricssignifytheoverallmeanpositiveandnegativeimpactlossrespectivelyacrossallimpacttypes.
6Figure3: Equalshareshasanimpactlossinallimpactareasbesideseducation,culture,welfareandinallimpact
metrics besides winning rate, which shows a universal impact gain for equal shares. Equal shares also shows
withinnoveltygaininalmostalloftheimpactareasandbetweennoveltygainintheareasofeducation,culture
and welfare, in which it also shows impact gain. In all other impact areas, equal shares shows loss of between
novelty. Within novelty comes with larger gains than losses, while between novelty comes with larger losses
than gains. The figure shows different impact areas (Y-axis) for different impact and novelty metrics (X-axis).They compare
theimpact(firstfourcolumns)ofexclusivevs. non-exclusivewinningprojectsinequalshares(ES)andutilitariangreedy(UG).
Theyalsocomparethenoveltygainandloss(lasttwocolumns)ofequalsharesoverutilitariangreedyintwodifferentways: (i)
within-impact-areanovelty,whichmeasurestheshareofcostandnumberofexclusivelywinningprojectswithinasingleimpact
area out of the total cost and number of winning projects for that impact area and (ii) between-impact-area novelty, which
measurestheshareofcostandnumberofexclusivelywinningprojectsforagivenimpactareaoutofthetotalcostandnumber
ofexclusivewinningprojectsacrossallimpactareas. Theoverallwithinandbetweennoveltylossesofeachimpactareaisalso
shown.
7Novelty loss of equal shares: Equal shares shows between novelty losses for impact areas of public transit,
public space, urban greenery, sport and environmental protection. Forinstance, in terms ofwinningcosts, the
between novelty losses for urban greenery, public space, public transit and environmental protection is 24%,
21%, 19% and 19% respectively. This means that out of the total exclusively winning costs by respective
aggregation methods, equal shares reduces the cost allocation on exclusively winning projects by 24%, 21%,
19% and 19% for such impact areas respectively. Likewise, in terms of winning projects, the between novelty
losses for the same impact areas are 29%, 28%, 23% and 20% respectively.
2.3 Proportionality in representation of impact areas by equal shares
Equalsharesintroducesaproportionalrepresentationofdiverseprojecttypes. Figure4illustrates
the performance of equal shares and utilitarian greedy for projects across different impact areas in terms of
project proportionality. This impact metric measures the proportionality of representation of a given impact
area in winning outcomes with respect to the initial distribution of proposed projects. We find that winning
outcomes by equal shares are more proportionally represented compared to utilitarian greedy. A value of
project proportionality greater than 1 for an impact area means that the impact area is over-represented
in the winning outcome while a value less than 1 signifies under-representation. Particularly, equal shares
increases the proportionality in representation of under-represented impact areas such as education, culture
and welfare, while slashing over-representation of urban greenery and environmental protection. Since the
valueoftheprojectproportionalitymetricbyequalsharesacrossallimpactareasroughlyalignsaroundafair
representation value of y = 1, a diverse set of project types are proportionately represented in the winning
outcome. Theequalsharesmethodalsoimprovestheprojectrepresentationforspecificbeneficiaries. Table1
showsthatacrossallbeneficiaries,theprojectrepresentationbyequalsharesincreasessignificantlycompared
toutilitariangreedy. Theincreaseinprojectrepresentationforpopulationbeneficiariesandmoreproportional
representation of various impact areas comes at the expense of sacrificing ambitious projects for less expensive
ones (see Figure ?? in SI).
Table1: Equal shares results in selection of projects that increases project representation across
all target beneficiaries compared to utilitarian greedy. Table shows the overall number of proposed
projects across all instances targeted towards specific beneficiaries and the corresponding values for project
representation by utilitarian greedy and equal shares.
Beneficiaries Total Projects UG Project Representation ES Project Representation
Families 2625 47.6 66
Students 366 44.3 72.1
Disabled People 4266 28.3 61.9
Children 7062 33.7 65
Adults 7656 35.3 66.6
Seniors 6239 33.8 65.7
Animals 313 67.1 80.8
Youth 6943 33 65.5
2.4 Impact loss across impact areas and different cost levels
Ourfindingssofarsuggestthatimpactislostbyequalsharesforinfrastructuralandsustainabledevelopment
projects while impact is gained for projects related to education, culture, welfare. Moreover, on account of
equal distribution of budget among all voters by the equal shares, expensive projects are discouraged while
8Figure 4: Equal shares (ES) shows impact gain in project proportionality for education, welfare, culture and
health, with an impact loss in all other impact areas. Equal shares over-represents the impact areas of culture
and education by 14% and 11% respectively, while it under-represents the area of public transit by 19%. In
contrast,utilitariangreedy(EG)over-representsurbangreenery,environmentalprotectionandpublicspaceby
37%,50%and12%respectively,whileunder-representingwelfareby34%. Foreachoftheninedepictedimpactareas,
aprojectproportionality(Y-axis)of‘1’showsafairrepresentationoftheprojects, astheratioofanimpactareaintheballot
ofprojectsequalstheratioofthisareainthewinningprojects. TheX-axisdenotesvotinginstancessortedaccordingtoimpact
loss. Values>1denoteover-representationand<1under-representation. Thenumbersintheparenthesesnexttoeachimpact
area denote the impact loss measured by the difference of project proportionality between utilitarian greedy and equal shares
withrespecttotheinitialvalueofutilitariangreedyi.e.,(UG-ES)/UG.
9inexpensive projects are favored (see Figure ??, ?? in SI). We compare the impact loss or gain of equal
sharesforprojectsindifferentimpactareasacrossmultiplecostlevels. Figure5illustratestheaverageimpact
performance of equal shares and utilitarian greedy and consequently the impact loss or gain of equal shares
for projects in different impact areas across various cost levels.
Here we see that, despite the preference of low-cost projects by equal shares, very-cheap urban greenery
projectsexhibitanimpactlossof5%onaverageforbothmetricsofbudgetshareandwinningrate. However,
in terms of cost and project representation, equal shares achieves an impact gain of 4% for both metrics.
For very-expensive urban greenery projects, the impact loss of equal shares in terms of budget share and
winning rate is minimal (0% and 1%) respectively, while loss in terms of cost and project representation is
more significant (7% and 5% respectively). Similarly, for very cheap environmental protection projects, the
impact lost in terms of budget share and winning rate by equal shares is 6% and 7% respectively. However,
in terms of cost and project representation, equal shares achieves an impact gain of 5% and 5% respectively.
On the other hand, projects related to education and culture exhibit a different trends of impact across
various cost levels. For very cheap education projects, impact is gained by equal shares for all metrics i.e.
budget share, winning rate, cost and project representation by 7%, 7%, 23% and 21% respectively. For very
cheap culture projects, the impact gained for these metrics are 4%, 4%, 15% and 14% respectively. However,
forveryexpensiveeducationalprojects,impactisgainedbyequalsharesintermsofbudgetshareandwinning
rateby6%and6%respectively,whileimpactisslightlylostintermsofcostandprojectrepresentationby3%
and2%respectively. Despiteveryexpensiveprojectsincultureandwelfare,equalsharesresultsinanimpact
gain of 5%, 2% and 4%, 2% respectively in terms of budget share and winning rate. However, impact is lost
byamarginalvalueof1%forsuchveryexpensiveprojectsincultureandwelfareintermsofcostandproject
representation.
How impact areas and cost levels explain voting outcomes: a conjoint analysis. We have con-
ducted a conjoint analysis to explore the causal relationship in determining the budget utilization rate of
equal shares and utilitarian greedy using the attributes of impact areas and cost levels. Eight independent
variables are used (4 variables for popular combination of project impact areas X 2 variables for cost levels).
Table 2 tabulates the most frequently observed combination of project impact areas. These combinations of
project impact areas group sustainable infrastructure projects, education & cultural projects separately. For
eachofthese4independentvariableswithcombinationsofimpactarealabels,wefurthersegregatetheminto
two cost-price levels – low-cost and high-cost, resulting in a total of 8 independent variables.
Table 2: Most frequently observed mutually-exclusive combination of labels for project impact
areas
Project Tags Combination Number of Projects
Culture, Education 1227
Environmental Protection, Public Space, Urban Greenery 966
Public Space, Public Transit and Roads 755
... ...
Health, Public Space, Sport 261
Based on the presence or absence of winning projects with these combinations at two different cost levels
in the winning outcomes of equal shares and utilitarian greedy, we model a choice-based conjoint analysis
problem that contributes to the budget utilization (overall budget share). Our modeling results in a good
fit for both equal shares and utilitarian greedy with R2 = 0.88 and R2 = 0.82 respectively with significant
p-values for all independent variables (i.e. p-val < 0.05).
The relative importance (part-worth utilities) of different project impact areas and cost-price levels by
equal shares and utilitarian greedy is shown in Figure 6. The conjoint analysis further reinforces the findings
10Figure 5: The impact loss of equal shares for public transit originates from very expensive projects in budget
share (5%) and winning rate (5%). In contrast, the impact loss of equal shares for environmental protection,
urban greenery and public space originates from very-cheap and cheap projects i.e. 7%, 5%, 4% and 8%, 7%,
6% respectively in terms of budget share and 7%, 4%, 4% and 7%, 7%, 6% respectively in terms of winning
rate. Strikingly, sports projects that are very expensive show impact loss (3% and 2.5% respectively), while
sports projects that are cheap and slightly expensive show impact gain (2.5% and 2.5% respectively). For cost
andprojectrepresentation,impactlossisobservedforveryexpensiveprojects,whileprojectsofanyothercost
level result in impact gain. Impactvalues(Y-axis)ofequalshares(ES)andutilitariangreedy(UG)acrossdifferentimpact
areasfor(A)BudgetShare,(B)WinningRate,(C)CostRepresentationand(D)ProjectRepresentationsegregatedatdifferent
costlevels(X-axis)isshown. Thelastcolumnofplotsdepictstherespectiveimpactlossvalues(UG-ES).
11of our results. The figure illustrates that projects with the combination of education, culture at low-cost
contribute the most to budget utilization by both equal shares and utilitarian greedy (relative importance of
71.6% and 52.5% respectively). However, the same combination of projects at higher cost ranges contributes
negatively to the budget utilization rate in both aggregation methods. Likewise, projects with combinations
of environmental protection, public space and urban greenery across both cost ranges contribute positively to
the budget utilization rate in the case of utilitarian greedy, whereas such projects contribute negatively in the
case of equal shares. This observation is congruent with results that suggest impact is lost by equal shares for
sustainable infrastructure related projects while impact is gained for projects related to culture, education and
welfare.
Figure 6: The impact areas of culture and education with low cost have the highest importance in both equal
shares and utilitarian greedy, while for high costs, both of these impact areas come with negative importance.
Thispatternisalsoobservedforthecombinationsofhealth,publicspace,sportandpublicspace,publictransit.
In contrast, for the impact area of environmental protection, public space and urban greenery, the voting
aggregation method is more important than the cost: positive importance for both cost levels of utilitarian
greedy, negativeimportanceforboth costs ofequalshares. Mostfrequentcombinationsofimpactareas(X-axis)across
costlevelsandtheirrelativeimportance(Y-axis,part-worthutilities)contributingtobudgetutilizationratebyequalsharesand
utilitariangreedyisshown.
122.5 Equal shares in real world: the cases of City Idea & Green Million
Doesequalsharesmitigateimpactlossinrealworld? Hereweexploretheimpactlossandgainofequal
sharesacrossdifferentimpactareasforrecentlyimplementedparticipatorybudgetinginstancesinAarau(City
Idea Project) and Wieliczka (Green Million), in which winning outcomes were determined using a variant of
the equal shares method (add1 using integral endowments for Green Million and add1u for City Idea). The
impactloss(orgain)onthewinningoutcomesbyequalsharesforthesetwocasesalongwiththemeanvalues
of overall voting instances is shown in Figure 7.
Figure7: The application of equal shares in real-world mitigates impact loss in public space and urban greenery
forbudgetshareandwinningrate,whileanimpactlossisobservedincultureandeducationandimpactgainin
sport. AsignificantimpactgainforpublictransitisobservedintheGreenMillioncampaigninPoland. Welfare
in the City Idea campaign in Switzerland shows impact gain for budget share and winning rate. Theimpactloss
(Y-axis)fordifferentimpactmetricsacrossdifferentimpactareas(X-axis)for(i)all345votinginstances(mean),(ii)theGreen
MillioncampaigninWieliczka,Polandand(iii)theCityIdeacampaigninAarau,Switzerland.
The winning outcomes by equal shares for the Green Million participatory budgeting instance is different
fromtheexpectedwinningoutcomesofequalshares. Contrarytotheexpectedequalsharesoutcome,itisseen
thatprojectsunderimpactareasofpublictransit,publicspace,urbangreeneryandenvironmentalprotection
achieves an additional impact gain instead of expected impact loss for such projects. This is because the
GreenMilionProject,asitsnamesuggests,wasparticularlyaimedatpromotingeco-friendly"green"projects
13such that most of the proposed projects were related to environmental protection, urban greenery and public
space. Likewise, due to the absence of projects related to education, culture and welfare for this instance, an
unexpected and significant impact loss is observed (in terms of all metrics) for such impact areas.
In case of the City Idea Project in Aarau, the winning outcomes by equal shares exhibit expected impact
gains for welfare and expected impact loss for public transit and environmental protection related projects.
However, unlike the expected impact gains for projects related to education by equal shares, a significant
impact loss for educational projects is observed across all impact metrics. Also, a significant impact gain is
observed for projects related to urban greenery. This is because, among the proposed project, only a single
project (relatively expensive) was labeled under education while more number of projects (relatively cheaper
than the cost of the single educational project) were assigned for urban greenery.
3 Discussion
The findings and key results comes with some significant implications. Equal shares gains momentum with
radically different voting outcomes in participatory budgeting: a larger number of lower cost projects are
elected (see Figure ?? in SI), often ‘replacing’ expensive popular projects, creating a fundamentally different
impact for the society as a result of higher proportional representation of voters’ preferences. We show that
there are some opportunities and risks here. In particular, infrastructural projects, especially ones related to
sustainability, may be frequently disadvantaged by equal shares, as a result of their inherently costly nature
but also beyond this, see Figure 5. On the other hand, equal shares strongly favors novel welfare, education
and cultural projects, which is a likely result of their lower cost in the context of participatory budgeting.
The risk of a democratic deficit towards the endeavor of sustainability and net zero requires attention
and mitigation. Apparently, letting infrastructural and sustainability projects planned in a top-down way
is a major threat to legitimacy [34] by creating vulnerabilities for corruption and even green washing by
large corporate organization with influence in governments. Preserving a capacity in participatory budgeting
campaigns to materialize infrastructural and sustainability projects that fairly benefit the whole population
is a key challenge to address in the future. Our new findings here suggest that participatory budgeting
campaigns with projects of high cost discrepancies may be more effective when they are broken down into
multiple campaigns with more local and synergistic effects in their implementation across different localities,
for instance, low-cost incremental expansions of bike lines across a city, instead of centrally deciding the
creation of a multi-million large bike lane network. The possibility of such substitution or complementarity
effects among proposed projects is also discussed by Jain et al. [35].
Wealsoshowevidencefromthefirstrecentreal-worldparticipatorybudgetingcampaignsconductedusing
themethodofequalsharesthatthemitigationofthisimpactlossisfeasible. Awarenessabouthowthevoting
aggregationmethodworksandwhatitprioritizesresultsindifferentproposedprojects, withdifferent(lower)
costsand,eventually,differentpreferencesthatyieldimpactrecoveryforpublictransitandsport,seeFigure7.
Thisstudyprovidesnewinsightsforseveralbeneficiaries: Forcitizensandcommunities,theresultsunravel
new pathways for democratic social innovations and the preservation of capacity to innovate as such. They
also provide further empirical evidence and understanding of more complex voting methods such as equal
shares, and its effectiveness. For policymakers, the findings of this work can support a more effective design
ofparticipatorybudgetingcampaignsthatmitigateforpotentialimpactlossesalreadyatthestageofproject
proposals and feasibility checks. They also support them to align ambitious net zero policy agendas with
citizens’ participation in their implementation and democratic legitimacy [29]. For the academic community
of(computational)socialchoiceandbeyond,theinsightsofourstudymotivatefornewaxiomaticfoundations
to assess fairness, proportionality and voting methods. Last but not least, for industry, a more localized,
distributed and synergistic implementation of infrastructural and sustainability projects with direct citizens’
engagements suggests the need for new business models aligned to democratic values.
144 Methods
4.1 Experimental Dataset
The data on participatory budgeting elections was collected in August 2023 from the PABULIB [31] open
repository. The repository consists of multiple files which signify the details of a particular participatory
budgeting voting instance defined by a standard .pb file. Such .pb files contain details on project costs, votes
received, project description, and the total available budget. In reality, for all but two of the voting instances
from the collected dataset, the winning outcomes were determined using utilitarian greedy. To determine the
hypothesized winning outcomes by equal shares, we used the pabutools [36] library. While calculating the
winning outcomes by equal shares, we added the conditions of arbitrary budget increments and utilitarian
termination (add1u) to prevent non-exhaustive outcome and ensure higher utilization of budget.
The dataset consists of 810 participatory budgeting instances. Out of these, only 345 instances have
information on project impact areas and population beneficiaries. Table 3 shows the overall and average
distribution of projects across the 9 different impact areas, and Table 4 shows the overall and average distri-
butionofprojectacross8differentbeneficiaries. For the participatory budgeting instances of City Idea, Aarau
and Green Million, Wieliczka, the impact area labels for proposed projects were absent in the data collected
from the repository. As such, the impact areas labels for proposed projects in these instances were assigned
independently by multiple individuals to cross-validate the classification.
Table 3: Distribution of Proposed Projects Across Impact Areas
Impact Areas Total Projects Avg. Num. Projects
Education 4336 13.3
Health 1408 4.6
Culture 3019 9.4
Sport 2760 8.4
Public Transit 1973 6.3
Welfare 783 4.2
Urban Greenery 2534 8.6
Public Space 5512 16.4
Environmental Protection 2093 7.5
Table 4: Distribution of Proposed Projects Across Targeted Beneficiaries
Beneficiaries Total Projects Avg. Num. Projects
Families 2625 7.7
Students 366 1.1
Disabled People 4266 12.4
Children 7062 20.5
Adults 7656 22.3
Seniors 6239 18.1
Animals 313 0.9
Youth 6943 20.2
154.2 Impact & Novelty Metrics
For a given participatory budgeting instance I and voting aggregation method f, Table 5 outlines the list
of symbols and their meanings for defining the impact and novelty metrics. Based on these values, given
aggregation method f, and label l, proposed impact and novelty metrics are calculated.
Table 5: Symbols for project variables and measurement used in the formulation of impact
metrics
Symbol Interpretation
f Voting aggregation methods e.g. equal shares or utilitarian greedy i.e. f=ES or f=UG
l A distinct label for projects within a given impact area e.g. education, health, etc.
C Cost of all proposed projects
N Total number of all proposed projects
C l Cost of proposed projects within the impact area l
N l Number of proposed projects within the impact area l
Cf Cost of all winning projects by the method f
w
Nf Number of winning projects by the method f
w
Cf’ Cost of all winning projects exclusive to the method f
w
Nf’ Number of winning projects exclusive to method f
w
Cf Cost of winning projects within the impact area l by the method f
w,l
Nf Number of winning projects within the impact area l by the method f
w,l
Cf’ Cost of winning projects within the impact area l exclusive to the method f
w,l
Nf’ Number of winning projects within the impact area l exclusive to the method f
w,l
R N,l Ratio of number of projects in the impact area l over the total projects, i.e. N Nl
R C,l Ratio of total cost of projects in the impact area l over the total cost of projects, i.e. C Cl
Budget Share: BudgetshareimpactIf foragivenimpactarealisthecostshareofthewinningprojects
BS,l
fortheimpactareawithrespecttothetotalcostofallwinningprojectsbytherespectiveaggregationmethod
Cf
f i.e. w,l. The exclusive budget share is calculated as the cost of exclusively winning projects for the impact
Cf
w
area out of total cost of all winning projects by the respective aggregation method.
WinningRate: WinningrateimpactIf foragivenimpactarealdenotesthefractionofwinningprojects
WR,l
Nf
in the impact area out of the total winning projects by the respective aggregation method f i.e. w,l. The
Nf
w
exclusive winning rate is calculated as the number of exclusively winning projects for the impact area out of
the total number of winning projects by the respective aggregation method.
CostRepresentation: CostrepresentationimpactIf fortheimpactarealisthecostfractionofproposed
CR,l
projects within the impact area that is represented in the winning outcome by the respective aggregation
Cf
method f i.e. w,l. The exclusive cost representation is calculated as the cost of exclusively winning projects
Cl
within the impact area out of the total cost of proposed projects for that impact area.
Project Representation: Project representation impact If for the impact area l is the fraction of pro-
PR,l
posedprojectswithintheimpactareathatisrepresentedinthewinningoutcomebytherespectiveaggregation
16Nf
methodf i.e. w,l. Theexclusiveprojectrepresentationfortheimpactareaiscalculatedasnumberofexclu-
Nl
sively winning projects within the impact area out of the total number of proposed projects for that impact
area.
Cost Proportionality: Cost proportionality impact If for an impact area l, measures if the cost of
CP,l
projects within the impact area is proportionately represented in the winning outcome of the method f with
If
respect to the initial cost ratio of projects labeled under the impact area i.e. BS,l.
RC,l
Project Proportionality: Project proportionality impact If for an impact area l, measures if projects
PP,l
within the impact area are proportionately represented in the winning outcome of the method f with respect
If
to the initial ratio of projects labeled under the impact area i.e. WR,l.
RN,l
Within-impact-area Cost Novelty: This metric denoted by νf for an impact area l by aggregation
P,l
method f, measures the cost of winning projects with the label l that are exclusively winning in f out of the
Cf’
total cost of winning projects with label l by f i.e. w,l
Cf
w,l
Within-impact-area Projects Novelty: Thismetricdenotedbyνf foranimpactareal byaggregation
N,l
method f, measures the number of winning projects with the label l that are exclusively winning in f out of
Nf’
the total number of winning project with the label l by f i.e. w,l
Nf
w,l
Between-impact-areas Cost Novelty: This metric denoted by βf for an impact area l by aggregation
P,l
method f, measures the cost of winning projects with the label l that are exclusively winning in f out of the
Cf’
total cost of exclusively winning projects in f i.e. w,l
Cf’
w
Between-impact-areas Projects Novelty: This metric denoted by βf for an impact area l by aggrega-
N,l
tion method f, measures the number of winning projects with the label l that are exclusively winning in f out
Nf’
of the total number of exclusively winning projects in f i.e. w,l
Nf’
w
Forthelistedmetrics,impactandnoveltyvaluesrangebetween0and1. Impactandnoveltylosses(orgains)
are calculated as the difference in the metrics values between utilitarian greedy and equal shares as shown in
Table 6.
17Table 6: Impact loss or gain calculation for proposed metrics
Metric Loss (or Gain)
Budget Share IUG IES
BS,l− BS,l
Winning Rate IUG IES
WR,l− WR,l
Cost Representation IUG IES
CR,l− CR,l
Project Representation IUG IES
PR,l− PR,l
Within-impact-area Cost Novelty νUG νES
P,l − P,l
Within-impact-area Count Novelty νUG νES
N,l − N,l
Between-impact-areas Cost Novelty βUG βES
P,l − P,l
Between-impact-areas Count Novelty βUG βES
N,l− N,l
Code Availability
Source code used and developed for this paper is made available at
https://github.com/TDI-Lab/Impact-Analysis-Participatory-Budgeting.
References
[1] DirkHelbingandEvangelosPournaras. Society: Builddigitaldemocracy. Nature,527(7576):33–34,2015.
[2] DirkHelbing,SachitMahajan,RegulaHänggliFricker,AndreaMusso,CarinaIHausladen,CesareCaris-
simo, Dino Carpentras, Elisabeth Stockinger, Javier Argota Sanchez-Vaquerizo, Joshua C Yang, et al.
Democracy by design: Perspectives for digitally assisted, participatory upgrades of society. Journal of
Computational Science, 71:102061, 2023.
[3] EvangelosPournaras. Proofofwitnesspresence: Blockchainconsensusforaugmenteddemocracyinsmart
cities. Journal of Parallel and Distributed Computing, 145:160–175, 2020.
[4] Participatory budgeting world atlas. Participatory Budgeting World Atlas. Date Accessed: 2024-02-16.
[5] Democracy technologies. Grassroots Politics and Participatory Budgeting in Poland. Date Accessed:
2023-06-01.
[6] Javier Gomez, D Rios Insua, José M Lavin, and Cesar Alfaro. On deciding how to decide: Designing
participatory budget processes. European Journal of Operational Research, 229(3):743–750, 2013.
[7] Brian Wampler. A guide to participatory budgeting. International Budget Partnership, 2000.
[8] Emyr Williams, Emily St Denny, and Daniel Bristow. Participatory budgeting: An evidence review.
Available at Online Research @ Cardiff: 124566, 2019.
[9] SimonReyandJanMaly. The(computational)socialchoicetakeonindivisibleparticipatorybudgeting.
arXiv preprint arXiv:2303.00621, 2023.
[10] Luca Bartocci, Giuseppe Grossi, Sara Giovanna Mauro, and Carol Ebdon. The journey of participa-
tory budgeting: a systematic literature review and future research directions. International Review of
Administrative Sciences, 89(3):757–774, 2023.
18[11] Thomas Welling, Fatemeh Banaie Heravan, Abhinav Sharma, Lodewijk Gelauff, Regula Haenggli, and
Evangelos Pournaras. Fair and inclusive participatory budgeting: Voter experience with cumulative and
quadratic voting interfaces. arXiv preprint arXiv:2308.04345, 2023.
[12] AshishGoel,AnileshKKrishnaswamy,SukolsakSakshuwong,andTanjaAitamurto. Knapsackvotingfor
participatory budgeting. ACM Transactions on Economics and Computation (TEAC), 7(2):1–27, 2019.
[13] Markus Brill, Rupert Freeman, Svante Janson, and Martin Lackner. Phragmén’s voting methods and
justified representation. Mathematical Programming, pages 1–30, 2023.
[14] Dominik Peters, Grzegorz Pierczyński, and Piotr Skowron. Proportional participatory budgeting with
additive utilities. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems, 34:12726–12737, 2021.
[15] Explanation of the method of equal shares, 2023. Accessed on November 2, 2023.
[16] Stadt aarau city idea. Stadt Aarau City Idea. Date Accessed: 2024-04-30.
[17] Wendy K Cho. Algorithms can foster a more democratic society. Nature, 558(June 28, 2018), 2018.
[18] John Deutch. Is net zero carbon 2050 possible? Joule, 4(11):2237–2240, 2020.
[19] £400bn additional infrastructure spend needed to meet net zero target. Accessed on April 1, 2024.
[20] LaShondaMStewart,StevenAMiller,RWHildreth,andMajaVWright-Phillips. Participatorybudget-
ingintheunitedstates: apreliminaryanalysisofchicago’s49thwardexperiment. New Political Science,
36(2):193–218, 2014.
[21] Impact assessments. Impact assessments. Date Accessed: 2024-02-16.
[22] Mhairi Campbell, Oliver Escobar, Candida Fenton, and Peter Craig. The impact of participatory bud-
geting on health and wellbeing: a scoping review of evaluations. BMC public health, 18:1–11, 2018.
[23] Diether W Beuermann and Maria Amelina. Does participatory budgeting improve decentralized public
service delivery? experimental evidence from rural russia. Economics of Governance, 19(4):339–379,
2018.
[24] Inga Hajdarowicz. Does participation empower? the example of women involved in participatory bud-
geting in medellin. Journal of Urban Affairs, 44(1):22–37, 2022.
[25] Yves Cabannes. Children and young people build participatory democracy in latin american cities. En-
vironment and urbanization, 18(1):195–218, 2006.
[26] CatherineGMkude,CristinaPérez-Espés,andMariaAWimmer. Participatorybudgeting: Aframework
toanalyzethevalue-addofcitizenparticipation. In201447thHawaiiInternationalConferenceonSystem
Sciences, pages 2054–2062. IEEE, 2014.
[27] Brian Wampler. Can participatory institutions promote pluralism? mobilizing low-income citizens in
brazil. Studies in Comparative International Development, 41(4):57, 2007.
[28] NiekMouter,PaulKoster,andThijsDekker. Anintroductiontoparticipatoryvalueevaluation. Available
at SSRN 3358814, 2019.
19[29] ThomasSamuelWellings,SirjoniMajumdar,RegulaHaenggliFricker,andEvangelosPournaras. Improv-
ing city life via legitimate and participatory policy-making: A data-driven approach in switzerland. In
Proceedings of the 24th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research, pages 23–35,
2023.
[30] Pelle Nelissen. An empirical analysis of participatory budgeting in amsterdam. arXiv preprint
arXiv:2310.18033, 2023.
[31] DariuszStolicki,StanisławSzufa,andNimrodTalmon. Pabulib: Aparticipatorybudgetinglibrary. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2012.06539, 2020.
[32] Jens Hainmueller, Daniel J Hopkins, and Teppei Yamamoto. Causal inference in conjoint analysis: Un-
derstanding multidimensional choices via stated preference experiments. Political analysis, 22(1):1–30,
2014.
[33] Wieliczka zielony milion ("green million") 2023s, 2023. Accessed on April 1, 2024.
[34] Carina Ines Hausladen, Regula Hänggli, Dirk Helbing, Renato Kunz, Junling Wang, and Evangelos
Pournaras. On the legitimacy of voting methods. Available at SSRN 4372245, 2023.
[35] Pallavi Jain, Krzysztof Sornat, and Nimrod Talmon. Participatory budgeting with project interactions.
In IJCAI, pages 386–392, 2020.
[36] pabutools. pabutools. Date Accessed: 2024-02-16.
Acknowledgements
This work is funded by a UKRI Future Leaders Fellowship (MR/W009560/1): Digitally Assisted Collective
Governance of Smart City Commons–ARTIO. All data used for this study are in public domain.
20Fair Voting Outcomes with Impact and Novelty Compromises?
Unraveling Biases of Equal Shares in Participatory Budgeting
Supplementary Information
Sajan Maharjan1, Srijoni Majumdar1, and Evangelos Pournaras1
1School of Computing, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK,
E-mails: {scsmah, s.majumdar,e.pournaras}@leeds.ac.uk
May 9, 2024
Equalsharesresultsinadominantselectionofverycheapandinexpensiveprojectsbutdiscour-
ages selection of very expensive projects. Figure1illustratestheimpactlossorgainbyequalsharesfor
projectsgroupedonthebasisofcost-pricelevelsintermsoftheproposedimpactmetrics. Theimpactlostby
equal shares method for very expensive projects is greater in magnitude compared to the impact gained for
very cheap, cheap and slightly expensive projects in terms of budget share and winning rate. For instance, in
termsofbudgetshareandwinningrate, theimpactlostforverycheap, cheapandslightlyexpensiveprojects
by equal shares is -5%, -10%, -11% and -4%, -5%, 2% respectively. The voting instances with budget share
losses and winning rate losses for these cost-quartile projects are only as few as 3%, 5%, 12% and 16%, 22%,
39% respectively. On the other hand, the budget share losses and winning rate losses for very expensive
projects is 26% and 14% respectively. Such losses for budget share and winning rate is observed in 70% and
74% of the election instances respectively.
This observed impact loss or gain by equal shares for different cost quartiles can be attributed to the
novelty of exclusive selection by utilitarian greedy or equal shares method. Figure 2 illustrates the impact
scoresintermsoftheproposedmetricsfornon-exclusiveandexclusivewinningoutcomesaswellasthenovelty
loss within and between groups of different cost-quartiles by the equal shares and utilitarian greedy methods.
We observe that for very cheap, cheap and slightly expensive projects, the overall within and between-group
novelty losses are negative, but for very expensive projects the within and between-group novelty losses are
positive. For instance, in terms of budget share, the within novelty losses for very cheap, cheap and slightly
expensive projects is -66%, -59% and -37% (i.e. novelty gain of 66%, 59% and 37%) respectively. This means
that, out of the total winning costs for each of such cost-quartiles, an additional of 66%, 59% and 37% of
the winning costs allocated to these cost quartiles are attributed to the exclusively winning projects by equal
shares which results in the net impact gain for such cheap and slightly expensive projects. Likewise, in terms
of budget share, the between-group novelty loss for very expensive projects is 88%. This means that out of
thetotalexclusivelywinningprojectsbyutilitariangreedy,anexcessof88%ofsuchexclusivelywinningcosts
are allocated to very expensive projects which ultimately contributes in a net impact loss.
1
4202
yaM
8
]AM.sc[
1v58050.5042:viXraFigure1: Equal shares results in voting outcomes with an impact loss in very expensive projects. Besides these
projects,impactgainismorefrequentandlargerinscaleforcostandprojectrepresentation,whileimpactloss
islargerinscaleforbudgetshareandprojectrepresentation. Foreachofthefourdepictedimpactmetrics–(A)Budget
Share,(B)WinningRate(C)CostRepresentationand(D)ProjectRepresentation,positiveloss(Y-axis,UG-ES)inanimpact
cost quartile (colored lines) shows out-performance by utilitarian greedy (UG), while negative loss shows out-performance by
equalshares(ES).TheX-axisdenotesvotinginstancessortedaccordingtoimpactloss. Acircularmarkerisplacedalongeach
line to easier distinguish the number of voting instances with positive/negative loss. The four numbers next to each cost level
denotethe(i)%ofvotinginstanceswithpositiveloss,(ii)themean‘ ’,(iii)meanpositive‘+’and(iv)meannegative‘-’impact
∼
loss. Twoadditionalnumberswiththeprefixes’+’and’-’placedoneachofthemetricssignifytheoverallpositiveandnegative
impactlossrespectivelyacrossallprojectcostquartiles.
2Figure 2: Equal shares exhibits impact gain for projects that lie in the cost-price ranges of very-cheap, cheap
and slightly expensive projects whereas impact is lost for very-expensive projects. Equal shares also shows
within-novelty and between-novelty gain for the very-cheap, cheap and slightly expensive projects. On the
other hand, for very expensive projects, equal shares shows loss for both within-novelty and between-novelty.
The within-novelty and between-novelty gain is the highest for very-cheap projects, and this magnitude of within-novelty and
between-novelty gain is slightly reduced as the cost price of winning projects increases to cheap and expensive projects. For
veryexpensiveprojects,within-noveltylossisashighaswithin-noveltygainforverycheapprojects. Moreover,between-novelty
lossforvery-expensiveprojectsisofthehighestmagnitudecomparedtoothers. Thefigureshowstheperformanceofcost-price
levelledprojects(Y-axis)intermsofimpactandnoveltymetrics(X-axis). Thefirstfourbarscomparetheimpactofexclusivevs
non-exclusivewinningprojectsbyequalshares(ES)andutilitariangreedy(UG).Thenextfourbarscomparethenoveltygain
andlossintwodifferentways: (i)withinnovelty and(ii)betweennovelty. Theoverallwithinandbetweennoveltylossesforeach
cost-pricelevelsofprojectsisshown.
3