1
Pipe Routing with Topology Control for UAV
Networks
Shreyas Devaraju, Student Member, IEEE, Shivam Garg, Member, IEEE, Alexander Ihler, Member, IEEE,
Sunil Kumar, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—Routing protocols help in transmitting the sensed found, a UAV (called the target UAV) continuously monitors
data from UAVs monitoring the targets (called target UAVs) to each target and transmits the sensed information back to the
the BS. However, the highly dynamic nature of an autonomous,
base station (BS) in real time. The remaining UAVs continue
decentralized UAV network leads to frequent route breaks or
to collaboratively monitor the area to find new targets while
traffic disruptions. Traditional routing schemes cannot quickly
adapt to dynamic UAV networks and/or incur large control maintainingconnectivityandcommunicationroutestotheBS.
overheadanddelays.Toestablishstable,high-qualityroutesfrom The goal of a routing protocol is to help establish commu-
targetUAVstotheBS,wedesignahybridreactiveroutingscheme nicationroutesalongwhichthesenseddatacanbetransmitted
called pipe routing that is mobility, congestion, and energy-
fromeachtargetUAVtotheBS.However,thehighlydynamic
aware. The pipe routing scheme discovers routes on-demand
nature of an autonomous decentralized UAV network can
and proactively switches to alternate high-quality routes within
a limited region around the active routes (called the pipe) when result in frequent changes in the network topology, causing
needed,reducingthenumberofroutebreaksandincreasingdata existing routes to break or creating traffic disruptions. The
throughput. We then design a novel topology control-based pipe disruptednetworkmayexperiencelossofdata(packetdrops),
routingschemetomaintainrobustconnectivityinthepiperegion
increased control and computational overhead, as more re-
around the active routes, leading to improved route stability
sources are devoted to the frequent route rediscoveries, and
and increased throughput with minimal impact on the coverage
performance of the UAV network. corresponding increased delays in the transmission of the
target data. Most existing routing schemes cannot update
Index Terms—Unmanned aerial vehicles, autonomous UAV
the routing table or discover a new route before the current
networks, routing, topology control, mobility model, network
connectivity. route breaks. Reactive routing schemes then create significant
delays, since they perform new route discovery while the
currentroutesarebroken.Ontheotherhand,proactiverouting
I. INTRODUCTION
schemes introduce large overheads, as each node periodically
Unmanned aerial vehicles (UAVs) equipped with self- transmits control messages to maintain and update the routes
localization and sensing capabilities have become popular for in the network [4]. Another concern in our application, in
applications such as area monitoring, surveillance, search- which all the target UAVs need to relay their information to
and-rescue, and target tracking [1]–[3]. We focus on low a single base station, is that the routes may converge and
SWaP (size, weight, and power), fixed-wing UAVs, which create high resource usage (and congestion) at nodes along
offer a balance of portability and area coverage (with higher any shared routes, especially at high data rates. These “hot-
speedsandlongerlifetimesthanrotor-basedUAVs).However, spot” nodes along shared routes can become critical points of
low SWaP UAVs face some practical difficulties: they have failure,causingcommunicationdisruptions.LowSWaPUAVs
limited communication range and are more prone to failure have limited battery capacity, and their residual energy levels
than larger UAVs. These issues motivate a decentralized and mayvarydependingonusage(flightdurationandtrajectories).
autonomous network of UAVs, in which the nodes explore Selecting UAVs with low energy reserves to participate in
an area, perform local sensing, and communicate with their routes to the BS inevitably results in disruption of the data
neighborswithoutanyglobalknowledgeofnetworktopology. flows when these low-energy UAVs fail.
We consider a network of low SWaP fixed-wing UAVs To mitigate these issues, a good routing protocol should
deployed in an area without any fixed communication infras- be mobility, congestion, and energy-aware. We say a routing
tructure, such as a cellular network. Example targets might be protocol is “mobility-aware” if its selection of routes in a
buildings on fire or a damaged bridge in a disaster area, or network is based on the trajectories of nodes within the route;
enemy troop movements on a battlefield, so the targets need it can select long-lasting routes by considering the estimated
constant monitoring. When one or more targets of interest are lifespanofachosenroute[5]–[7].“Congestion-aware”routing
protocols select routes that minimize congestion by avoiding
S. Devaraju is with Computational Science Research Center, San Diego congested nodes [4], [8]–[11]. Finally, “energy-aware” rout-
StateUniversity&UniversityofCalifornia,Irvine,USA,sdevaraju@sdsu.edu
ing involves selecting nodes above a minimum energy level
S.GargiswithElectrical&ComputerEngineeringDepartment,SanDiego
StateUniversity,SanDiego,California,USA,sgarg@sdsu.edu required to provide stable and long-lasting routes.
A.IhleriswithSchoolofInformation&ComputerScience,Universityof Of course, the ability of a routing protocol to find or
California,Irvine,USA,ihler@ics.uci.edu
switchroutesdependsontheavailabilityofroutesbetweenthe
S. Kumar is with Electrical & Computer Engineering Department, San
DiegoStateUniversity,SanDiego,California,USA,skumar@sdsu.edu source and destination. Hence, routing protocols alone cannot
4202
yaM
7
]IN.sc[
1v87640.5042:viXra2
Fig. 1: Decentralized, autonomous UAV network performing monitoring, search and surveillance in inaccessible disaster areas.
guarantee the stability and quality of the routes; the nodes’ designed; it works in conjunction with the Pipe routing
mobility model plays a crucial role. For this reason, we use scheme, and is called TC-Pipe routing. The TC-Pipe
the BS-CAP mobility [12], a pheromone-based connectivity- scheme improves the availability of high-quality routes
aware mobility model, to improve overall network and BS between the target UAVs and BS.
connectivity. Our focus is on enhancing the stability and • TheTC-Piperoutingschememaintainsrobustconnectiv-
qualityofroutesbetweentargetUAVsandtheBS;tothisend, ity around the active routes, leading to improved route
we propose a pheromone-based topology control mechanism stability and increased throughput with minimal impact
to increase the density of UAVs around an active route. This on the coverage performance of the UAV network.
improves the availability of high-quality routes and enables • Both the TC-Pipe and Pipe schemes’ PDR and coverage
the routing protocol to choose the best route (long-lasting and performance decrease gracefully in proportion to the %
less congested) from the available options. UAVs failing in the network.
Webuildourapproachonahybridreactiveroutingprotocol • A relay based routing scheme that uses dedicated relay
called MCA-AODV [13], and design a novel energy-aware nodes is also discussed for comparison against the per-
routing protocol, called Pipe routing, as well as a comple- formance of the Pipe and TC-Pipe routing schemes
mentary topology control scheme, together called TC-Pipe Paper Organization: We first review several existing rout-
routing. These schemes select a stable route between each ing and topology control schemes that focus on providing
target UAV and the BS, while also considering the energy robust routes (Section II). Next, we discuss our proposed pipe
level of the nodes along the selected route. A relay based routing and topology control schemes in Sections III and IV,
routing scheme is also discussed for comparison against the respectively, followed by the relay based routing scheme in
performance of both pipe based routing schemes. Section VI. We evaluate the performance of our approach in
• We design a mobility, congestion, and energy-aware simulations and analyze the results in Section VII.
hybrid reactive routing protocol, called Pipe routing, by
modifying the MCA-AODV [13] routing protocol. This II. RELATEDWORK
routing protocol is able to adapt to highly dynamic UAV Designing a resilient, robust routing protocol for au-
networksandproactivelyswitchorselectstableandhigh- tonomous, decentralized UAV networks is challenging: the
quality routes. networktopologyishighlydynamic,andtrafficundergoesfre-
• Energy awareness prevents the selection of routes with quent fluctuations [11], [14]–[16]. Proactive routing schemes,
low-energyUAVs;thisavoidsdisruptionofthedataflows suchasOLSRanditsvariants[4],[17],introducelargecontrol
when these low-energy UAVs fail. and computational overhead [4] and may increase congestion
• Congestion-aware routes reduce the congestion at hot- in the network.
spot nodes when multiple flows to the BS are present in Ontheotherhand,reactiveroutingschemes[16],[18]–[27]
the network (especially at high data rates). discovernewroutesonlyondemand,andthusincurlowercon-
• A novel pheromone-based topology control scheme is trol and computational overhead. However, reactive methods3
create higher route discovery delays. Route re-discovery can congestion-aware AODV (MCA-AODV) [13] combines reac-
beespeciallyproblematicwhenroutesbreakfrequently,asina tive and proactive routing methods to adapt to dynamic UAV
dynamic UAV network. Many reactive routing schemes [15], networks with lower control overhead than traditional proac-
[18] suffer from control packet (RREQ) flooding problems, tive networks. Here, the source node maintains knowledge
known as “broadcast storms” [16]. Although some schemes of alternate routes and their quality within a 2-hop region
[16],[21],[22]explicitlytrytoreducetheoverheadanddelay aroundtheselectedroute(calleda“pipe”)toperformproactive
caused by frequent route discoveries, this often comes at the routeswitchingwhenthequalityofthecurrentroutedegrades.
costofusingthebestinformation.Forexample,in[22],when MCA-AODVisbothmobilityandcongestion-aware.Itselects
a route breaks, the intermediate nodes search for an alternate the best route based on various factors such as hop count,
routeonlyintheirrespectivek-hopneighborhood;thisreduces interference, route lifetime, and estimated latency to provide
control overhead by avoiding network-wide route discovery long-lasting and less congested routes.
by the source node. In [21], RREQ flooding is limited by Topology Control for Robust Routes: Some schemes (e.g.,
only forwarding the RREQ to certain nodes identified in [12], [29]–[33]) modify the mobility models to provide stable
different zones based on the neighboring nodes’ location and network connectivity. In this section, we review topology
connectivity. However, since the full network topology is not controlandroutingschemesthatmaintainastableactiveroute
used for route discovery, these schemes can result in the between the source and destination UAVs. In [34], the AODV
selection of poor routes. routing protocol [18] and a modified Boids mobility model
Manyapplicationsaretimesensitive(e.g.,videostreaming) [35] are used to maintain the links over the route in a highly
and demand a certain bandwidth level from the network. dynamicautonomousUAVnetwork.In[36],aglobaljoint3D
Reactive routing schemes that are QoS-aware [13], [23], [24], trajectory and power allocation scheme was designed using
[28]usenetworkstatisticssuchasnodemobility,linkstability, spectral graph theory and convex optimization techniques to
hop count, signal strength, node energy level, congestion, and form interference-aware routes between a single source and
traffic load to select the best route. In one such scheme [23], destination (BS) using rotary wing UAVs. In [37], a mobility
RREQ is rebroadcast by only those nodes that meet specific controlsystemforFANETsbasedonvirtualspringsmaintains
QoS thresholds like time-to-live (TTL), bandwidth, and flow an aerial mesh network to ensure ground-user coverage and
jitter. However, this protocol does not estimate or track node QoS for disaster recovery. In [38], a virtual force-based UAV
mobility and link stability, leading to frequent route breaks. mobility model and energy-efficient mobility-aware cluster
In [24], an intermediate node in the route can adapt to the head (CH) UAV selection is used to improve ground-user
changes in the network topology and traffic conditions by coverage and network connectivity. Authors also propose a
selecting a new downstream node (towards the destination). topology-aware routing protocol that uses Q-learning to find
This selection is based on neighbor distance, latency, traffic stable, low-delay and energy-efficient routes between CH
load, and reliability. However, this scheme can sometimes UAVs and BS.
result in longer and less efficient routes. An energy-aware Our proposed routing protocol for autonomous UAV net-
variant of AODV [28] uses the link stability and residual works combines the advantages of both proactive and reactive
energy of the nodes to select stable routes. schemes, along with topology control, to establish robust and
Multipathreactiveroutingprotocols[20],[25]findmultiple low-overhead routes that are also mobility, congestion and
node-disjoint or link-disjoint paths during route discovery energy aware. This protocol is based on our connectivity-
and cache them as backup routes. When the current route aware pheromone mobility model that balances maintaining
quality degrades, the backup routes from the cache are used connectivity with providing coverage [12].
insteadofperforminganewroutediscovery.However,likethe
A. Overview of UAV Mobility Models
current route, the quality of the backup routes also typically
decline over time. To avoid selecting bad routes, [26], [27] Pheromone mobility models use digital repel pheromones
periodicallymonitorthequalityofthebackuproutes.Whereas to promote exploration and fast coverage of an area with
[16]performslocalrouterepairusingrouterecoverymessages no prior information [3], [30]. We consider a decentralized
and uses fuzzy logic route selection based on node mobility, connectivity-aware pheromone-based UAV mobility such as
residual energy, and link quality. Link stability based reactive BS-CAP [12] in our experiments, to provide fast area cov-
routing protocol [19] uses a semi-proactive route switching erage, strong node degree, and base station connectivity. In
mechanism, which reduces route discovery overhead incurred BS-CAP, the UAVs move and deposit repel pheromones in
in [16], [26], [27]. Here, the intermediate nodes notify the virtual maps divided into grid cells, and the trajectory of a
destination node of the route whenever the quality of the UAV (controlled by its next-waypoint) is decided based on
linktotheirdownstreamnodesdegrades.Thenthedestination the repel pheromone in cells and the node degree at a set of
node sends a new RREP packet (containing the updated route candidate waypoints, while ensuring that the next-waypoint
stability value) to the source node along each cached route. maintains a route to the BS. The coverage and connectivity
The source node then switches to an alternate route, which trade-off is controlled by adjusting the weight given to the
avoids the high overhead and delay of new route discovery. UAVs’ node degree at the waypoints. In the sequel, we also
However, this scheme is unable to adjust to traffic changes modify the BS-CAP model to provide topology control in the
and congestion and also lacks a route repair mechanism. pipe, and increase the density of UAVs around an active route
A scalable hybrid routing protocol called mobility and (see Sections III and IV).4
Another connectivity-aware UAV mobility model used in a route break. Therefore, these UAVs should safely disengage
our experiments is the ConCov model [31], which uses a fromtheroute.Forthisreason,routeswithEn ≤En +δ
R th e
modified flocking behavior toprovide trade-offs between cov- arenotconsideredduringrouteselectioninourscheme.Since
erage and BS connectivity. The ConCov model uses artificial the source node receives updated topology information (node
potential fields, along with 1-hop neighbor locations and their energy)every2s,weselectthevalueofthetolerancefactorδ
e
routinginformation,tominimizeoverlapintheareasensedby to be twice the per-second energy depletion rate of a UAV to
neighboring UAVs but maintain BS connectivity. The heading accountforthedelay.Moreover,preemptiverouteswitchingis
of a UAV is the weighted sum of repelling forces from performed when the currently active route’s En falls below
R
neighboring UAVs and an attractive force to a neighboring the threshold En .
th
UAV with a route to the BS. The coverage/connectivity trade-
off can be tuned by adjusting the relative weight of these two
forces. B. Active Route Selection
During the route discovery process, if the target UAV
III. PIPEROUTINGSCHEME
(source node) does not already have a route to the destination
ThePiperoutingschemeselectsandmaintainsastableroute (in our setting, the BS), it broadcasts an RREQ message to-
between each target UAV and the BS, known as an active wards the BS. Unlike MCA-AODV [13], which floods RREQ
route. It is based on a mobility and congestion-aware, hybrid messages in the entire network, our scheme takes advantage
reactive routing scheme [13]. Since the UAVs participating of the UAV’s knowledge about the BS’s GPS location and
on an active route also participate in area coverage and broadcasts the RREQ messages only in the direction of the
exploration tasks (e.g., following the BS-CAP mobility model BS. In response, the BS sends back RREP messages to the
[12]),theresultingnetworktopologychangesovertime,which targetUAVoverthereverseroutes,identifiedduringtheRREQ
can cause link breaks and/or changes in route quality. Pipe forwarding phase. To find stable routes, with a low control
routing proactively maintains the network information of a packet overhead, RREQ forwarding is limited to intermediate
narrow, 2-hop region of nodes around the active route (called nodes that meet both the link stability condition (as in Eq. (1)
the “pipe”; see Section III-C), and the source node performs of [13]) and the energy threshold condition, En >En .
i th
a “multi-metric” route selection (Sections III-A and III-B) to
The target UAV receives RREPs containing the HC and
switch to a new, higher-quality route when required. Because
IL values of the respective routes. The target UAV then
it takes into account the node mobility, available energy, and computes the best route R∗ (route with least cost C , defined
R
congestion, the Pipe routing scheme selects less congested
in (4)) by selecting among all routes that satisfy a lifetime
and long-lasting routes with fewer route breaks, while also
condition (2) and an energy condition (3). The selected route
incurring little route discovery overhead. When the quality
islong-lasting,less-congested,andenergy-sufficient.Here,the
of the current route drops below a pre-defined threshold, the
lifetime condition is,
source node proactively switches to a new route within the
pipe without triggering a new route discovery. RLT >TTL, (2)
R
A. Desctiption of Routing Metrics where TTL is the time-to-live value of the data packets. The
energy condition is,
To choose a stable, low congestion route with a long life-
time,weuseseveralrouteinformationmetrics,capturingroute
En >En +δ , (3)
length, interference, anticipated route lifetime, and available R th e
energy.Inparticular,weusethehopcount(HC,thenumberof
For each satisfying route R, we compute the cost,
linksbetweenthetargetUAVandtheBS)alongwiththetotal
number of interfering links (IL) across all UAVs in the route. HC IL
C =w ( R )+w ( R ), (4)
The route lifetime (RLT) is the estimated time duration after R 1 HC 2 IL +αIL
min min R
whichtherouteislikelytobreak;itistheminimumestimated
where (·) = min (·) and X is the set of all routes
link lifetime (LLT) over all the links that form the route. A min R∈X R
known by the target UAV that satisfy the constraints (2)
UAV estimates the LLT of a link with its neighbors using
and (3). The weights w , w determine the balance between
the GPS and current trajectory information found in the Hello 1 2
short paths (low HC) and low-interference paths (low IL),
message from its neighbors. Additional details on computing
with w + w = 1; we set w = w = 0.5. To reduce
these metrics can be found in [13]. 1 2 1 2
Inadditiontothegivenroutemetrics,theresidualenergyof the route computation delay, we only consider routes with
the route (En R) is computed as the minimum energy across HC R ≤HC min+3. We use α=0.3 as the scaling factor to
all nodes in the route. If En is the energy level of node i in convert the IL cost values to a similar range as the HC cost
i
the route (R), and N is the set of nodes, then values 1.
R
UAVs with energy
levE en lsR b= eloim w∈Ni an R( thE ren si h)
old (En th) are
like(1 ly)
I siL
m1 mS uli
i
an
n
tc ie
o≥
nH
s2
eC
,
tt(m inIi
L
gn
sm
,≥
i tI hnL
e+2
R
r,
α
at nIh gLe eRr oa
)
fng
tc
hae
in
so rvf
aa
t(
r iy
oHH ifC srC om [mR 1i ,n 20)
..
57i )7s bt( eo1 c, a32 u.3. s5
3
e] ..
IH
LS oi Rm wi
e
il sva er gl
r
ey
,
n,
i
ens ri an
o
lc
u
lye
r
torunoutofbatterysoon,resultinginnodefailureandcausing greaterthanILmin.5
C. Pipe Formation nodeinitiatesabreadth-firstsearch(BFS)algorithmtoexplore
all the available routes within the pipe to the destination node
Since the UAV network topology changes frequently, the
and selects the route with least cost (calculated using (4)).
quality of the current active route may deteriorate over time
When the source node switches to a new active route, the
and new, better-quality routes may become available. Ideally,
existing pipe is abandoned and a new pipe is formed around
thetargetUAV(sourcenode)shouldproactivelyswitchroutes
thenewactiveroute.Ifnosuitablealternaterouteisavailable,
whenthecurrentroutedeteriorates.Inpractice,weaccomplish
a new route discovery is triggered. By using the local pipe
thisbyswitchingtoanewroutewhenthequalityofthecurrent
topologywhenpossible,proactiverouteswitchingreducesthe
active route drops below a certain threshold. This proactive
number of new route discoveries, and thus their overhead and
switchingcanimprovethroughput,reduceinterruptionsindata
delays, while minimizing the interruptions in data throughput.
flow, and prevent packet drops due to route breaks.
Since network topology information is not centralized and
nonodeknowstheentiretopology,thenodesmustperiodically IV. TOPOLOGYCONTROL
broadcast their information via the protocol’s Hello packets. The UAVs in the network follow the BS-CAP mobility
AsinMCA-AODV[13],thetargetUAV(sourcenode)collects scheme for improved coverage and connectivity [12]. In this
and builds limited network topology information around the section, we discuss a topology control scheme to alter the
currently used active route to form a “pipe” and enable trajectory of UAVs near the pipe region in order to maintain
proactive route switching. When a target is discovered, the a robust pipe and a stable route. The proposed scheme, which
targetUAVperformsroutediscoveryandselectsthebestroute combines both pipe-based routing (Section III) and topology
to BS. Also, a pipe (see Figure 2) is established along the control,iscalledpiperoutingwithtopologycontrol(TC-Pipe).
active route from the target UAV to the BS [13]. The pipe
comprises the nodes along the active route (red nodes) and
A. Need for Topology Control
their2-hopneighbors(greennodes).Thetopologyinformation
Stable and high quality routes, along with proactively iden-
(includingLLT,En,andILvalues)ofthenodeswithinthepipe
tifiedalternateroutesinthepipe,canincreasedatathroughput
is transmitted periodically to the source node as discussed
and reduce the number of route rediscoveries, thereby reduc-
in [13]. A pipe width of 2-hop neighbors around the active
ing packet loss, overhead, and delay. Although the BS-CAP
route appears to give a good trade-off between the usefulness
mobility model tries to provide a strong node degree as well
of the neighborhood information and its incurred overhead
as BS connectivity, it can be difficult to achieve both fast area
[13]. Increasing the pipe width correspondingly increases the
coverage and stable connectivity for low to medium density
amount of the known network topology; while this may help
UAV swarms. As a result, the route between the target UAV
identify more alternate routes, it comes at the cost of more
andBSmaynotbestableorhavesufficientqualitytomeetthe
control packets and computational overhead.
QoS requirements. Additionally, the advantages of our pipe-
based routing and proactive switching critically depend on
alternate routes being available in the pipe, which is also less
likely at lower densities.
The BS-CAP mobility model uses a repel pheromone, in
which UAVs fly away from already-covered areas to explore
the entire map, without taking into account the active route(s)
being used for data communication. This can lead to sections
of the pipe becoming thin, where some intermediate node(s)
intheactiveroutehaveveryfewornoneighbors.Wecallthis
effect the ‘pipe thinning’ problem, and illustrate it in Figure
3.
Typically, existing node mobility schemes do not consider
how to facilitate a robust set of alternative routes to improve
thereliabilityandthroughputofongoingcommunicationtoBS
[14], [29], [34]. Our proposed topology control scheme uses
Fig.2:Illustrationofapipearoundtheactiveroute(redlinks)
thedigitalpheromonemapandnode-degreeinformationofthe
from the target UAV to BS. The pipe consists of nodes (green
nodes along the active route between the target UAV and BS
nodes) that are up to 2-hop from the nodes along the active
to maintain a sufficient number of neighboring UAVs in the
route (red nodes).
pipe region. Our topology control is performed by applying a
pheromonemaskthatnegatestherepelpheromone(effectively
acting like attract pheromone) to bring UAVs toward regions
D. Proactive Route Switching
of each active route’s pipe where the UAV density is low.
Proactive route switching is triggered when the quality of Combined with pipe-based routing, this reduces data flow
the active route (R∗) degrades below a threshold, given by interruptions and improves throughput. It can be particularly
the conditions (2) and (3), or when a shorter alternate route helpful when the targets are located far from the BS (a long
becomes available in the pipe. In such a situation, the source route length) in a network of low node density.6
Algorithm 1: Topology Control
1 // For an active route
2 for each node N′ in active route; except BS do
3 Get d N′ = 1-hop node degree excluding upstream and
downstream nodes;
4 //Node degree threshold, Th=2
5 if d N′ ≤Th then
6 // Pipe node density low in region
7 Apply pheromone mask, P =P R⊙A from (5);
8 else
9 // Pipe node density not low in region
10 Remove pheromone mask, P =P R;
11 end
12 end
Consider a node N′ located in cell (x,y), with repel
Fig. 3: Illustration of pipe thinning problem, where the node pheromone map P R [12]. If a pheromone mask is applied
N′ has no 1-hop neighbors except the upstream and down- by node N′, its resulting pheromone map P becomes
stream nodes on the active route.
P =P ⊙A, (5)
R
whereAisthepheromonemaskand⊙representsanelement-
B. Topology Control Scheme wise product. A is a rectangular region of dimension 2L x L
centeredatnodeN′’scell(x,y),andorientedperpendicularto
the vector connecting the upstream and downstream nodes of
N′ (see Figure 4). The size L is taken to be the UAV’s signal
transmissionrange,i.e.,themaximum1-hopdistancebetween
UAVs. The pheromone values of cells in A are set to zero.
The mask update can be equivalently viewed as depositing an
attract pheromone value in each cell equivalent to its current
repel pheromone value, resulting in a net pheromone value of
zero. This causes the cells under the 2L x L region to attract
UAVs relative to cells outside the masked region, whose repel
pheromone values are generally positive.
Nodesarrivinginthenewlymaskedregionprovidepotential
alternate links and improve the robustness of the pipe region
around the active route node(s). The pheromone mask is then
retractedbythenode(s)ontheactiverouteonceitsnumberof
1-hop neighbors exceeds Th. The topology control algorithm
is described in Algorithm 1. We use the threshold Th =
2 in our simulations. While higher Th attracts more nodes
Fig. 4: Applying a pheromone mask to attract UAVs.
to the 1-hop regions of the active route, doing so does not
necessarily improve the routing performance and can degrade
In Figure 3, the node N′ (shown in yellow) on the active
the network’s area coverage at low node densities.
route has a low node degree, below a user-selected threshold
Th, due to pipe thinning. This low degree reduces the proba-
V. CONTROLOVERHEADANDCOMPUTATIONAL
bility of finding an alternate route in the pipe region from the
COMPLEXITY
target UAV to the BS. In this section, we propose a topology
controlschemethatusespheromone-basedmobilitycontrolto ControlOverhead:Inadditiontotheinformationsentinthe
resolve the pipe thinning problem. RREQ,RREP,RERRandHellopacketsinthestandardAODV
SinceallUAVsinthenetworkfollowtheBS-CAPmobility protocol, each node in the propsed TC-Pipe routing scheme
model (which is a repel pheromone-based mobility scheme), includes the following information in its Hello packet:
their mobility is influenced by the pheromone values of the • Its UAV ID (7 bits), its current location (18 bits with 10
cells [12]. The digital pheromone information is propagated m resolution), next-waypoint cell (12 bits for the cell ID,
to the neighbors using the Hello messages. In our updated assuming 60 x 60 cells of 100 m x 100 m resolution in
approach, nodes on an active route apply a pheromone mask a 6 km x 6 km area), and a local pheromone map (6-
to nullify the nearby repel pheromone if their node degree is bit pheromone values in the 5 x 5 cells centered at the
below Th. As a result, neighboring nodes that are not a part UAV’s current cell, for 150 bits total). It also includes
of the active route are induced to move into the region; see thehopcountoftheshortestroutetoBS(4bits),andthe
Figure 4 for an illustration. pheromone mask flag/cell ID (12 bits).7
• Its En and IL values (1 to 2 bytes). route between each target UAV and BS is established for data
• If the node is a 1-hop neighbor of an active node (that is communication. When a relay node fails, the above process is
participatingindatapacketforwarding),itbroadcaststhe repeated to establish a new shortest route. Of course, in the
LLT, En, IL, and isLinkActive values for each of its 1- presenceofmultipletargets,thisprocessofselectingtheshort-
hopneighbornodes(variablesizedependingonneighbor estroutestotheBSmayleadtomultipleactiveroutessharing
density). links in common, which will result in congestion, especially
The destination node periodically sends the Notify Source at high data rates. The relay UAVs act as a separate layer
packet to the source node, which carries the 2-hop neighbor- from the rest of the UAVs, which continue performing area
hood information (i.e., UAV ID and their En, IL and LLT search and coverage while maintaining connectivity using the
values) of all intermediate nodes on the route (variable size BS-CAP mobility model. Again, the more nodes are selected
depending on 2-hop neighbor density along the route). to act as relays, the fewer nodes are available for search area
ComputationalComplexity:IntheTC-Piperoutingscheme, coverage, degrading the swarm’s coverage performance.
the source node employs the BFS algorithm to discover all
VII. SIMULATIONRESULTSANDDISCUSSION
possible routes to the destination node within the pipe. This
A. Simulation Setup
algorithm’s worst-case time complexity is O(TV2(E +V )),
p p p
where T represents the number of route recomputations, and Our experimental evaluations simulate the behavior of a
V and E denote the number of nodes and links within the swarm of 30 to 50 low SWaP fixed-wing UAVs (e.g., [42],
p p
pipe, respectively. Additionally, intermediate nodes use the [43]) monitoring a 6 km × 6 km area in which fixed com-
Bron-Kerbosch algorithm to compute cliques within their 2- munication infrastructure, such as a cellular network, is not
hopneighborhood.Thisalgorithm’sworst-casetimecomplex- available. The aerial BS is located at the bottom center of the
ity is O(3Vp/3). It is worth noting that the clique computation map, and the UAVs are launched from the vicinity of the BS.
is optional but aids in reducing control overhead. EachUAVisequippedwithGPSandhasatransmissionrange
of1km(e.g.,[4],[31],[44]).Weassumeamultihoptopology
with free space propagation (e.g., [44]). For simplicity, the
VI. RELAYROUTING
UAVs are assumed to be point masses, and their mobility is
Our approach to mobility and routing in UAV swarms is limitedtotheX-Yplaneflyingataconstantaltitude(typically
explicitly homogeneous: each node in the network is, individ- from 200 m to 1 km above the ground [43]). UAVs perform
ually, balancing the two needs of exploration (area coverage) collision avoidance through trajectory modifications [45]. To
and communication (providing routes within the network and facilitate representing the pheromone map, waypoints, and
to the BS). A possible alternative, of course, is to assign coverage statistics, the area is divided into grid cells of 100
roles to nodes within the network, allowing some nodes to m × 100 m each, consistent with other literature [3], [30],
become solely responsible for providing routing (“relays”), [31], [46]. A UAV scans the cell in which it currently resides
while others continue to explore the environment. As one and deposits a repel pheromone of magnitude 1. We use
example,relayUAVsmightbedeployedasaseparatelayerto pheromoneevaporationλanddiffusionψ ratesof0.006each.
provide continuous BS connectivity in a hierarchical network Table I shows the simulation parameters.
[39], [40]. We evaluate monitoring both single and multi-target set-
We believe that a homogeneous approach has a number tings, across various locations; see Figure 5. The UAVs use
of important advantages. While a relay-based scheme prior- the BS-CAP mobility model (β =1.5) to compute their flight
itizes ensuring a stable communication path, by focusing on trajectories. All the UAVs start out from the region near the
maintaining a specific route, it may create bottleneck nodes base station. If a UAV discovers a target, it becomes a “target
that suffer from congestion, or that can become critical points UAV”andcontinuouslymonitorsthetargetbycirclingaround
of failure to the communications structure. Moreover, these it. Meanwhile, other UAVs continue searching and scanning
nodes may be more vulnerable to antagonistic interference for new targets or events. The target UAV establishes a route
(e.g., on a battlefield) [41], since differences in the nodes’ and transmits data packets continuously to the BS.
behavior may indicate their current role. Finally, in low- In our simulations, we take the channel rate to be 11 Mbps
density networks, the loss of some nodes to communication and the UAV transmission range to 1 km. We consider a
infrastructuremaysignificantlydegradeareacoverage,without line-of-sight communication and ignore channel fading and
an obvious mechanism to trade off between the two. noise. The packet size and TTL values are 1.5 kB and 3 s,
In order to explore the scale of these tradeoffs to our respectively. We consider a distributed TDMA MAC protocol
approach, we implement a simple relay-based routing scheme [47] and a large MAC queue size. Packets with the smallest
(calledRelay)andcompareitsperformancewithourproposed time-to-expiry in the queue are pushed to the head-of-line.
schemes. Initially, all UAVs in the network follow the BS- In order to study the network behavior under traffic, we
CAP mobility model. When a UAV finds a target, it finds first simulate the UAV swarm for 1000 s, after which time all
the shortest route to the BS using AODV routing. The nodes thetargetshavebeenfound.Thenweevaluatethethroughput,
along this route to BS are reassigned as relay nodes. The routing and coverage performance for 2000 s (i.e., from 1000
relay UAVs in this established route start flying in a nearly to 3000 s) as the swarm monitors the targets and continues
circular trajectory within or around their current grid cell to to search. We report performance metrics averaged over 30
maintain the established route. Thus, a stable and permanent simulation runs.8
Low SWaP UAVs are prone to failure due to mechanical • Cell Visitation Frequency (V f): is the average number of
malfunctioning or energy depletion. To understand the impact times a gridcell of the areamap is visited by UAVsover
of these issues on our routing scheme, we study the method’s a given duration of time (2000 s of simulation).
performance when a fraction of nodes randomly fail during Our proposed pipe routing with topology control scheme
the simulation time. In particular, we assign a fixed fraction (Section IV) is referred to as ‘TC-Pipe’. Pipe routing without
of nodes (20% or 30%) a failure time during the simulation, topology control (Section III) is referred to as ‘Pipe’. The
with the time selected uniformly between 1000 and 3000s. ‘AODV’routingschemedoesnotuseapiperegionandtopol-
This simulates nodes failing progressively over the course of ogy control. The TC-Pipe, Pipe and AODV routing schemes
the deployment. all follow the BS-CAP mobility model. Pipe routing under
the ConCov mobility scheme [31] is referred to as ‘ConCov-
TABLE I: Simulation Parameters
Pipe’. Finally, the relay-based routing scheme uses the BS-
CAPmobilitymodelandisreferredtoas‘Relay’(seeSection
Parameters Values
VI).Suffix“-20”(e.g.,TC-Pipe-20,AODV-20)indicatesUAVs
Simulation Time 2000 s
at 20 m/s, while “-40” indicates UAVs at 40 m/s speeds.
Map Area 6 km × 6 km
We first discuss the routing and coverage performances of
Transmission Range 1 km
Number of UAVs 30, 50 these schemes for different single and 3-targets settings with
UAV Speed 20 m/s, 40 m/s no node failure in Sections VII-C and VII-D, respectively.
Number of Targets 1, 3 Next, we discuss the effect of 20% and 30% node failure on
Channel Range 11 Mbps
theperformanceoftheseschemesinSectionVII-E.Lastly,we
Packet size 1.5 kB
summarize the results in Section VII-F.
Data Rate 1 - 3.5Mbps
TTL 3 s
C. Performance for Single Target
We first consider the routing and coverage performance for
asingleflowfromatarget(source)toBS.Theperformanceof
B. Performance Metrics
a routing scheme depends on the number and location of the
We measure the performance of our UAV network using targets (sources). In our simulations, we considered various
several routing and coverage metrics. target locations; however, for the sake of convenience, we
The routing properties of the network are measured by: detail the results for three particular settings, designated C ,
1
• Packet Delivery Ratio (PDR): The ratio of total data C 2 and C 3, in which the target is located at [1.5 km, 5 km],
packets received at the BS to the total data packets [4 km, 4 km] and [2 km, 2 km], respectively (see Figures
generated at the target UAVs. PDR is a normalized 5a, 5b, and 5c). Here C 1 (target located far from BS) and C 3
throughput and can be used to calculate other metrics (target located close to BS) represent the two extremes of the
such as flow throughput (PDR x data rate) and packet map. We see that the performance of the network for other
loss ratio (1 - PDR). target locations (such as C 2) generally tends to fall within the
• Route Breaks (R b): The number of route breaks per data performance range of the two extreme settings (C 1 and C 3).
flowduringthe2000ssimulationduration.Sincearoute 1) Routing Performance:: Figures 6-9 show the routing
break leads to new route discovery, a lower R value performance (measured by average route length, PDR, route
b
signifiesmorestableroutesandalowercontroloverhead. uptimeandnumberofroutebreaks)ofdifferentschemes(TC-
• Route Up Time (R u): The percentage of time a target Pipe, Pipe, ConCov-Pipe, AODV, and Relay) for a single data
UAV has a valid route to the BS throughout the simu- flow from a target to BS for three different target locations,
lation (2000 s duration). A higher value is desired as it representedbyC 1,C 2andC 3.Here,theUAVnetworkconsists
signifies a more stable route to BS with fewer data flow oftwodifferentnodedensities(30and50UAVs)andtwonode
interruptions. speeds (20 and 40 m/s).
Average Route Length: Figure 6 shows the average route
The coverage properties of the network are measured by:
length achieved by all the routing schemes for both densities
• Coverage (C v): The average percentage of cells in the atbothspeeds.Weobservethattheroutelengthincreaseswith
mapvisitedbyUAVsatleastoncewithinagivenduration
distancebetweenthetargetandBSnodes,butitdoesnotvary
oftime;wepreferahigherC inagivendurationoftime.
v noticeably when the node density and speed are changed. A
• Coverage Fairness (F): Represents how equally all the shorter route length typically provides better data throughput
cells of the map are visited during a given time period,
and smaller delays. For C where the target is far from the
1
as measured by Jain’s fairness index [48],
BS, our TC-Pipe scheme achieves the average route length
((cid:80) x )2 of ≈8.6, while AODV achieves ≈9.2. On the other hand, for
F = n(cid:80)i xi
2
(6) C
3
where the target is relatively close to the BS, our TC-
i i Pipe scheme achieves the average route length of ≈3.8, while
where x is the number of scans of cell i, and n is the AODV achieves ≈4.4. Overall, the TC-Pipe scheme achieves
i
total number of cells in the map. A higher value of F is theshortestaverageroutelength,whileAODVhasthelongest
desired. route length, with other routing schemes (Pipe, Relay and9
[1.5,5]km
[4,4]km
[2,2]km
BS BS BS
(a) Target Location: C1 (b) Target Location: C2 (c) Target Location: C3
[3,5]km
[5,4.8]km
[1,4.5]km [5,4.5]km
[1,4]km
[3.6,2.5]km
[3,2]km
[1,1.5]km [5,1.5]km
BS BS BS
(d) Target Location: C4 (e) Target Location: C5 (f) Target Location: C6
Fig. 5: The target locations in a 6x6 km2 map. Three different target locations are shown for a single target in (a), (b) and (c)
and for a group of 3-targets in (d), (e) and (f).
ConCov-Pipe) providing average route lengths in between the Further, the Pipe routing scheme performs better than
two. This indicates the ability of topology control with pipe AODV for both densities at both speeds for all three target
routingtoestablishstable,shorterroutesusingthepiperegion. locations because the use of pipe region facilitates proactive
Average PDR: Figure 7 shows the average PDR achieved route switching instead of route rediscovery when the route
by all the routing schemes for both node densities at both quality degrades. Also, the Pipe routing scheme (which uses
speeds. The average PDR achieved by a routing scheme BS-CAP mobility model with pipe routing) performs better
increasesasthedistancebetweenthetargetandBSdecreases; than ConCov-Pipe (which uses ConCov mobility model [31]
this is because longer routes are more likely to break due with pipe routing); this demonstrates the advantage of using
to node mobility. Further, the average PDR increases for a the BS-CAP mobility model which provides a better node
higher density because route discovery and maintenance of degreeandBS-connectivitythantheConCovmodel[12].The
piperegionismoreefficient.Also,theaveragePDRdecreases RelayschemeachieveshigherPDRperformancethanallother
withnodespeedbecausemoreroutebreaksoccur.Fordifferent schemes,asitusesdedicatedrelayUAVstoestablishtheactive
network settings and target locations (C , C and C ), our route. However, as a trade-off, its coverage performance is
1 2 3
proposed TC-Pipe scheme achieves higher average PDR than decreased, as discussed in Section VII-C2.
the Pipe, AODV, and ConCov-Pipe, except the Relay scheme, RouteUp(R ):AHigherR valueindicatesthattheroute
u u
as discussed below (see Figure 7). from target UAV to BS exists for a longer duration of time,
For setting C , the PDR at different data rates for both which generally results in a more stable route providing a
1
UAV densities and speeds are shown in Figures 7a and 7d. higherPDR.Figure8showstheR valueofalltheconsidered
u
For longer routes in Figure 7a, the TC-Pipe scheme provides schemes for both node densities at both speeds. The value
up to 63%, 105% and 129% increase in PDR compared to of R increases for a higher node density but decreases for
u
Pipe, AODV and ConCov-Pipe schemes, respectively, for 30 a higher node speed. Here, the Relay scheme achieves the
UAVs at 20 m/s. For higher UAV speed of 40 m/s, the TC- highestR (nearly100%)becauseastablerouteisestablished.
u
Pipeschemeachievesupto52%,113%and100%increasein The TC-Pipe scheme achieves the highest R value after the
u
PDR compared to Pipe, AODV and ConCov-Pipe schemes, Relayschemeforbothnodedensitiesatbothspeeds.InFigure
respectively. We observed similar trends for 50 nodes in 8b,TC-PipeachievesR valueof94%and93%,forthetarget
u
Figure 7d. Even at higher UAV speeds where route breaks location C at a node density of 50 and speeds of 20 m/s
1
are more frequent, the TC-Pipe scheme achieves significant and 40 m/s, respectively, compared to 87% and 83% achieved
improvementinPDRcomparedtothePipeandotherschemes by the Pipe routing scheme. The TC-Pipe scheme’s improved
because the use of topology control in the pipe region makes performance over the Pipe scheme is due to its ability to
the route more robust. For settings C and C too, TC-Pipe maintain a robust pipe along the active route. AODV (which
2 3
scheme provides higher PDR than Pipe, AODV and ConCov- uses the BS-CAP mobility model without pipe region) and
Pipe, but the relative PDR improvement is reduced with the ConCov-Pipe (which uses the ConCov [31] mobility model
distance of the target from BS. with a lower BS connectivity performance compared to the10
Fig. 6: Average route length for single target locations (C , C , and C ).
1 2 3
(a) PDR (Target C1, 30 UAVs) (b) PDR (Target C2, 30 UAVs) (c) PDR (Target C3, 30 UAVs)
(d) PDR (Target C1, 50 UAVs) (e) PDR (Target C2, 50 UAVs)
(f) PDR (Target C3, 50 UAVs)
Fig. 7: Routing Performance: PDR for single target settings C , C and C . Suffix“-20” (e.g., TC-Pipe-20, AODV-20) indicate
1 2 3
UAVs at 20 m/s, while “-40” indicates UAVs at 40 m/s speeds.11
BS-CAP mobility model [12]) provide lower R values. This C in Figure 11 at 30 UAVs and 20 m/s, the TC-Pipe and
u 1
shows that Pipe routing combined with the BS-CAP mobility Relay schemes achieve C of ≈ 86%, compared to ≈ 90%
v
model provides better routing performance (as in TC-Pipe, achieved by Pipe and ConCov schemes. Note that TC-Pipe
Pipe). A similar performance trend is observed at 30 UAV and Relay coverage performance is comparable to Pipe and
densityinFigure8a;however,theR performancesdecreases ConCov for higher node density and/or speed. For example,
u
considerably, especially for longer route lengths in target for 50 UAVs at 20 m/s, TC-Pipe, Pipe and ConCov achieve
setting C , due to a lower node density. C of 99%, compared to 96% by Relay scheme.
1 v
Route Breaks (R ): Figure 9 shows the number of route The Fairness (F) performance of all the schemes for both
b
breaks achieved by all the routing schemes for both node node densities at both speeds is shown in Figure 12. Each
densities at both speeds. Proactive route switching using the scheme achieves a higher F when the density and/or node
alternate route in the pipe reduces data flow interruptions and speed increase as all the cells in the area under monitoring
delays in pipe routing based schemes (i.e., TC-Pipe, Pipe are visited more frequently. The TC-Pipe has slightly lower
and ConCov-Pipe). Due to better pipe robustness, the TC- value of F than the Pipe and ConCov-Pipe schemes for 30
Pipe scheme achieves the least route breaks (R ) among the UAVs at both speeds for all three target locations, as some
b
pipe-based schemes for both densities at both speeds and for UAVs are attracted to maintain a stable pipe region. Since
all three target locations, reducing new route discoveries and enough UAVs are available at node density of 50, the fairness
associated control overhead. The pipe routing based schemes performanceoftheTC-PipeschemeiscomparabletoPipeand
have far less route breaks than the AODV scheme for both ConCov-Pipe at both speeds. For example, in Figure 12a, for
densities at both speeds. For example, in target setting C 30 UAVs in setting C , TC-Pipe achieves an F of 0.67 and
1 1
for 50 UAVs, TC-Pipe achieves lower R value of 22 at 20 0.75 at 20 m/s and 40 m/s, respectively, compared to F value
b
m/s compared to 40 for the Pipe scheme. The ConCov-Pipe around 0.71 and 0.77 (resp.) for Pipe and ConCov. In Figure
and AODV schemes yield higher R of 52 and 355 at 20 12b, for 50 UAVs in setting C , TC-Pipe achieves an F of
b 1
m/s,respectively.At UAVspeedof40m/s, moreroutebreaks 0.87 and 0.90 at 20 m/s and 40 m/s, respectively. Meanwhile,
are observed due to dynamic network topology. We find a PipeandConCovachieveF valuesof0.88and0.85at20m/s,
similarperformancetrendacrossallthreetargetlocations(C , and 0.92 and 0.90 at 40 m/s, respectively. The Relay scheme
1
C and C ) at both UAV densities at both speeds. Since the achieves F values of 0.83 and 0.88 for 50 UAVs at 20 m/s
2 3
Relay scheme establishes stable routes, it experiences zero and 40 m/s, respectively. We further examine Relay scheme’s
route breaks. coverage and fairness performance for three targets in Section
2) Coverage Performance:: Figures 10 - 12 show the VII-D2.
coverage performance (measured by coverage vs. time, total
coverage, and fairness) of different schemes (TC-Pipe, Pipe,
D. Performance for Three Targets
ConCov-Pipe, and Relay) for a single data flow from a target
to BS for three different target locations, represented by C , Inthissection,weconsidertheroutingandcoverageperfor-
1
C and C . Here, the UAV network consists of two different mance for multiple flows from three targets to the BS. In our
2 3
node densities (30 and 50 UAVs) and two node speeds (20 simulations, we considered various target locations; however,
and40m/s).TheperformanceofAODVschemeisnotshown for the sake of convenience, we detail the results for three
because it uses the BS-CAP mobility model with coverage particular settings, designated C 4, C 5 and C 6, in which the
performance identical to Pipe scheme. targets are located at ([1 km, 4.5 km], [3 km, 5 km], [5 km,
We select the BS-CAP mobility model with β = 1.5 (for 4.5km]),([1km,4km],[3.6km,2.5km],[5km,4.8km])and
TC-Pipe,Pipe,andRelay)andConCovmobilitywithω =0.5 ([1 km, 1.5 km], [3 km, 2 km], [5 km, 1.5 km]), respectively
(for ConCov-Pipe). Among the three tuning parameter values (see Figures 5d, 5e and 5f). Here C 4 (targets are located
of β and ω experimented in [12], the aforementioned middle far from BS) and C 6 (targets located close to BS) represent
values give a balanced coverage and connectivity trade-off two extremes of the map. We see that the performance of
performance. Also, these values give relatively similar cov- the network for other target locations (such as C 5) generally
erage profiles (coverage vs. time curves) for the two mobility tends to fall within the performance range of the two extreme
models, allowing us to compare differences in their routing settings (C 4 and C 6).
performances. 1) RoutingPerformance:: Figures13-16showtherouting
The Coverage vs. Time plots in Figure 10 represent the performance(measuredbyaverageroutelength,PDR,routeup
total map area covered in a given time for both node densities time and number of route breaks) of different schemes (TC-
at both speeds. The rate of area covered increases with node Pipe, Pipe, ConCov-Pipe, AODV, and Relay) for three data
density as well as speed. The Relay scheme achieves a lower flows (one flow from each of the three targets to the BS), for
coverageperformancecomparedtothePipeandConCov-Pipe three different settings of target locations, represented by C ,
4
schemes, as it reassigns some of its UAVs as relay nodes, C and C . Here, the UAV network consists of two different
5 6
which do not actively cover the map. This impact is more node densities (30 and 50 UAVs) and two node speeds (20
apparent at low UAV density (30 UAVs) and multiple targets and 40 m/s).
(see Section VII-D2). Similarly, at low UAV density, the TC- Interference and congestion may occur when multiple tar-
Pipe scheme achieves a lower coverage performance because getswithflowstotheBSexist,especiallyathigherdatarates.
some of the UAVs are attracted to the pipe region. For setting TheTC-PipeandPiperoutingschemestakeintoconsideration12
(a) Route Up (30 UAVs)
(b) Route Up (50 UAVs)
Fig. 8: Routing Performance: Route Up for single target settings C , C and C .
1 2 3
Fig. 9: Routing Performance: Route Breaks for single target settings C , C and C .
1 2 313
(a) Coverage (Target C1, 30 UAVs) (b) Coverage (Target C2, 30 UAVs) (c) Coverage (Target C3, 30 UAVs)
(d) Coverage (Target C1, 50 UAVs) (e) Coverage (Target C2, 50 UAVs)
(f) Coverage (Target C3, 50 UAVs)
Fig. 10: Coverage vs. Time plots for single target settings C , C and C .
1 2 3
Fig. 11: Coverage Performance: C for target single settings C , C and C .
v 1 2 314
(a) Fairness (30 UAVs)
(b) Fairness (50 UAVs)
Fig. 12: Coverage Performance: Fairness for single target settings C , C and C .
1 2 3
the congestion and interfering links between different routes distance between the target and BS nodes, but it does not
when selecting an active route or when proactively switching vary noticeably when the node density and/or speed change.
theactiveroutes,leadingtobetterperformance.UsingtheTC- A shorter route length is desired because it can provide better
Pipe scheme to maintain a robust pipe (with alternate routes) data throughput and smaller delays. In setting C where the
4
around each flow (active route) allows for selecting high- targets are far from BS, our TC-Pipe scheme achieves the
quality routes to BS with less interference and congestion. average route length of ≈8.5, while AODV achieves ≈9.1.
Whereas, the Pipe routing scheme (without topology control) On the other hand, for C where the targets are relatively
6
selects less interfering or less congested routes as and when close to the BS, our TC-Pipe model achieves the average
they become available in the pipe region. The AODV scheme route length of ≈4.1, while AODV achieves ≈4.8. Overall,
onlyconsiderstheshortestrouteandcanthereforeselectroutes theTC-Pipeschemeachievestheshortestaverageroutelength,
with congested or interfering links. while AODV has the longest route length, with other routing
schemes (Pipe, Relay and ConCov-Pipe) providing average
Average Route Length:Figure13showstheaverageroute route lengths in between the two. This indicates the ability of
lengthachievedbyalltheroutingschemesforbothdensitiesat topology control with pipe routing to establish stable, shorter
both speeds. We observe that the route length increases with15
routes using the pipe region. speeds of 20 m/s and 40 m/s, respectively, compared to 86%
Average PDR: Figure 14 shows the average PDR achieved and81%achievedbythePiperoutingscheme.AODV(which
by all the routing schemes for both node densities at both uses the BS-CAP mobility model without pipe region) and
speeds. The average PDR achieved by a routing scheme ConCov-Pipe (which uses the ConCov [31] mobility model
increasesasthedistancebetweenthetargetandBSdecreases; with a lower BS connectivity performance compared to the
this is because longer routes are more likely to break due BS-CAP mobility model [12]) provide lower R values. This
u
to node mobility. Further, the average PDR increases for a shows that Pipe routing combined with the BS-CAP mobility
higher density because route discovery and maintenance of modelprovidesbetterroutingperformance(asinTC-Pipeand
piperegionismoreefficient.Also,theaveragePDRdecreases Pipe). A similar performance trend is observed at 30 UAV
withnodespeedbecausemoreroutebreaksoccur.Fordifferent density in Figure 15a. For 30 UAVs, in setting C where
4
network and 3-target settings (C , C and C ), our proposed targets are located far from the BS, all schemes achieve lower
4 5 6
TC-Pipe scheme achieves higher average PDR than the Pipe, R values(exceptRelay)becausetherearefewerUAVsinthe
u
AODV, and ConCov-Pipe schemes due to a more robust pipe network to maintain the routes.
whichhelpsinselectingbetterqualityroutes(i.e.,stableroutes Route Breaks (R ): Figure 16 shows the number of route
b
with low interference and congestion). breaks achieved by all the routing schemes for both UAV
For target setting C , the PDR at different data rates for densities at both speeds. Proactive route switching using the
4
both UAV densities and speeds are shown in Figures 14a and alternate route in the pipe reduces data flow interruptions
14d, respectively. For longer routes, the advantage of using and delays in pipe routing based schemes (i.e., TC-Pipe,
TC-Pipe scheme becomes more prominent. In Figure 14a, the Pipe and ConCov-Pipe). Due to better pipe robustness, the
TC-Pipeschemeachievesupto50%,71%and112%increase TC-Pipe scheme achieves the least route breaks (R ) among
b
in PDR compared to Pipe, AODV and ConCov-Pipe schemes, the pipe-based schemes for both densities at both speeds
respectively, for 30 UAVs at 20 m/s. For higher UAV speeds and for all three target location settings, reducing new route
of 40 m/s and 30 UAVs, the TC-Pipe scheme achieves up discoveries and associated control overhead. The pipe routing
to 39%, 77% and 75% increase in PDR compared to Pipe, based schemes have far less route breaks than the AODV
AODV and ConCov-Pipe schemes, respectively. We observed scheme for both densities at both speeds. In Figure 16, in
similartrendsfor50nodesinFigure14d.EvenathigherUAV settingC for50UAVs,TC-PipeachieveslowerR valuesof
4 b
speeds where route breaks are more frequent, the TC-Pipe 24at20m/scomparedto40inthePipescheme.TheConCov-
scheme achieves significant improvement in PDR compared Pipe and AODV schemes yield R of 50 and 348 at 20 m/s,
b
to the Pipe scheme because the use of topology control in respectively. At UAV speed of 40 m/s, more route breaks are
the pipe region makes the route more robust. For settings C observed due to dynamic network topology. We find a similar
5
and C too, TC-Pipe scheme provides higher PDR than Pipe, performancetrendacrossallthreetargetlocationsettings(C ,
6 4
AODV and ConCov-Pipe but the relative PDR improvement C and C ) for both UAV densities at both speeds. Since
5 5
is reduced with the distance of the target from BS. For all theRelayschemeestablishesstableroutes,itexperienceszero
three target settings and both UAV densities and speeds, the route breaks.
Pipe scheme achieves higher PDR than ConCov and AODV 2) Coverage Performance:: Figures 17 - 19 show the
schemes. coverage performance (measured by coverage vs. time, total
For all three settings C , C and C (for 50 UAVs) and coverage, and fairness) of different schemes (TC-Pipe, Pipe,
4 5 6
for C (for 30 UAVs), the TC-Pipe achieves better PDR ConCov-Pipe, and Relay) for three data flows from targets
6
than the Relay scheme for higher data rates. This is because to BS for three different target location settings, represented
forming shortest paths to BS without considering congestion by C , C and C . Here, the UAV network consists of two
4 5 6
and interference in the Relay scheme leads to poor PDR at different node densities (30 and 50 UAVs) at two node speeds
higher data rates. Whereas, in Figure 14a, for setting C with (20 and 40 m/s). The performance of AODV scheme is not
4
longer routes for 30 UAVs, the Relay scheme outperforms shown because it uses the BS-CAP mobility model with
the TC-Pipe scheme. Also, the Relay scheme for three targets coverage performance identical to Pipe scheme. As explained
requires more reassigned relay UAVs to form the routes, inSectionVII-C2,weselecttheBS-CAPmobilitymodelwith
resulting in a greater decrease in coverage performance (as β = 1.5 (for TC-Pipe, Pipe, AODV, and Relay) and ConCov
discussed in Section VII-D2). mobility model with ω =0.5 (for ConCov-Pipe).
RouteUp(R ):AHigherR valueindicatesthattheroutes The Coverage vs. Time plots in Figures 17 represent the
u u
from targets UAV to BS exist for a longer duration of time, total map area covered in a given time for both node densities
which generally provides a higher PDR. Figure 15 shows the at both speeds. The rate of area covered increases with node
R valueofalltheconsideredschemesforbothnodedensities density as well as speed. The Relay scheme achieves a lower
u
atbothspeeds.WeobservethatthevalueofR increasesfora coverageperformancecomparedtothePipeandConCov-Pipe
u
highernodedensitybutdecreasesforahighernodespeed.The schemes, as it reassigns some of its UAVs as relay nodes
Relayschemeachievesthehighest R (nearly100%)because in the three routes to BS; these relay nodes do not actively
u
astablerouteisestablished.TheTC-Pipeschemeachievesthe cover the map. This impact is more apparent at low UAV
secondhighestR valueforbothnodedensitiesatbothspeeds. density(30UAVs).Thelongertheroutelengthoftheseroutes,
u
In Figure 15b, TC-Pipe achieves R value of 95% and 92%, the greater the number of UAVs reassigned as relay nodes,
u
for the target location setting C at a node density of 50 and and the greater the decrease in coverage performance. This
416
Fig. 13: Average route length for 3-target locations.
(a) PDR (Targets C4, 30 UAVs) (b) PDR (Targets C5, 30 UAVs) (c) PDR (Targets C6, 30 UAVs)
(d) PDR (Targets C4, 50 UAVs) (e) PDR (Targets C5, 50 UAVs)
(f) PDR (Targets C6, 50 UAVs)
Fig. 14: Routing Performance: PDR for 3-targets settings C , C and C .
4 5 617
(a) Route Up (30 UAVs)
(b) Route Up (50 UAVs)
Fig. 15: Routing Performance: Route Up for 3-targets settings C , C and C .
4 5 6
Fig. 16: Routing Performance: Route Breaks for 3-targets settings C , C and C .
4 5 618
is observed in Figures 17 and 18, where the Relay scheme’s whilealsoperformingareacoverage.For30UAVs,therouting
coverageperformance ismuchworse intargetsetting C than performance, including PDR (see Figure 20, see highlighted
4
in C . At low UAV density (30 UAVs), the TC-Pipe scheme column for C at 3 Mbps data rate for illustration) and route
6 2
achieves a slightly lower coverage performance because some up and route breaks (see Figure 22, highlighted values), of
of the UAVs are attracted to the pipe region to maintain its TC-Pipe and Pipe schemes decrease with increase in % node
node density. However, the TC-Pipe scheme allows the UAVs failures. The impact of node failures is more for longer route
participating in the route to move and cover the surrounding lengths. The loss of nodes reduces the rate at which the cells
area,hencegivingbettercoveragethantheRelayscheme.For are covered. Since the coverage (C ) represents the % cells
v
setting C in Figure 18 at 30 UAVs and 20 m/s, the TC-Pipe covered at least once during the observation period of 2000
4
andRelayschemesachieveC of84%and73%,respectively, s, the impact of node failures on C is not visible; however,
v v
compared to ≈ 90% achieved by Pipe and ConCov schemes. fairness value F decreases with increase in % node failures.
TC-Pipe’s coverage performance is comparable to Pipe and Forahighernodedensity(50UAVs)atbothspeeds,theeffect
ConCov for higher node density, whereas Relay has a lower ofnodefailuresonroutingandcoverageperformancesofPipe
performance, especially for C and C (which correspond to and TC-Pipe schemes is relatively low (see Figures 21 and
4 5
medium and long route lengths). For example, for 50 UAVs 23, highlighted values). When a relay UAV fails in the Relay
at 20 m/s, TC-Pipe, Pipe and ConCov achieve C of ≈ 98%, scheme, a new shortest route is re-established using AODV
v
compared to ≈ 91% achieved by Relay for C and C . routing. Therefore, its routing performance remains almost
4 5
The Fairness (F) performance of all the schemes for both unaffectedbynodefailures;however,itscoverageperformance
node densities at both speeds is shown in Figure 19. Each decreases considerably compared to the TC-Pipe and Pipe
scheme achieves a higher F when the density and/or node schemes.
speed increase as all the cells in the area under monitoring 2) Effect of Node Failures for Three Targets:: In 3-target
arevisitedmorefrequently.F valueoftheTC-PipeandRelay settings (C 4, C 5 and C 5 shown in Figure 5), a separate route
schemes is lower than Pipe and ConCov-Pipe schemes for 30 isestablishedtoservethedataflowfromeachofthreetargets.
UAVs at both speeds for all three target location settings. In Figures24and25showthePDRperformanceoftheTC-Pipe,
TC-Pipe, some UAVs cover the region near the pipes of three Pipe and Relay schemes for 30 and 50 UAVs at both speeds,
flows (due to pheromone masking), leading to a decrease in respectively, whereas Figures 26 and 27 show other routing
coveragefairnessperformance.Whereas,inRelay,moreUAVs and coverage metrics.
are reassigned as relay nodes to form the routes of the three The overall trends representing the impact of node failures
flows, leading to a bigger decrease in the number of UAVs on different routing and coverage metrics are similar to the
performing coverage and thus decreasing coverage fairness. single target settings discussed above. Since more nodes are
For example, in Figure 19a, for 30 UAVs and setting C , required to maintain the pipe region for routes for flows from
4
TC-Pipe achieves F of 0.66 and 0.74 at 20 m/s and 40 m/s, three targets, the node failures result in a relatively greater
respectively, compared to F values of 0.74-0.67 and 0.77- impact on the routing and coverage performances for both
0.76 (resp.) for Pipe and ConCov-Pipe. The Relay scheme node densities and at both speeds in the TC-Pipe and Pipe
achieves lower F values of 0.58 and 0.63 for 30 UAVs at schemes. For 30 UAVs in setting C 5 with long routes, we
20 m/s and 40 m/s, respectively. Since enough UAVs are observe decrease in PDR, coverage and other routing metrics
available at a density of 50 UAVs, the TC-Pipe scheme’s due to node failures (see Figures 24 and 26). For 50 UAVs
fairnessperformanceiscomparabletoPipeandConCov-Pipe, at both speeds, we observe a better overall performance (due
whereastheRelayschemeachieveslowerF values(seeFigure to a higher node density) but the impact of node failures is
12b). still visible, especially for a longer route length and higher
% node failures (see setting C in Figures 25 and 27). In the
5
Relay scheme, the relay UAVs establish stable routes, so the
E. Effect of Node Failures on Performance
PDR and other routing performance see a small decrease due
We study the impact of node failures on the routing and to node failures. But its coverage performance becomes much
coverageperformanceoftheTC-Pipe,PipeandRelayschemes worse,especiallyfortheflowswithlongerroutelengths.Since
when a fraction of nodes randomly fail during the simulation moreUAVsarereassignedasrelaynodestoformroutes,fewer
time. We consider 20% and 30% of the UAVs progressively UAVsareavailableforcoveringthemap(seeC performance
v
failing during the simulation due to energy depletion and in Figure 26).
mechanical failures, and observe that the PDR and coverage
performancesdecreasegracefullyinproportiontothe%UAVs F. Summary
failing in the network. We see that both pipe routing and topology control con-
1) Effect of Node Failures for Single Target:: For single tribute to maintaining a robust set of alternative routes and
target settings (C , C and C ), Figures 20 and 21 show the lead to better routing performance (higher PDR, longer route-
1 2 3
PDR performance of TC-Pipe, Pipe, and Relay schemes for up time, and fewer route breaks) at all settings, with TC-Pipe
30and50UAVsatbothspeeds,respectively,whereasFigures (which uses both) outperforming Pipe, AODV, and ConCov-
22 and 23 show other routing and coverage metrics. Pipe. With no pipe region, AODV performs worst; the pipe
AtlowUAVdensitiesandbothspeeds,fewerUAVsareleft regionallowstheothermethods(TC-Pipe,Pipe,andConCov-
after node failures which are required to maintain the pipe Pipe) to proactively switch routes within the pipe, leading to19
(a) Coverage (Targets C4, 30 UAVs) (b) Coverage (Targets C5, 30 UAVs) (c) Coverage (Targets C6, 30 UAVs)
(d) Coverage (Targets C4, 50 UAVs) (e) Coverage (Targets C5, 50 UAVs)
(f) Coverage (Targets C6, 50 UAVs)
Fig. 17: Coverage vs. Time plots for 3-targets settings C , C and C .
4 5 5
Fig. 18: Coverage Performance: C for 3-targets settings C , C and C
v 4 5 620
(a) Fairness (30 UAVs)
(b) Fairness (50 UAVs)
Fig. 19: Coverage performance: Fairness for 3-targets settings C , C and C
4 5 6
fewerroutebreaksandthusfewerroutediscoveries.Ingeneral, performances decrease gracefully in proportion to the % of
the routing and coverage performance is a trade-off [12]. TC- UAVs failing in the network. At higher density, this decrease
Pipe sees a slight decrease in coverage (C , F) compared is less than at lower density, as there are enough UAVs to
v
to Pipe, AODV and ConCov-Pipe at lower node density (30 maintain a robust pipe.
UAVs), but at higher density, TC-Pipe achieves comparable
coverage performance with better PDR. VIII. CONCLUSION
The Relay scheme achieves higher PDR than TC-Pipe in We considered a decentralized, multi-hop, dynamic UAV
singletargetsettingsandsome3-targetssettings(longerroutes network consisting of low SWaP UAVs, where UAVs con-
and lower data rates), because it uses dedicated relay UAVs tinuously monitor the map area to find new targets and
to establish stable routes. However, it provides the worst maintain routes between UAVs monitoring targets to BS for
coverage performance among the tested schemes, especially data communication. We designed a mobility, congestion, and
for multiple targets with long routes at low UAV density, energy-aware hybrid reactive routing protocol, called the Pipe
becausesignificantlyfewerUAVsareavailabletoperformarea routing (Pipe), based on the MCA-AODV [13], followed by a
coverage. In both Pipe and TC-Pipe, the PDR and coverage novel pipe routing with topology control scheme (TC-Pipe).21
Fig. 20: PDR values for 30 UAVs for single-target settings C , C and C .
1 2 3
Fig. 21: PDR values for 50 UAVs for single-target settings C , C and C .
1 2 322
Fig. 22: Routing and Coverage metrics: 30 UAVs for single target settings C , C and C .
1 2 3
In TC-Pipe routing, the 2-hop region around the active REFERENCES
routes(the“pipe”)ismaderobustusingtopologycontrol;this
helps to establish stable routes and improves routing perfor- [1] I. Martinez-Alpiste, G. Golcarenarenji, Q. Wang, and J. M. Alcaraz-
mance. Both TC-Pipe and Pipe routing schemes saw fewer Calero,“Searchandrescueoperationusinguavs:Acasestudy,”Expert
SystemswithApplications,vol.178,p.114937,2021.
routebreaksandbetterPDRthantheAODVandConCov-Pipe
[2] E. Y. Adam, “Leveraging connectivity for coverage in drone networks
routingschemes.TC-Pipeachievedbetterroutingperformance
for target detection,” Balkan J. Electrical and Computer Eng., vol. 7,
than Pipe but saw a slight decrease in coverage performance no.3,pp.218–225,2019.
at low UAV density. This is due to the inherent trade-off [3] A.L.Alfeo,M.G.Cimino,N.DeFrancesco,M.Lega,andG.Vaglini,
“Design and simulation of the emergent behavior of small drones
between connectivity and coverage performance. Though the
swarming for distributed target localization,” J. Computational Sci.,
Relay scheme establishes stable routes between the target vol.29,pp.19–33,2018.
UAVs and BS, the TC-Pipe scheme achieved better PDR for [4] S.Garg,A.Ihler,E.S.Bentley,andS.Kumar,“Across-layer,mobility,
andcongestion-awareroutingprotocolforuavnetworks,”IEEETrans.
certain 3-target settings at higher data rates. In both the TC-
AerospaceElectronicSystems,vol.59,no.4,pp.3778–3796,2023.
Pipe and Pipe schemes, the PDR and coverage performances
[5] B. H. Khudayer, M. Anbar, S. M. Hanshi, and T.-C. Wan, “Efficient
decreased gracefully in proportion to the number of failures routediscoveryandlinkfailuredetectionmechanismsforsourcerouting
in the network. Thus, both TC-Pipe and Pipe routing schemes protocolinmobilead-hocnetworks,”IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.24019–
24032,2020.
are well suited for decentralized dynamic UAV networks
[6] S. Garg, “An adaptive and low-complexity routing protocol for dis-
performing target monitoring and area coverage applications. tributedairbornenetworks.”inEWSN,2021,pp.187–191.
[7] C. Z. Sirmollo and M. A. Bitew, “Mobility-aware routing algorithm23
Fig. 23: Routing and Coverage metrics: 50 UAVs for single settings C , C and C .
1 2 3
for mobile ad hoc networks,” Wireless Communications and Mobile Drones,vol.6,no.1,p.9,2021.
Computing,vol.2021,pp.1–12,2021. [15] A.Rovira-Sugranes,A.Razi,F.Afghah,andJ.Chakareski,“Areview
[8] M.Zhang,C.Dong,P.Yang,T.Tao,Q.Wu,andT.Q.Quek,“Adaptive ofAI-enabledroutingprotocolsforUAVnetworks:Trends,challenges,
routing design for flying ad hoc networks,” IEEE Commun. Letters, andfutureoutlook,”AdHocNetw.,vol.130,Art.no.102790,2022.
2022. [16] S.-W. Lee et al., “An energy-aware and predictive fuzzy logic-based
[9] C. Pu, “Link-quality and traffic-load aware routing for UAV ad hoc routing scheme in flying ad hoc networks (FANETs),” IEEE Access,
networks,”inInt.Conf.CollaborationInternetComput. IEEE,2018, vol.9,pp.129977–130005,2021.
pp.71–79. [17] A. M. Rahmani et al., “Olsr+: A new routing method based on fuzzy
[10] M. Song, J. Liu, and S. Yang, “A mobility prediction and delay logic in flying ad-hoc networks (fanets),” Veh. Commun., p. 100489,
prediction routing protocol for uav networks,” in Int. Conf. Wireless 2022.
Commun.SignalProcessing. IEEE,2018,pp.1–6. [18] C.Perkins,E.Belding-Royer,andS.Das,“Adhocon-demanddistance
[11] M.Gharib,F.Afghah,andE.S.Bentley,“LB-OPAR:Loadbalancedop- vector(aodv)routing,”IETF,RFC3561,2003.
timizedpredictiveandadaptiveroutingforcooperativeUAVnetworks,” [19] X. Li and J. Yan, “Lepr: Link stability estimation-based preemptive
AdHocNetworks,vol.132,Art.no.102878,2022. routing protocol for flying ad hoc networks,” in IEEE Symp.Comput.
[12] S. Devaraju, A. Ihler, and S. Kumar, “A deep Q-learning based, base- Commun.IEEE. IEEE,2017,pp.1079–1084.
stationconnectivity-aware,decentralizedpheromonemobilitymodelfor [20] S. Devaraju, M. Parsinia, E. S. Bentley, and S. Kumar, “A multipath
autonomousuavnetworks,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2311.16409,2023. localrouterepairschemeforbidirectionaltrafficinanairbornenetwork
[13] S. Garg, “Design of cross-layer mac and routing protocols for au- ofmultibeamfddnodes,”IEEETrans.Aerosp.Electron.Syst.,vol.58,
tonomousuavnetworks,”Ph.D.dissertation,SanDiegoStateUniversity, no.4,pp.2983–2995,2022.
2022. [21] B. H. Khudayer, M. Anbar, S. M. Hanshi, and T.-C. Wan, “Efficient
[14] A.H.Wheeb,R.Nordin,A.Samah,M.H.Alsharif,andM.A.Khan, routediscoveryandlinkfailuredetectionmechanismsforsourcerouting
“Topology-based routing protocols and mobility models for flying ad protocolinmobilead-hocnetworks,”IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.24019–
hoc networks: A contemporary review and future research directions,” 24032,2020.24
Fig. 24: PDR values for 30 UAVs for 3-targets settings C , C and C .
4 5 6
Fig. 25: PDR values for 50 UAVs for 3-targets settings C , C and C .
4 5 625
Fig. 26: Routing and Coverage metrics: 30 UAVs for 3-targets settings C , C and C .
4 5 6
[22] N.Ahmad,S.Sethi,andM.Ahmed,“Cache-awarequery-broadcastto survey,”J.NetworkandComputerAppl.,vol.207,p.103495,2022.
improveqosofroutingprotocolsinmanets,”WirelessPers.Commun., [30] S.Devaraju,A.Ihler,andS.Kumar,“Aconnectivity-awarepheromone
vol.113,no.1,pp.481–498,2020. mobility model for autonomous uav networks,” in 2023 IEEE 20th
[23] C.E.PerkinsandE.M.Belding-Royer,“Qualityofserviceforadhoc ConsumerCommunications&NetworkingConference(CCNC). IEEE,
on-demanddistancevectorrouting,”Tech.Rep.,2003. 2023,pp.1–6.
[24] D. Jinil Persis and T. Paul Robert, “Review of ad-hoc on-demand [31] E. Y. Adam, “Connectivity considerations for mission planning of a
distance vector protocol and its swarm intelligent variants for mobile search and rescue drone team,” Turkish J. Electrical Engineering and
ad-hocnetwork,”IETNetworks,vol.6,no.5,pp.87–93,2017. ComputerSciences,vol.28,no.4,pp.2228–2243,2020.
[25] A.O.Fapojuwo,O.Salazar,andA.B.Sesay,“Performanceofaqos- [32] K.Khateri,M.Pourgholi,M.Montazeri,andL.Sabattini,“Acompar-
based multiple-route ad hoc on-demand distance vector protocol for ison between decentralized local and global methods for connectivity
mobile ad hoc networks,” Canadian J. Elect. Comput. Eng., vol. 29, maintenance of multi-robot networks,” IEEE Robotics and Automation
no.1/2,pp.149–155,2004. Letters,vol.4,no.2,pp.633–640,2019.
[26] S. Kumar et al., “Robust on-demand multipath routing with dynamic [33] H.ElHammouti,M.Benjillali,B.Shihada,andM.-S.Alouini,“Learn-
pathupgradefordelay-sensitivedataoveradhocnetworks,”Journalof as-you-fly: A distributed algorithm for joint 3d placement and user
ComputerNetworksandCommunications,vol.2013,2013. association in multi-uavs networks,” IEEE Trans. Wireless Commun.,
[27] P. Li, L. Guo, and F. Wang, “A multipath routing protocol with load vol.18,no.12,pp.5831–5844,2019.
balancingandenergyconstrainingbasedonaomdvinadhocnetwork,” [34] N.E.H.Bahloul,S.Boudjit,M.Abdennebi,andD.E.Boubiche,“Bio-
MobileNetw.Appl.,pp.1–10,2019. inspiredondemandroutingprotocolforunmannedaerialvehicles,”in
[28] P. Srinivasan and P. Kamalakkannan, “Rsea-aodv: route stability and 26th Int. Conf. on Computer Communication and Networks. IEEE,
energy aware routing for mobile ad hoc networks,” Int. J. Comput. 2017,pp.1–6.
Commun.,vol.8,no.6,pp.891–900,2013. [35] C. W. Reynolds, “Flocks, herds and schools: A distributed behavioral
[29] M. M. Alam, M. Y. Arafat, S. Moh, and J. Shen, “Topology control model,”pp.25–34,1987.
algorithms in multi-unmanned aerial vehicle networks: An extensive [36] A. Rahmati, S. Hosseinalipour, Y. Yapıcı, X. He, I. Gu¨venc¸, H. Dai,26
Fig. 27: Routing and Coverage metrics: 50 UAVs for 3-targets settings C , C and C .
4 5 6
and A. Bhuyan, “Dynamic interference management for uav-assisted AeroVironment Switchblade.AccessedOct.15,2023.
wireless networks,” IEEE Transactions on Wireless Communications, [44] M.Alam,N.Ahmed,R.Matam,andF.A.Barbhuiya,“Ieee802.11ah-
vol.21,no.4,pp.2637–2653,2021. enabledinternetofdronearchitecture,”IEEEInternetofThingsMaga-
[37] A. Trotta, L. Montecchiari, M. D. Felice, and L. Bononi, “A gps- zine,vol.5,no.1,pp.174–178,2022.
free flocking model for aerial mesh deployments in disaster-recovery [45] J.N.Yasinetal.,“Unmannedaerialvehicles(uavs):Collisionavoidance
scenarios,”IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.91558–91573,2020. systems and approaches,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 105139–105155,
[38] M. M. Alam and S. Moh, “Joint topology control and routing in a 2020.
uavswarmforcrowdsurveillance,”JournalofNetworkandComputer [46] Multi-sensor payloads: Intelligence, surveillance, and reconnaissance
Applications,vol.204,p.103427,2022. (isr) micro-gimbals. AeroVironment, Inc. Accessed Oct. 16, 2023.
[39] E.Yanmaz,“Jointordecoupledoptimization:Multi-uavpathplanning [Online].Available:https://www.avinc.com/uas/payloads
forsearchandrescue,”AdHocNetworks,vol.138,p.103018,2023. [47] S.Garg,V.S.S.Kuchipudi,E.S.Bentley,andS.Kumar,“Areal-time,
[40] J. Scherer and B. Rinner, “Short and full horizon motion planning distributed,directionaltdmamacprotocolforqos-awarecommunication
for persistent multi-uav surveillance with energy and communication inmulti-hopwirelessnetworks,”IEEEAccess,vol.9,pp.26343–26361,
constraints,”inIEEE/RSJInt.Conf.IntelligentRobotsandSyst. IEEE, 2021.
2017,pp.230–235. [48] R. K. Jain, D.-M. W. Chiu, and W. R. Hawe, “A quantitative measure
[41] A. I. Hentati and L. C. Fourati, “Comprehensive survey of uavs of fairness and discrimination,” Eastern Research Laboratory, Digital
communication networks,” Computer Standards & Interfaces, vol. 72, EquipmentCorporation,Hudson,MA,vol.21,1984.
p.103451,2020.
[42] D. Hambling. The us navy wants swarms of thousands of
small drones. https://www.technologyreview.com/2022/10/24/1062039/
us-navy-swarms-of-thousands-of-small-drones/. Accessed Oct. 15,
2023.
[43] Wikipedia. Aerovironment switchblade. https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/