1
A Resource-Efficient Decentralized Sequential
Planner for Spatiotemporal Wildfire Mitigation
Josy John, Student Member, IEEE, Shridhar Velhal, Suresh Sundaram, Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—This paper proposes a Conflict-aware Resource- is well-suited for scenarios with spatially distributed, dynamic
Efficient Decentralized Sequential planner (CREDS) for early targets with diverse deadlines.
wildfire mitigation using multiple heterogeneous Unmanned
Index Terms—Wildfire management, multitask assignment,
Aerial Vehicles (UAVs). Multi-UAV wildfire management sce-
non-stationary tasks, spatiotemporal tasks.
narios are non-stationary, with spatially clustered dynamically
spreading fires, potential pop-up fires, and partial observability
due to limited UAV numbers and sensing range. The objective
of CREDS is to detect and sequentially mitigate all growing
I. INTRODUCTION
fires as Single-UAV Tasks (SUT), minimizing biodiversity loss WILDFIRES pose a significant threat to biodiversity
throughrapidUAVinterventionandpromotingefficientresource
and resource sustainability, particularly when left
utilizationbyavoidingcomplexmulti-UAVcoordination.CREDS
unchecked in their early stages. Rapid escalation in size
employs a three-phased approach, beginning with fire detection
usingasearchalgorithm,followedbylocaltrajectorygeneration and number can occur due to factors like terrain and wind
usingtheauction-basedResource-EfficientDecentralizedSequen- conditions. Emergency response teams face the critical task
tial planner (REDS), incorporating the novel non-stationary of decision-making, allocating limited resources to combat
cost function, the Deadline-Prioritized Mitigation Cost (DPMC).
fires based on location and severity. Multi-UAV systems are
Finally,aconflict-awareconsensusalgorithmresolvesconflictsto
increasingly employed for wildfire management [1], [2] to
determineaglobaltrajectoryforspatiotemporalmitigation.The
performance evaluation of the CREDS for partial and full ob- reducehumanexposuretohazardousenvironments.Whileex-
servabilityconditionswithbothheterogeneousandhomogeneous istingresearchinthefieldofmulti-UAVwildfiremanagement
UAVteamsfordifferentfires-to-UAVratiosdemonstratesa100%
explores various combinations of search [3], monitoring [4],
success rate for ratios up to 4 and a high success rate for the
[5], and mitigation [6], few studies address the integrated critical ratio of 5, outperforming baselines. Heterogeneous UAV
aspects of all three phases [7], [8]. The task assignment
teamsoutperformhomogeneousteamsinhandlingheterogeneous
deadlines of SUT mitigation. CREDS exhibits scalability and dimension remains a critical challenge in the realm of multi-
100% convergence, demonstrating robustness against potential UAV wildfire management due to its complex dependencies
deadlock assignments, enhancing its success rate compared to [9]. This involves assigning UAVs to specific fires based
the baseline approaches.
on size and location. Wildfire scenarios are characterized by
NotetoPractitioners—Practicalwildfirescenariosofteninvolve clustered fire areas that dynamically grow, compounded by
unknown clusters of rapidly evolving fires that exceed the avail-
the vast geographical area and limited sensing capabilities of
able firefighting resources. Wildfire scenarios often involve vast
UAVs,resultinginlimitedvisibility(partiallyobservable)con-
areasandlimitedsensorcapabilitiesofUAVs,resultinginpartial
information about the environment. When the number of fires ditions. Consequently, the multi-UAV multi-task assignment
exceedsthenumberofUAVs,decentralizedsequentialactionbe- for dynamic tasks remains a complex research area.
comesnecessary.Earlywildfiremitigation,focusingoncontaining Variousapproacheshavebeenproposedtoaddressthechal-
fireswithinthequenchingcapabilityofasingleUAV,iscrucialfor
lenge of allocating resources effectively in wildfire scenarios.
minimizingdamageandefficientresourceutilizationbyavoiding
Theproblemofschedulingavailablefirefightingresourceslike
complex multi-UAV coordination. The approach of single UAV
mitigation introduces deadlines for initiating mitigation efforts. fire engines, air tankers, and helicopters to contain multiple
The deadlines vary based on factors like fire area, spread rate, fires is solved using the concept of deteriorating jobs in
andquenchrate.Thecomputationofaquenchingsequencewith [10]. A multi-objective optimization method for fire engine
efficient prioritization of deadlines ensures mission success and
scheduling, by allocating resources to heuristically prioritized
reduction in the total destroyed area. The challenges involved
firesbasedonquenchcapabilitytotraveltime,spreadrate,and
in wildfire scenarios necessitate a three-phased framework: a
searchstagetolocatefiresusingthermalsensorsandcameras,a size of fires, is presented in [11]. A lazy max-sum algorithm
Resource-EfficientDecentralizedSequentialplannertoassignlo- forassigningtaskswithgrowingcoststoheterogeneousagents
caltrajectories(mitigationsequence)foreachUAV,andaconflict ispresentedin[12].Thisapproachminimizestheaccumulated
resolutionstagetoensuresmoothoperationbyresolvingpotential
growth while addressing potential model inaccuracies through
conflicts between UAV trajectories. CREDS prioritizes deadlines
asamplingtechnique.Amodel-basedapproachformulti-agent
andachievessuccessfulmissionsevenwhenfiresoutnumberUAVs
byfivetimes.Additionally,heterogeneousUAVteamswithdiverse wildfiretaskassignmenttominimizethetotalcompletiontime
quench and speed capabilities outperform homogeneous teams is examined in [13]. This method uses an initial deployment
andtraditionalmethodsfocusedonexecutiontime.Thisapproach consideringthetraveltimeandexecutioncapacityforthetask,
followedbyadynamicredeploymentatintervalsbasedonthe
JosyJohn,ShridharVelhal,andSureshSundaramarewiththeDepartment
optimal execution capacity when travel time is neglected. A
of Aerospace Engineering, Indian Institute of Science, Bengaluru, India.
josyjohn@iisc.ac.in;velhalb@iisc.ac.in;vssuresh@iisc.ac.in tree-based genetic programming hyperheuristic algorithm has
4202
luJ
72
]OR.sc[
1v36191.7042:viXra2
been studied in [14] to develop collaborative decision-making numberofsuccessfulSUTmitigations.Finally,thethirdphase
strategies to guide multiple robots for bushfire elimination. employs the conflict-aware consensus algorithm to resolve
While the existing research explores the assignment and conflicts and generate conflict-free global trajectories for the
scheduling of traditional firefighting resources, a critical gap UAVs. The lack of relevant benchmarks within the existing
exists regarding early intervention with limited UAVs under literature necessitate the creation of a baseline focused on
partial observability. The delayed response can escalate fires minimizing total execution time to serve as a reference for
intoMulti-UAVTasks(MUTs),requiringsimultaneousactions performance evaluation. The extensive Monte-Carlo simula-
and complex coordination strategies. Conversely, managing tions validate the effectiveness of CREDS in achieving signif-
firesasSingleUAVTasks(SUTs)imposetemporalconstraints icantly higher success rates in critical scenarios where fires
toenableearly-stagemitigationwhileminimizingbiodiversity outnumber UAVs by four to five times, outperforming the
loss and maximizing mission success rates. This strategic ap- baseline cases. The advantage of CREDS is further ampli-
proach significantly enhances wildfire management efficiency fied by heterogeneous UAV teams whose diverse capabilities
by reducing resource, computational, and communication de- enablethemtotacklefireswithheterogeneousdeadlinesmore
mands through streamlined UAV coordination for resource- efficiently than homogeneous teams. Additionally, CREDS
efficient mitigation. The mitigation of spatially distributed consistentlyachieves100%convergencewithlesseriterations,
dynamic fires under temporal constraints transforms the prob- demonstratingrobustnessagainstpotentialdeadlockscenarios,
lem into a spatiotemporal assignment with dynamic costs. ultimately enhancing its success rate compared to baseline
The temporal constraints or deadlines for these growing tasks approaches.Theresource-efficienttaskassignment,scalability,
becomeheterogeneousduetofactorslikefirearea,firespread and rapid convergence make CREDS a real-time computable
rate, and quench rate of UAVs. Efficient mitigation requires solution ideal for timely intervention in real-world wildfire
prioritizingthesedeadlinesandutilizingaheterogeneousUAV managementscenarios.ThemaincontributionsofCREDScan
team with diverse capabilities. The real-world challenges of be summarized as follows
non-stationarywildfireenvironments,partialobservability,and
1) An early wildfire management system is proposed to
limited resources often result in uncontrollable fires. This
mitigate fires as SUTs before they grow into MUTs,
emphasizes the need for decentralized solutions for local
minimizing damage, especially when fires outnumber
planning [15]. Sequential multi-task assignment strategies
available UAVs.
[16] prove beneficial in scenarios with limited agents and
2) A decentralized sequential spatiotemporal task assign-
non-uniform task distributions in the mission area. Thus, a
ment for growing tasks featuring non-stationary costs is
deadline-prioritized, decentralized, sequential spatiotemporal
used for the computation of mitigation sequence. This
task assignment for growing fires, utilizing a heterogeneous
facilitatesefficientplanningandresourceutilizationeven
team of UAVs, is necessary for early-stage wildfire manage-
under partial observability.
ment.
3) CREDS efficiently prioritizes heterogeneous deadlines
This paper presents the Conflict-aware Consensus-based
by utilizing the heterogeneous UAV teams with novel
Resource-EfficientDecentralizedSequentialplanner(CREDS)
DPMC. Monte-Carlo simulation and ablation studies
for early wildfire management with a heterogeneous UAV
confirm the ability of CREDS to achieve high success
team. The CREDS uses a deadline-imposed sequential SUT
rates, even when fires exceed UAVs by five times.
mitigation to achieve early intervention while reducing the
4) The CREDS exhibits high success rates, scalability, and
loss of biodiversity. The non-stationary wildfire scenarios
faster convergence in resource-limited scenarios, mak-
with growing fires, new pop-up fires, a limited number of
ing it suitable for real-world applications with limited
UAVs with partial observability, and heterogeneous deadlines
resources and growing costs.
for fires make the multi-UAV wildfire management problem
even more challenging. The CREDS tackles the challenge The rest of this paper is organized as follows. Section
by reformulating the problem as a decentralized, sequential II provides a review of existing multi-robot multi-task as-
spatiotemporal task assignment problem for growing tasks– signment approaches. Section III presents the formulation of
an NP-complete problem. CREDS employs a three-phased the wildfire suppression problem as a spatiotemporal task
decentralized framework with path replanning that operates assignment problem. Section IV introduces the CREDS for
effectively under partial observability, ensuring timely inter- wildfire management. Numerical simulation results are given
vention despite incomplete situational awareness. The first in Section V to verify the performance of the CREDS for
phase uses the Oxyrrhis Marina-inspired Search (OMS) al- wildfire suppression, and Section VI concludes the paper.
gorithm [7] to aid UAVs in detecting initially unknown fire
locations. The number of fires detected varies with time
depending on the search phase, and CREDS replans the path II. RELATEDWORKS
when a new fire is detected. The second phase utilizes a de-
centralized auction-based task assignment, Resource-Efficient The wildfire mitigation using a team of UAVs has been
Decentralized Sequential planner (REDS) for planning the framed as a multi-UAV decentralized spatiotemporal task
local trajectory. The CREDS proposes a Deadline Prioritized assignment problem in this paper. This section briefly sum-
Mitigation Cost (DPMC) to efficiently prioritize the tasks marizes the existing literature on multi-agent multi-task as-
based on their heterogeneous deadlines to increase the total signment, covering various problem contexts.3
A. Multi-task Assignment Problems temporalgrowth(progressivelyincreasingquenchtimes)under
partial observability. Additionally, deadlines must be consid-
Multi-Robot multi-Task Assignment (MRTA) has found
ered for these tasks, and coordinating a heterogeneous team
applications in various domains, including search and rescue
of agents poses a significant challenge. This paper presents
[17], [18], territory protection [19], job-shop scheduling [20],
a novel CREDS specifically designed for real-world wildfire
vehicle routing problems [21], pickup and delivery problems
management to address these shortcomings.
[22], [23], [24], [25], etc. The domain under consideration
shapes the characteristics and complexity of the MRTA prob-
lem [26]. The Hungarian method [27] is the first approach to III. UAV-BASEDWILDFIREMANAGEMENT
efficiently compute optimal solutions for linear sum assign- A wildfire management scenario featuring multiple UAVs
ment problems within a finite time among centralized MRTA deployedinthemissionarea,Ω⊂R2,tosequentiallymitigate
algorithms. Centralized MRTA systems have drawbacks like randomlylocatedmultipleunknownfireareasisshowninFig.
scalability, computational complexity, and lack of robustness, 1.AteamofmUAVs,{U ,...,U }isdeployedinthemission
1 m
making them suitable for scenarios with a small number of areatodetectandmitigatethesetofn fires,{f ,...,f }.The
t 1 nt
robotsandtaskswithreadilyavailableglobalstateinformation UAVs need to use the search capabilities to detect the fires
[28]. and determine individual sequences for efficiently quenching
The coordination of a fleet of autonomous vehicles for fires,withanoverallgoalofminimizingbiodiversityloss.The
multi-assignmentproblemsusingtheConsensus-BasedBundle active forest fire areas exhibit critical quench rates, beyond
Algorithm (CBBA) is detailed in [29]. The CBBA approach which additional quench efforts prove ineffective in reducing
adoptsadecentralizedauction-basedstrategyfortaskselection the quench time [8]. This study assumes UAVs operate with
and integrates a consensus routine to resolve conflicts, guar- a quench rate close to the critical quench rate, limiting the
anteeing convergence to conflict-free assignments. An MRTA potential for substantial performance gains with additional
strategy focused on minimizing mission completion time is UAVs if the fire remains a SUT. The assumptions made
detailed in [30], employing a decentralized genetic algorithm in this study include constant fire spread rate, uniform fuel
approach and emphasizing parallelization across agents for availability, consistent terrain, and wind conditions across
efficient computational resource utilization. Building upon the mission area. Additionally, it assumes that UAVs have
the CBBA, [31] presents a consensus-based grouping algo- the sufficient quenching capacity to address multiple fires
rithmforcoordinatingUAVsinMUTassignmentsconsidering sequentially, with minimal time required for refueling.
equipment requirements and task dependencies. In [32], a
consensus-based timetable algorithm addressed the decen-
tralized multi-agent task allocation problem, where multiple Ω fj af fnt
f1 j
agents are needed to perform a task simultaneously.
f3 pf
j
B. Multi-task Assignment Problems with Time Constraints U1 Um
f4
MRTAproblemsinvolvingtemporal,spatial,andsequential
c ao un tos mtra ai tn iots nh [3av 3e ]td oiv se ur rs ve eia llp ap nl cic ea [t 3io 4n ].s, Cr ha an lg lein ng gef sro inm clw uda ere ah do au ps te
- rs
ien pU
u
ii
f5
ing to dynamically discovered tasks, meeting strict arrival f2
requirements, and addressing specific task sequences or con-
current execution needs. An auction-based distributed algo-
Fire UAV Sensingradius
rithmforthemulti-robottaskassignmentproblem,considering
finite task duration, task deadlines, and limited robot battery Fig.1. AwildfiremanagementscenariowheremultipleUAVsperformsearch
life, is studied in [35]. The challenge of maximizing the andmitigationofwildfire.
number of task allocations in a distributed multi-robot system
ThisworkfocusesonsolvingtheSUTassignmentproblem,
operating under strict time constraints and fuel limits is ad-
where a single UAV sequentially quenches all detected fires
dressed with Performance Impact-MaxAss (PI-MaxAss) [36].
before they escalate into MUT while minimizing forest area
PI-MaxAss follows a two-phased task assignment strategy
destruction. This strategic approach potentially reduces bio-
where a solution generated from an existing PI algorithm
diversity loss, eliminates delays associated with waiting for
[37] is iteratively improved to maximize task assignments
coordinatedUAVefforts,andenhancesresourceutilizationby
withoutrepeatingtheentireallocationprocedure.Adistributed
sequentially quenching more fires.
task allocation problem for maximizing the total number of
successfullyexecutedtasksinmulti-robotsystemsconsidering
A. Mathematical Formulation
taskdeadlinesandfuellimitsisstudiedin[38].Thealgorithm
minimizes traveling time and prioritizes tasks with earlier Let m represent the total number of UAVs, and U ≜
deadlines. {1,...,m} denote the index set of UAVs. The UAVs utilized
Current MRTA literature lacks solutions for managing real- inthemissionexhibitheterogeneity,possessingdistinctspeeds
world wildfire scenarios. These scenarios involve the se- and quenching capabilities. The position coordinate of the i-
quential assignment of spatially distributed tasks that exhibit th UAV is denoted by pu. The speed in m/s and the area
i4
quenchrateinm2/sfortheithUAVaredenotedasv andϕq in the success of the mission, and the path computation is
i i
respectively. Each UAV denoted as U , is confined to sensing challenging for complex dynamic environments like wildfire
i
only the fire locations within its designated sensing radius, scenarios. The path computed should ensure that all UAVs
rsen. The detected fire locations are stored in a dedicated commencemitigationoffiresintheirpathbeforetherespective
i
list denoted as D . The UAVs navigate within a partially deadline times while minimizing the loss of biodiversity. The
i
observable environment where the initial details regarding the primary objective of computing paths of UAVs is to achieve
number, size, and locations of fires are unknown. successful mission through resource-efficient SUT mitigation
In a typical wildfire scenario, the tasks or fires are dynamic of all fires in the mission area. Mathematically, this translates
intermsofsizeandnumberasthefireparticlescanbecarried to a constraint ensuring that all fires in the paths of all UAVs
away due to the wind and terrain conditions, resulting in an are addressed before their individual deadlines. This can be
increased number of clustered fire areas. Let n represents the expressed as:
t
number of fires in the mission area at time t in seconds, with
τs −τd <0 ∀j ∈µ ,∀i∈U, (4)
the assumption that the number of fires is higher than the ij ij i
number of deployed UAVs for the mission (n >> m). The where, τs is the start time of mitigation of f by U .
t ij j i
index set of fires is denoted as F ≜{1,...,n } and the center The start time includes the quench times for the previous
t
of the jth fire spot is located at the position coordinate pf. tasks in the path and the travel time to reach the current
j
Each fire, f in the cluster of fires, can be modeled as a point task from the initial position along the path. Let the path,
j
fire model with a circular fire profile [13]. The initial areas µ i = {µ i1,µ i2,...,µ il,...} be executed by U i. The element,
of the fires are assumed to be heterogeneous with different µ il, denotes the task executed by U i at the lth point of the
initial areas and af j0 be the initial area of f j in m2. The fire path. The U i should search, detect, travel, and start quenching
area grows with time, depending on the radial spread rate, ϕs the fire before that fire becomes an infeasible quenching task
j
inm/s.Letaf j(t)andP jf(t)betheareainm2andperimeterin forU i.TheU ishouldarriveatthefirelocation,µ ilbeforeτ id µil
am so af ft uh ne cf tij onat ot fs fir re esp ae rc et aiv ae sly P.T jfh (te )p =eri 2m √e πte (cid:113)rc aa
f
jn (b t)e .e Wxp hr ee nss Ued
i
t
i
io
. se
tl
τ
oim
is µ
mi it
l
int <h ime τfi
iid
zµr eie
l.
ta hTr ee ha
e
tob
s
te ael lco ow
bn
ioda dac i
r
iµ vyi el
o
rt sbo
ij te
ym cti lit ovi sg
e
sa ,ote
af
ct ph hae
it eh
vfi ar
c
be
o
lma es
p
tha
u
rtS oatU
ui
goT hn,
detects and acts on f , the rate of change of the area of f
j j minimizingthestarttimeofmitigatingfiresintheUAV’spath.
can be expressed as a first-order system equation as:
Computingµ withafocusonminimizingthestarttime,while
i
satisfying (4), ensures that all fires are quenched as SUTs
a˙f(t)=ϕsPf(af)−ϕq. (1) at an early stage, reducing biodiversity loss and maximizing
j j j j i
resource efficiency.
The fire area decreases when a˙f j(t) < 0, specifically when In real-time evolving wildfire environments with dynamic
ϕq > ϕsPf(af). The critical area, denoted as ac , is the task execution costs, a real-time computable, scalable, and
i j j j ij
threshold fire area below which the fire remains as a SUT resource-efficient solution is required. Each UAV individually
for U . The critical area, ac can be computed as: selects the fires to mitigate in a decentralized manner based
i ij
on the start time of mitigation of fires using a resource-
(cid:16) ϕq (cid:17)2
ac = √i i∈U,j ∈D . (2) efficientdecentralizedsequentialplanner,andaconflict-aware
ij 2 πϕs i
j consensus algorithm is employed for the conflict resolution.
If af > ac , ∀i, then the fire area exceeds the critical area,
j ij IV. DEVELOPMENTOFCREDS
rendering the task infeasible for a single robot in the team.
Thecriticaltimeatwhichthefireareagrowstoac represents The Conflict-aware Resource-Efficient Decentralized Se-
ij
quential planner is designed to compute sequential assign-
the deadline time for successful mitigation of f by U as a
j i
SUT.Thedeadlinetimeoff forU isdenotedasτd andcan mentsforallUAVsinvolvedinwildfiremanagementmissions,
j i ij
ensuring the timely quenching of all fire areas before their
be computed as:
respective deadline times. The planner prioritizes efficient
(cid:113)
(cid:112) ac − af resource utilization and aims to minimize the overall area
τ id
j
= i ϕj s√
π
j0 i∈U,j ∈D i. (3) destroyed by fires. The schematic diagram depicting the com-
j ponents of the CREDS for a UAV, U , is shown in Fig. 2.
i
The critical area and deadline time are heterogeneous for Wildfire management comprises three phases: search, path
UAVs depending on the initial fire area, fire spread rate, generation, and conflict resolution. All UAVs are equipped
and quench rate of the UAV acting on the fire. Each UAV with temperature sensors that measure the temperature and
has distinct observations, and given the detected fire list for temperaturegradient requiredforthe searchphase. TheUAVs
individualUAVsandthedeadlinetimefortheirdetectedfires, also have an infrared camera that senses the fire profile
this work aims to assign a sequence of fires to each UAV parameters when the fire location is within the sensing radius.
strategically. The mission is considered successful when all Due to the limited sensing range, each UAV will have only
fire areas are effectively mitigated as SUTs, meaning no fires local observations. The UAVs individually search for fires
become infeasible due to missed deadlines. using OMS [7] to detect the fires.
The path of U , denoted as µ , is the ordered sequence TheCREDSadoptsanauction-basedmethodologythatem-
i i
of fires to be mitigated. The paths play an important role ployscostfunctionstodeterminethepathsoftheUAVs.Each5
within the sensor radius of the infrared camera, and the fire is
addedtothedetectedfirelistofdetectedUAV.Thus,forafire
j ∈ D , the detected UAV will have the position coordinates
i
pf, fire area af, and the spread rate ϕs of the fire.
j j j
B. Cost Function Formulation
The formulation of cost functions isessential in the context
of the CREDS, which computes the fires being quenched
by each UAV and determines the order in which each UAV
mitigatesthefirespottominimizetheoverallcosttotheteam
of UAVs. The multi-task assignment problems dealing with
static tasks typically employ cost functions such as the total
Fig.2. SchematicdiagramoftheCREDSforaUAV.
distance covered or the total mission time. Unlike static tasks,
wildfires exhibit dynamic characteristics, necessitating a cost
function that accommodates the growing size of the fire areas
UAVemploystheResourceEfficientDecentralizedSequential
and their mitigation requirements. Despite the clustering of
plannertogeneratethepathofmitigation,utilizinginformation
fires, travel time remains crucial, particularly as the size of
on detected fires and mission objectives. The formulated cost
the fire area expands when the UAV reaches the fire location.
function should account for both the deadline time and start
The feasibility of a task is contingent on whether the fire
timeofmitigation,reflectingthetotaldestroyedareatoachieve
area exceeds the critical area or if the start time of mitigation
mission objectives. The REDS works in a decentralized man-
exceeds the deadline time.
ner to minimize the individual costs of UAVs, and the same
taskcouldbeaddedtothepathsofmultipleUAVs.Theconflict Let τ is j represent the start time of mitigation of f j by U i.
resolution phase uses a conflict-aware consensus algorithm The start time of mitigation, τ is j, is computed as:
to compute a conflict-free path by assigning fires to UAVs, (cid:40)
dij, l=1;
ultimately minimizing the overall mission cost. The assigned τs = vi (5)
UAV should continuously spray water on the firefront for the ij τ ic j′ + d vj i′j, l>1.
scheduled quench time to quench the fire completely. Each
where l denotes the position in the path, d is the distance
ij
UAV can quench only one fire at a time, and after complete
fromtheinitialpositionofU tof ifjisthefirsttaskassigned
i j
mitigation, the UAV moves to the next task in the path. If
to U , j′ is the previous task assigned to U , τc is the time
the path is an empty set, the UAV needs to search and detect i i ij′
of completion of the previous task, and d is the distance
j′j
firesinunexploredareas.Thetaskexecutionisactivatedwhen
from the previous task to the current task. The start time of
the UAVs start the traversal from their previous task to the
mitigationoftasksinthepathdependsonthecompletiontime
currenttask.Whenanewfireisdetected,UAVswithactivated
of preceding tasks in the path. The completion time of a task
tasks cannot alter their current task, but their upcoming path
is defined as the time at which a fire is completely quenched.
is recomputed, considering the existing tasks in the detected
The completion time of a task in the path is the summation
fire list.
of individual task execution times up to the task in the path.
The execution time of each task includes the travel time and
A. Search Phase quench time required for the corresponding fire area.
Thequenchtimeisthetimerequiredtoquenchthefireafter
ThesearchphaseoffiresisrequiredastheUAVshaveonly
thestartofmitigation.Thequenchtimeofthefiredependson
partial information about the fires present in the mission area.
the size of the fire area, the spread rate, and the quench rate,
The UAVs can detect only the fire areas located within their
consideringaspecificnumberofUAVsactingonthefire.The
sensing radius, and the detected fire locations of UAV, U , are
i size of the fire area to be quenched alternatively depends on
denoted by set D i = {j, if d ij < r isen, ∀j ∈ F}, where thestarttimeofmitigation.Letτq representsthequenchtime
d ij is the distance from the U i to f j. The UAVs individually for SUT mitigation of f by U .i Tj he value of τq for feasible
search for fire areas using OMS if the corresponding detected j i ij
tasks can be computed from the solution for (1) assuming fire
fire list, D i = ∅. The OMS is a multilevel search inspired area at start time, af(τs) as the initial condition, and the fire
by the foraging pattern of Oxyhrris Marina. The UAVs use j ij
area after quench time as af(τs +Qt )=0 [13]. The τq can
temperature and temperature gradient measurements to switch j ij ij ij
be computed as,
between the explorative and exploitative search levels. The
U isA lV owsu es re tl he av nys te ha erc th emto pe ex rp atl uo rr eeth the rea sr hea olw dh ven aluth ee .t Tem hepe Ura Atu Vre s τ iq
j
=  (K2 ϕϕ s jq i )2ln(cid:16) ϕq i−Kϕϕ s jq i af j(τ is j)(cid:17) − 2(cid:113) Kaf j ϕ( s jτ is j) ,τ is j <τ id j; (6)
employ the exploitative brownian search if the temperature is ∞,τs ≥τd.
ij ij
higher thanthe temperaturethreshold. Further,if thetempera-
turegradientispositive,adirectionallydrivenbrowniansearch where af(τs) is the fire area of f when U starts the miti-
j ij √ j i
with a smaller search space is employed to reach the accurate gation and K = 2 π. The quench time for SUT assignment
fire location [7]. The fire is detected when the fire location is is a finite value as in (6) for all feasible SUTs and ∞ for all6
infeasibletasks.Thequenchtimeforaparticulartaskdepends mightpushthestarttimeoftaskstodeadlinetimes.Thus,both
on the time of the start of the task, which is influenced by the the temporal deadline cost and start time cost are required to
execution times for the previous tasks. Let τe be the time beminimizedtomaximizeSUTassignmentswhileminimizing
ij
required to execute f by U and τe is calculated as, thetotaldestroyedarea.TheDPMCaccountsforthedynamic
j i ij
costs of fires as a product of both temporal deadline cost and
dij +τq , l=1 and τs <τd;
vi ij ij ij start time cost along the path to prioritize the deadlines ef-
τe = d j′j +τq , l>1 and τs <τd; (7) fectively. The CREDS effectively balances resource efficiency
ij ∞vi
,
ij
τs ≥τd.
ij ij
with deadlines to minimize fire damage by minimizing both
ij ij
the temporal deadline and the start time cost.
The execution time is a finite value for all SUTs and ∞ for
2) Baseline: In the absence of established benchmarks
allMUTs.Thecompletiontimedenotedasτc marksthetime
ij for this specific multi-UAV wildfire management scenario,
when f is completely quenched by U . The completion time
j i a baseline approach to minimize the total execution time
of task µ , at the lth point of the path, is the summation of
il is established within the same CREDS framework for the
execution times of all tasks up to the lth point of the path.
comparative evaluation. The total execution time cost is the
(cid:88)
τc = τe. (8) time taken to completely quench all the fire areas. The total
iµil ij
score for U performing tasks in the path µ is the sum
j∈{µi1,...,µil} i i
of execution time for all tasks in the path, µ , and can be
i
The start time, completion time, and execution time of tasks
computed as,
are all interdependent, and each task’s feasibility is intricately
(cid:88)
linked to the start times of preceding tasks in the path. S (µ )= τe. (10)
i i ij
1) Deadline-Prioritized Mitigation Cost: The CREDS in- j∈µi
troducesanovelcostfunction,Deadline-PrioritizedMitigation
The cost function in (10) is used as the baseline for
Cost, to achieve the objective of maximizing the SUT assign-
comparison with the performance of CREDS with (9). A new
ments while minimizing the total destroyed area. The DPMC
taskisinsertedintothelocationthatincurstheminimumscore
has two parts: temporal deadline cost and start time cost. The
improvement, and the marginal score improvement associated
temporal deadline cost ensures the maximization of SUT as-
with task j given the current path, µ is
i
signments, and the start time cost ensures the minimization of
the total destroyed area. The temporal deadline cost accounts C ij = min S iµi⊕η{j}−S iµi, ∀j ∈/ µ i. (11)
forthedifferenceinareaatthetimeofstarttothecriticalarea.
η≤|µi|
Thestarttimecostisadynamicduration-dependenttravelcost where µ i⊕ η{j} denotes task j is added after ηth component
that includes the cost of quenching previous tasks in the path of path µ i. The local reward associated with the new task is
and the travel cost to reach the current task from the initial the marginal score improvement associated with the task.
position along the path. A UAV can perform multiple tasks
sequentially, and the total score for U , denoted as S (µ ), C. Spatiotemporal Mitigation for Evolving Wildfires
i i i
to perform tasks in the feasible path µ using DPMC can be
i ThespatiotemporaltaskforU mitigatingf canbedefined
i j
computed as, asF (pf,τd,τq)wheretheUAVhastoreachthefirelocation
j j ij ij
S i(µ i)= (cid:88)(cid:16)(cid:113) ac
ij
−(cid:113) af j(τ is j)(cid:17) . (cid:88) τ is
j
. (9) tp of j qto ues nta cr htt th he em firit eig ca oti mon plb ete ef lo yr .e Tτ hid j ea dn ed tes cp tr ea dy tt ah se kw sea tte or ffo Urτ i iq j
s
j (cid:124)∈µi (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124)j∈µ (cid:123)i (cid:122) (cid:125) definedasT iu ={F j ∀j ∈D i}.TheinformationsetofU i ci an
Temporaldeadlinecost Starttimecost bedefinedasIu ={pu,Tu}.Thepath,µ ofU ,isafunction
i i i i i
The S (µ ) = ∞ for infeasible paths where the start time is of the start time and scheduled quench time for fires in the
i i
greater than the deadline time. The mitigation of fire should path. The start time of all fires in the path of U is defined as
i
start before the deadline, and sometimes fires may not be τs ={τs, ∀j ∈µ }. The scheduled quench time of all fires
i∗ ij i
mitigatedbeforethedeadlineasUAVswillbebusymitigating in the path of U is defined as τq = {τq, ∀j ∈ µ }. Thus,
i i∗ ij i
others. The temporal deadline cost is minimal when the fires µ = g (τs,τq), τq = g (µ ,τs), τs = g (µ ,τq), where
i 1 i∗ i∗ i∗ 2 i i∗ i∗ 3 i i∗
in a feasible path are mitigated closer to their deadline times. g , g and g are functions. The quench time or scheduled
1 2 3
Theminimizationoftemporaldeadlinecostleadstolatermit- time for fire depends on the fire area at the time of start and
igation of fires with later deadlines. This cost function creates theareaquenchrateoftheUAV,whichinturndependsonthe
time slots for fires with earlier deadlines and maximizes the path of the UAV and the start times of the mitigation of fires
number of fires that can be executed as SUTs. in its path. The start times of the fires in the path depend on
The key idea for minimizing the destroyed area is to the time to reach the fire locations and the completion times
minimize the start time of mitigation to reduce the spread ofpreviousfiresinthepath, whichalternatelyisafunctionof
of fire. Due to the dynamic quench time associated with the path and quench time of all fires in the path.
fires, if larger fires with earlier deadlines and higher quench The wildfire management problem can be considered as
times are mitigated first, it might lead to an increase in the a superset of the technician routing and scheduling problem
fire area of other fires, leading to more destroyed areas. The with repair times, which belongs to the class of NP-Complete
temporal deadline cost alone is not sufficient for minimizing problems [39], [40]. The processing (repair) time for a task
destroyed areas for evolving tasks with dynamic costs, as it is constant for the technician routing and scheduling problem7
with repair times, whereas the quench time of fires gradually assignmentstofindaconflict-freetaskassignmentfordetected
increases with time. The growing nature of the fire demands fires. In a conflict-free SUT assignment, each task is assigned
dynamic (and increasing) quench time, and this makes it an to at most one UAV. The REDS determines the local path for
NP-complete problem. eachUAVinadecentralizedmanner,usingDPMC.TheUAVs
The spatiotemporal mitigation for wildfire tasks needs the adopt a greedy approach to augment their path lists from the
UAVs to reach the fire area and mitigate the fire before it set of detected fire areas, D , to minimize local or individual
i
becomes a MUT, indirectly enhancing resource utilization. rewards. The local reward for U for executing all assigned
i
TheUAVsshouldsequentiallymitigateallfirelocationswhen tasks is
(cid:80)ntC
(µ )x .
j ij i ij
the fire area remains as a SUT for a successful mission. The algorithm of the REDS is summarized in Algorithm 1.
The spatiotemporal mitigation for wildfire management can In REDS, each UAV, U , stores and updates 4 vectors, bundle
i
be formulated as a multi-task assignment problem given by, (b ), path (µ ), winning bids (y ), and winners list (z ) . The
i i i i
min
(cid:88)m (cid:32) (cid:88)nt
C (µ )x
(cid:33)
, (12)
b isu tn hd ele sei qs ua enli ts it alo of rt da es rks ofin ext eh ce uo tir od ner ofof taa sd kd s.it Tio hn e, wan ind nt ih ne gp ba idth
s
ij i ij
xij containthelowestbidforallthetasks,andthewinnersarethe
i=1 j=1
m UAVswithminimumbids.Thebundleandpathareinitialized
(cid:88)
s.t x ≤1 ∀j ∈F, (13) asnullvectors,thewinnerlistisinitializedtozerovector,and
ij
i winning bids are initiated as ∞ for all tasks. For iterations,
τs −τd <0 ∀j ∈µ ,∀i∈U, (14) λ>1, bundle, path, winner bids, and winners are initiated as
ij ij i
in the previous (λ−1)th iteration. The UAVs compute local
x ∈{0,1} ∀(i,j)∈U ×F, (15)
ij
rewards for all tasks in their detected task list using (11) and
x ij =0 ∀j ∈/ D i. (16) compute their valid task lists, h. The indicator function, I(),
comparesthelocalrewardwiththewinningbid.I()is1ifthe
The sequential spatiotemporal task assignment computes the
conditionalargumentistrueand∞otherwise.Ifthecomputed
paths of UAVs, minimizing the total cost of task execution
local reward is less than the known winning bid for the task,
in (12) while guaranteeing a successful mission. The task
then the task is valid, and h = 1; otherwise, the task is
assignment problem is formulated as an integer programming ij
invalid and h = ∞. The addition of valid tasks in the path
problem to compute the optimal path µ , ∀i ∈ U. The ij
i
minimizes local rewards for UAVs, and the UAV has a higher
UAVs can execute multiple tasks sequentially, and the path
probability of winning valid tasks as the individual reward
µ contains the ordered sequence of tasks assigned to U . The
i i
gain is less than the existing winner. Hence, the UAVs bid for
SUT mitigation condition where each fire area is assigned to
only valid tasks, and the task with a minimum reward, J , is
a single UAV is given in (13) and the temporal constraints to i
added to the end position in the bundle. The task is added to
quenchthefirewithasingleUAVisgivenin(14).Thebinary
the position in the path, η , which gives the minimum total
decision variable, x
ij
= 1 ∀j ∈ µ
i
and 0 otherwise, is given i,Ji
score for the UAV. The winner bids and winners are updated
in (15). The partial observability condition, where the fires
according to tasks added to the path.
get assigned to UAVs only if it is observable to the UAVs, is
The REDS tackles a minimization problem, where the task
added as (16).
with the lowest reward will be greedily added to the bundles
The cost function, C , is a path-dependent reward for the
ij
and paths of UAVs iteratively. The goal is to achieve a
executionofthetask,F byU .Inthiswork,C iscomputed
j i ij
minimum score for tasks added to the path while determining
using both DPMC and baseline cost to analyze the effect of
a feasible path. In baseline cost, UAVs prioritize tasks with
both cost functions. The sequential assignment of spatially
shorter completion times i.e., near smaller fires from the
located growing tasks with temporal constraints and dynamic
detected list are initially added to the bundle. However, larger
processingtimespresentssignificantcomputationalchallenges
tasks with higher bids tend to be added as the last tasks,
in finding optimal solutions. Traditional optimization methods
potentiallyresultingininfeasiblepathsandinfinitecosts.This
applied to (12) for wildfire task assignment in partially ob-
tendency may eventually lead to the exclusion of large fires
servable environments face computational complexity due to
from the paths.
the NP-complete nature of the problem. The spatiotemporal
The REDS prioritizes the addition of tasks with closer
assignmentoftasksforUAVsinwildfiremanagementinvolves
deadlines in the path. The large fires with earlier deadlines
complex dependencies [9], where the mission’s success relies
will have smaller bids with DPMC and are greedily added
heavily on the coordinated actions and schedules of the UAV
as the first tasks to bundles, while tasks with later deadlines
team. Given the tight coupling between individual tasks and
are included in subsequent iterations. This strategic approach
overallpathplanning,sophisticatedcoordinationstrategiesare
ensures the addition of distant larger fires in the path while
essential to optimize resource allocation and achieve effective
allowing near smaller fires to be suboptimally placed in the
firemitigation.TheproposedCREDSaddressesthiscomplex-
pathsofotherUAVs,ensuringthegenerationoffeasiblepaths.
ity by employing a decentralized auction-based approach.
The larger fires are not prioritized as the first task in the path
unlesstheirdeadlineisimminent,renderingtheminfeasibleif
D. Resource Efficient Decentralized Sequential Planner
there are any preceding tasks. The addition of larger fires at
The Resource Efficient Decentralized Sequential planner the beginning of the path impacts the start time of subsequent
uses an auction-based algorithm for the spatiotemporal SUT tasks,leadingtoanincreaseinstarttimecostsandreducingthe8
Algorithm 1: Algorithm of REDS Algorithm 2: Conflict-Aware Consensus Algorithm
while non-converging do while non-converging do
for i=1 to n do for i=1 to n do
A A
Initialize with m UAVs with D Initialize
i
Initialize b i(λ)=b i(λ−1),µ i(λ)=µ i(λ−1),y i(λ)=
b i(λ)=b i(λ−1),µ i(λ)=µ i(λ−1),y i(λ)= y i(λ−1),z i(λ)=z i(λ−1),T =1
y (λ−1),z (λ)=z (λ−1) REDS Algorithm
i i i
if D i ̸=∅ then if g ik =1 then
C =min Sµi⊕η{j}−Sµi∀j ∈ for j =1 to n f do
ij n≤|µi| i i if z (λ)=k then
D \b (λ) kj
i i
h =I(C <y (λ)) if z ij(λ)=k then
ij ij ij Update
J =argmin C .h
i j ij ij
η =argmin Sµi⊕η{j} else if z ij(λ)=0 then
i,Ji j i Update
b (λ)=b (λ)⊕ J
i i end i
else if y (λ)<y (λ) then
µ (λ)=µ (λ)⊕ J kj ij
i i ηi,Ji i Update
y (λ)=C
i,Ji i,Ji
z (λ)=i else if z (λ)=i then
i,Ji kj
else if z (λ)=k then
ij
Oxyhhris Marina Inspired Search Reset
Conflict-Aware Consensus Algorithm (Call else if z (λ)∈/ {i,k} then
kj
Algorithm 2) if z (λ)=k then
ij
Reset
else if z (λ)=0 then
kj
if z (λ)=k then
slotsforfeasibletasksinthepath.Additionally,theprolonged ij
Update
quenchtimeforthelargefiremayallowsmallertaskstogrow
into infeasible ones before the start of mitigation efforts. This
explains the significance of simultaneously minimizing the if z (λ)=z (λ) ∀ i,k for w iterations then
i k 1
product of temporal deadline cost and start time cost within Algorithm converges
the DPMC. else
The balance between minimizing temporal deadline costs Continue w iterations- deadlock removal phase
2
and start time costs is crucial for devising effective paths
Select assignment with minimum infeasible tasks
that adhere to deadlines while minimizing associated start
Update:y =y ,z =z
time costs. For both baseline cost and DPMC, the newly ij kj ij kj
added tasks in the path may become infeasible if τs ≥ τd, Reset:y ij =∞,z ij =0
ij ij
making the local reward of the UAVs ∞. The auction-based
REDS plays a crucial role in adding newly introduced tasks
to positions on the path where tasks will be mitigated before
task become invalid as the local reward is path-dependent.
the deadline time while generating a minimum finite local
Therefore, the UAVs must discard all the tasks added after
reward for UAVs. However, the DPMC demonstrates a higher
the unassigned task, and a conflict-resolved path is computed.
likelihood of obtaining feasible paths by prioritizing larger ThestoredvectorsintheUAVs,b ,µ ,y ,andz ,areupdated
i i i i
fires,therebyenablingthestrategicintegrationofsmallerfires
depending on the discarded tasks.
into the paths of UAVs.
The conflict-aware consensus algorithm provides conflict
resolution and global path generation, minimizing global re-
E. Conflict-Aware Consensus Algorithm wards in (12) by assigning conflict tasks to the UAV having
ThelocalpathgeneratedforUAVsusingREDS,maynotbe minimum individual rewards. The UAV recomputes the local
conflict-freeaseachUAVgreedilyaddstaskstoitslocalpath. rewards for the observed tasks that are not in the trajectory
The UAVs share the information based on the communication from its new initial position, and the process is repeated until
network, and the UAVs communicate their winner bids, y , the algorithm finally converges to a conflict-free global path.
i
and winners list, z , with other UAVs synchronously. The The consensus algorithm converges when the conflict-free
i
consensus rules are employed for conflict resolution among global path remains unchanged for future iterations. In this
the UAVs during each iteration, where the conflict tasks work, if the task winners remain the same for w 1 iterations,
are assigned to UAVs with a minimum bid (local reward), the algorithm is assumed to be converged.
and winning data gets updated in each UAV. The consensus The non-stationary nature of the problem, together with the
rules are summarized in Algorithm 2. After consensus, UAVs heterogeneous deadlines and UAVs, may lead to a deadlock
may lose some tasks in their local path, and the tasks get condition where the assignment toggles at each iteration,
unassigned.Thetasksaddedinthebundleaftertheunassigned leading to non-convergence for certain cases. The deadlock9
conditionarisesinthebaselinecostfunctionduetothehigher TABLEI
costs associated with critical large fires. Consequently, these SUCCESSRATECOMPARISONOFCREDSWITHBASELINE
criticallargefiresmighteitherbeassignedtoUAVsasthefinal
SuccessRate(%)
Typeof
task added to the path or excluded from the path, making it
Agents
nt Homogeneous Heterogeneous
infeasible and thereby increasing the occurrence of deadlock Baseline CREDS Baseline CREDS
15 100 100 96 100
scenarios. In such cases, a deadlock removal mechanism is
FO 20 93 100 89 100
employedwheretheconsensusalgorithmisrunfurtherforw 2 25 78 91 75 96
iterations, and the solution having minimum infeasible tasks 15 100 100 100 100
PO 20 100 100 100 100
is selected to declare the winners and the winning bids.
25 66 71 67 84
V. RESULTSANDDISCUSSION
is evaluated. Ablation studies are conducted to examine the
The performance of CREDS is evaluated for homogeneous
impactofhomogeneousteamsandfullyobservableconditions.
and heterogeneous teams of UAVs operating in both fully and
Heterogeneous teams have varying speed and quench capabil-
partially observable cases for dynamic numbers and sizes of
ities, while homogeneous teams exhibit identical quench and
fires. In instances where no fire locations are detected within
speed capabilities, maintained at the average of the quench
the sensing range, the UAVs employ the OMS method for
area rate and velocity of the heterogeneous team for equitable
searchingfireareas.Inthisstudy,differentUAVsareassumed
comparisons. The box plots of performance indices and suc-
to fly at different altitudes. The fire areas possess a circular
cess rates for different numbers of fires for all analyzed cases
profile and exhibit initial area heterogeneity. The performance
are presented in Fig. 3, Fig. 4 and Table I, respectively. The
ofCREDSiscomparedwiththebaselinecost.Thesimulations
details of mean values of performance indices are provided in
areconductedintheMATLABR2022benvironment,utilizing
the supplementary material.
an Intel Core-i7, 3.2−GHz processor, and 16−GB memory.
1) Homogeneous Team: The performance of a homoge-
The simulation results for a typical scenario to explain the
neous team of UAVs with speed, 20m/s, and the quench area
working of the CREDS for wildfire management are provided
rate, 20m2/s, is assessed. The variation performance indices
in supplementary material. A detailed Monte Carlo study is
obtainedfromMonte-Carloanalysisarepresentedasboxplots
presented next to evaluate the performance of the CREDS
in Fig. 3 for homogeneous UAVs with full observability
under different scenarios.
(Homo-FO) and partial observability (Homo-PO) for both
baseline and CREDS. The performance indices in Fig. 3
A. Monte-Carlo Analysis
include the cases of failure missions for which the value of
A Monte Carlo analysis is conducted to assess the aver- performance indices are computed as a very high value.
age performance of the CREDS under dynamic conditions The Homo-FO and Homo-PO results indicate that CREDS
encountered in wildfire management. A team of five UAVs significantly outperforms the baseline approach with a 100%
operatinginasearchareaofsize,1km×1kmtosearchand mission success rate for a fire-to-UAV ratio up to 4. When
quench varying numbers of fires is considered. The initiation mitigating25firesunderFO,CREDSachievesa91%success
of the search and detection process occurs randomly from rate compared to only 78% for the baseline. In the Homo-PO
different locations within the considered search area, with case, as the UAVs are unaware of all the fires, the assignment
UAVsdetectingfirelocationswithinthe300msensingradius. will be less efficient with more failures than Homo-FO. The
Casesinvolving15,20,and25fireslocatedinthesearcharea, values of performance indices will reflect the search time to
with initial radii randomly selected between 5 to 15 m, are detecttargets,whichdependsontheeffectivenessofthesearch
studied. A Monte-Carlo analysis, comprising 100 iterations method. The stochastic search approaches are beneficial in
for each case study, assesses the average performance of the detecting unknown targets in uncertain environments, while
CREDS across randomly initialized fire radii and UAV initial the search time associated with stochastic search methods is
locations for fixed fire center coordinates. not constant. Also, the paths generated may not effectively
The performance indices used to evaluate the Monte-Carlo reduce the global reward due to the absence of complete
simulation are the success rate, mean completion time, mean situational awareness. The performance of CREDS is better
quench time, and mean Fire Expansion Ratio (FER). The with a 71% success rate compared to baseline with a 66%
percentage of successful simulations among the total number success rate for 25 fires. The performance of the baseline is
of simulations is the success rate. The mean completion time slightly better than the FO case for 20 fires as the deadlock
is the average value of time required to detect and completely conditions are prominent with full observability due to the
quench all the fires in the search area. The mean quench time large number of observed fires. The boxplot of performance
is the average of the total quench time required to quench the indices of FO baseline cases has many outliers compared to
fires in the search area. The FER is the ratio of the change in other cases.
the area of fire after the start of the mission to the initial area 2) HeterogeneousTeam: TheperformanceoftheCREDSis
of fire at the start of the mission. The mean FER accounts for assessedforaheterogeneousteamwith2UAVshavinghigher
the additional destroyed area after the start of the mission [8]. quench and speed capabilities and the remaining with low
The Monte-Carlo analysis for different numbers of fires us- speed and quench rates. The average speed and quench rate
ing a heterogeneous team of UAVs under partial observability of the heterogeneous team are set to match the homogeneous10
15 300 300 200 200 600
150 150
10 200 200 400
100 100
5 100 100 200
50 50
0 0 0 0 0 0
15 20 25 15 20 25
Number of fires Number of fires Number of fires Number of fires Number of fires Number of fires
30 800 800 1000 2500
1000
25 600 600 800 2000 800
20 600 1500
400 600 400
15 400 1000
400
10 200 200 200 200 500
5 15 0 20 0 25 0 15 0 20 0 25
Number of fires Number of fires Number of fires
Number of fires Number of fires Number of fires
8
2 6 6 10
10
5 6 8
4
1.5 4 4 6
5
4
1 2 3 2
2
2
0 0 0
0.5 0 15 20 25
15 20 25
Number of fires Number of fires Number of fires
Number of fires Number of fires Number of fires
Hetero-FO Baseline Hetero-FO CREDS Hetero-PO Baseline Hetero-PO CREDS
Homo-FO Baseline Homo-FO CREDS Homo-PO Baseline Homo-PO CREDS
Fig.4. Boxplotofdifferentperformanceindicesforheterogeneousteam
Fig.3. Boxplotofdifferentperformanceindicesforhomogeneousteam
team for a fair comparison. The higher value of speed and and an 84% success rate for 25 fires. The success rate is
quench rate are chosen as 26, and the lower value as 16. reduced compared to the Hetero-FO case, but the other per-
ThevariationperformanceindicesobtainedfromMonte-Carlo formance indices have lower values due to the lower number
analysis are presented as boxplots in Fig. 4 for heterogeneous ofobservations,numberoftaskspushedtodeadlinesbecomes
UAVs. lesscomparedtotheHetero-FOcase.Thepartialobservability
TheCREDSperformsbetterwithasuccessrateof96%for makes it harder for CREDS to optimize the paths as the
25 fires and a 100% success rate up to 20 fires for Hetero- number of fires increases. With more fires, the trend reverses,
FO.TheperformanceimprovescomparedtotheHomo-FOfor reflecting an increase in mean completion time, quench time,
CREDSintermsofsuccessratebutotherperformanceindices and FER compared to Hetero-FO. This highlights that the
are higher than the homogeneous case. Heterogeneous cases challenges of partial observability become more critical when
have UAVs with high and low quench capabilities handling dealingwithlargerwildfirescenarios.Thebaselinehassimilar
heterogeneous deadlines. The deadline time is a function of
performanceupto20firesanddeterioratesconsiderablyinthe
the quench rate, spread rate, and initial area of the fire. The
caseof25fires.TheCREDSimprovesthesuccessrateby21%
UAVs with high quench capability increase the deadline time for Hetero-FO and 17% for Hetero-PO compared to baseline.
for a given spread rate and fire area. The high-speed, high 3) Scalability: The percentage failure for different fire-to-
quench rate UAVs have later deadlines and can mitigate fire UAV ratios is plotted in Fig. 5 with different quench rates
areasgrownintolargerareas,increasingfeasibleassignments. and velocities of a homogeneous team. The effect of quench
The algorithm will push the task start times closer to their rate variation with a constant velocity of 20 m/s is shown
deadline times to generate feasible paths with more tasks. in Fig. 5a and the effect of velocity variation with a constant
Thus heterogeneous cases possess the higher advantage of quenchrateof20m2/sisshownin5b.Theincreaseinquench
scheduling larger fires in the path compared to homogenous rate improves the success rates considerably for higher fire-
cases. The Hetero-FO baseline case performs worse than the to-UAV ratios. The percentage of failures steadily increases
Homo-FO and Homo-PO cases, with increased failures for 15 beyond the threshold ratio corresponding to each quench rate.
and 20 fires. The major reason for the degradation of baseline However, the increase in the success rates for higher fire-to-
performanceistheincreasedprobabilityofexclusionoflarger UAV ratios with the increase in velocity is less. Thus for a
fires with higher observations. Also, the number of deadlock given wildfire management scenario with specified fire spread
scenarios increases with heterogeneous teams compared to rate, the quench rate plays a critical role compared to the
homogeneous teams. velocity. Thus, the quench rate, velocity and number of UAVs
The Hetero-PO results demonstrate a significant advantage should be carefully chosen to build a heterogeneous team to
for CREDS, achieving a 100% success rate for up to 20 fires achieve a successful mission for scalable wildfire scenarios.
)nim(
emiT
noitelpmoC
)nim(
emiT
hcneuQ
latoT
REF
)nim(
emiT
noitelpmoC
)nim(
emiT
hcneuQ
latoT
REF
)nim(
emiT
hcneuQ
latoT
)nim(
emiT
noitelpmoC
REF
)nim(
emiT
noitelpmoC
)nim(
emiT
hcneuQ
latoT
REF
)nim(
emiT
hcneuQ
latoT
)nim(
emiT
noitelpmoC
REF
)nim(
emiT
hcneuQ
latoT
)nim(
emiT
noitelpmoC
REF11
100 100 VI. CONCLUSIONS
q=15 v=15
80 q q= =2 20
5
80 v v= =2 20 5 This paper presents Conflict-aware Resource-Efficient De-
60 60 centralized Sequential planner for early wildfire mitigation
using multiple heterogeneous UAVs. CREDS addresses the
40 40
challenges posed by non-stationary wildfire scenarios with
20 20 dynamically spreading fires, potential pop-up fires, and par-
0 0 tial observability due to limited UAV numbers and sensing
0 2 4 6 8 10 0 2 4 6 8 10
Fire to UAV ratio Fire to UAV ratio range. CREDS focuses on timely detection and sequential
(a) (b)
mitigation of growing fires as SUTs, thereby preventing the
Fig.5. PercentageoffailurevsfiretoUAVratio(a)Variationofquenchrate escalation of fires into MUTs and minimizing overall loss
forconstantvelocity.(b)Variationofvelocityforconstantquenchrate.
of biodiversity with efficient resource utilization. CREDS
reformulatesresource-limitedwildfiremanagementasadecen-
tralized sequential spatiotemporal task assignment for grow-
TABLEII ing tasks. The CREDS employs a three-phased framework,
CONVERGENCERATEANDAVERAGENUMBEROFITERATIONSFOR including OMS for the search phase, REDS for local trajec-
CONVERGENCE
tory generation, and conflict-aware consensus algorithm for
Homogeneous Heterogeneous global trajectory generation. A novel non-stationary deadline-
nt Baseline CREDS Baseline CREDS
prioritized mitigation cost is proposed to efficiently prioritize
CR(%) Iavg CR(%) Iavg CR(%) Iavg CR(%) Iavg
taskswithheterogeneousdeadlinestoachievehighsuccessand
15 99 9.02 100 7.36 94 10.07 100 7.36
20 91 10.90 100 8.89 87 11.77 100 8.95 convergence rates. The performance of CREDS is evaluated
25 83 12.75 100 10.33 78 13.65 100 10.80 using Monte-Carlo analysis for partial and full observability
conditions with both heterogeneous and homogeneous UAV
teams for different fires-to-UAV ratios. CREDS demonstrates
superior performance in Monte-Carlo analysis compared to
4) Convergence: Inwildfiremanagement,thecostfunction the baseline approach. In critical scenarios with the fire-to-
exhibits non-stationary behavior, leading to deadlock condi- UAV ratio of 5, CREDS achieves a 17% higher success rate
tions. The conflict-free assignment toggles at each iteration, for partially observable heterogeneous teams compared to the
preventingalgorithmconvergence.Thisdeadlockphenomenon baseline. Moreover, the heterogeneous team obtains a 13%
is particularly pronounced in baseline cases, prompting the higher success rate than homogeneous teams. CREDS further
introduction of a deadlock removal mechanism in the consen- demonstrates efficiency with full observability case, attaining
sus algorithm to finalize assignments. The deadlock removal a 21% improvement in success rate with 100% convergence
mechanismenhancesthesuccessrateofthebaselinebyselect- in 26.3% fewer iterations. CREDS exhibits high success
ing assignments with the least infeasible tasks. Convergence rates, robustness against deadlock scenarios, and scalability
rates (CR) for both baseline and CREDS are analyzed under in resource-limited environments, making it suitable for real-
full observability conditions, with results shown in Table II. world applications with growing costs and time constraints.
Baseline cases often fail to achieve convergence even with
a smaller number of fires, and non-convergence or deadlock
REFERENCES
scenarios are increased in heterogeneous baseline scenarios.
[1] M.A.Akhloufi,A.Couturier,andN.A.Castro,“Unmannedaerialvehi-
The comparison of the average number of iterations (I ) clesforwildlandfires:Sensing,perception,cooperationandassistance,”
avg
required for convergence is also provided in Table II for each Drones,vol.5,no.1,p.15,Feb.2021.
[2] C.Yuan,Y.Zhang,andZ.Liu,“Asurveyontechnologiesforautomatic
case. The CREDS with DPMC is more efficient and robust to
forest fire monitoring, detection, and fighting using unmanned aerial
achieve a 100% convergence with a lesser number of average vehiclesandremotesensingtechniques,”Can.J.For.Res.,vol.45,no.7,
iterations for all the case studies without deadlock removal pp.783–792,Mar.2015.
[3] M. Sarkar, X. Yan, B. A. Erol, I. Raptis, and A. Homaifar, “A novel
assistance. The maximum limit of iterations is fixed at 3m
search and survey technique for unmanned aerial systems in detecting
for the simulation studies where m is the number of UAVs. andestimatingtheareaforwildfires,”Robot.Auton.Syst.,vol.145,no.
The increase in the maximum limit beyond 3m exhibited 2021,p.103848,Aug.2021.
[4] P.Sujit,D.Kingston,andR.Beard,“Cooperativeforestfiremonitoring
negligibleimpactonthesuccessrateandconvergencebehavior
usingmultipleUAVs,”inProc.46thIEEEConf.Decis.Control,,2007,
of the baseline cases. The baseline approach consistently pp.4875–4880.
required at least 20% more iterations compared to CREDS, [5] H.X.Pham,H.M.La,D.Feil-Seifer,andM.C.Deans,“Adistributed
control framework of multiple unmanned aerial vehicles for dynamic
resultinginsignificantlyhighercomputationaldemands.Inthe
wildfiretracking,”IEEETrans.Syst.,Man,Cybern.Syst.,vol.50,no.4,
25 fire scenario with a heterogeneous team, CREDS achieves pp.1537–1548,Apr.2020.
a 100% convergence rate with 26.3% fewer iterations, while [6] M. Kumar, K. Cohen, and B. HomChaudhuri, “Cooperative control
of multiple uninhabited aerial vehicles for monitoring and fighting
thebaselineapproachexhibitslowerconvergenceat78%,with
wildfires,” J. Aerosp. Comput. Inf. Commun., vol. 8, no. 1, pp. 1–16,
deadlocks occurring in 22% of Monte-Carlo simulations. This Jan.2011.
translatestoasignificantreductionincomputationtime,mak- [7] K. Harikumar, J. Senthilnath, and S. Suresh, “Multi-UAV oxyrrhis
marina-inspired search and dynamic formation control for forest fire-
ing CREDS a more scalable solution for real-world wildfire
fighting,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., vol. 16, no. 2, pp. 863–873,
managementscenarioswheretimelyinterventionisimportant. Apr.2019.
eruliaf
fo
egatnecreP
eruliaf
fo
egatnecreP12
[8] J. John, K. Harikumar, J. Senthilnath, and S. Sundaram, “An efficient of automated guided vehicles for just-in-time delivery,” IEEE Trans.
approach with dynamic multiswarm of UAVs for forest firefighting,” Autom.Sci.Eng.,vol.20,no.3,pp.2099–2114,Jul.2023.
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Syst., vol. 54, no. 5, pp. 2860–2871, [25] Z. Pei, T. Fang, K. Weng, and W. Yi, “Urban on-demand delivery via
May2024. autonomous aerial mobility: Formulation and exact algorithm,” IEEE
[9] G.A.Korsah,A.Stentz,andM.B.Dias,“Acomprehensivetaxonomy Trans.Autom.Sci.Eng.,vol.20,no.3,pp.1675–1689,Jul.2023.
formulti-robottaskallocation,”Int.J.Robot.Res.,vol.32,no.12,pp. [26] A.Khamis,A.Hussein,andA.Elmogy,”Multi-robotTaskAllocation:
1495–1512,Oct.2013. A Review of the State-of-the-Art”. Cham: Springer International
[10] C. P. Pappis and N. P. Rachaniotis, “Scheduling in a multi-processor Publishing,2015,pp.31–51.
environment with deteriorating job processing times and decreasing [27] H.W.Kuhn,“Thehungarianmethodfortheassignmentproblem,”Nav.
values: the case of forest fires,” J. Heuristics, vol. 16, pp. 617–632, Res.Logist.Quart.,vol.2,no.1-2,pp.83–97,Mar.1955.
Aug.2010. [28] G.M.Skaltsis,H.-S.Shin,andA.Tsourdos,“Areviewoftaskallocation
[11] G. Tian, Y. Ren, and M. Zhou, “Dual-objective scheduling of rescue methodsforuavs,”J.Intell.Robot.Syst.,vol.109,no.76,pp.1–24,Nov.
vehiclestodistinguishforestfiresviadifferentialevolutionandparticle 2023.
swarm optimization combined algorithm,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. [29] H.-L. Choi, L. Brunet, and J. P. How, “Consensus-based decentralized
Syst.,vol.17,no.11,pp.3009–3021,Nov.2016. auctionsforrobusttaskallocation,”IEEETrans.Robot.,vol.25,no.4,
[12] J. Parker, A. Farinelli, and M. Gini, “Lazy max-sum for allocation of pp.912–926,Aug.2009.
taskswithgrowingcosts,”Robot.Auton.Syst.,vol.110,pp.44–56,Dec. [30] R. Patel, E. Rudnick-Cohen, S. Azarm, M. Otte, H. Xu, and J. W.
2018. Herrmann,“Decentralizedtaskallocationinmulti-agentsystemsusing
[13] J. Chen, Y. Guo, Z. Qiu, B. Xin, Q.-S. Jia, and W. Gui, “Multiagent a decentralized genetic algorithm,” in Proc. IEEE Int. Conf. Robot.
dynamictaskassignmentbasedonforestfirepointmodel,”IEEETrans. Automat.,2020,pp.3770–3776.
Autom.Sci.Eng.,vol.19,no.2,pp.833–849,Apr.2022. [31] S. Hunt, Q. Meng, C. Hinde, and T. Huang, “A consensus-based
[14] G. Gao, Y. Mei, B. Xin, Y.-H. Jia, and W. N. Browne, “Automated grouping algorithm for multi-agent cooperative task allocation with
coordination strategy design using genetic programming for dynamic complexrequirements,”Cogn.Comput.,vol.6,no.3,pp.338–350,Apr.
multipointdynamicaggregation,”IEEETrans.Cybern.,vol.52,no.12, 2014.
pp.13521–13535,Dec.2022. [32] S.Wang,Y.Liu,Y.Qiu,andJ.Zhou,“Consensus-baseddecentralized
[15] L.Liu,X.Wang,X.Yang,H.Liu,J.Li,andP.Wang,“Pathplanning task allocation for multi-agent systems and simultaneous multi-agent
techniquesformobilerobots:Reviewandprospect,”ExpertSyst.Appl., tasks,” IEEE Robot. Automat. Lett., vol. 7, no. 4, pp. 12593–12600,
p.120254,Oct.2023. Oct.2022.
[16] P.SujitandR.Beard,“Distributedsequentialauctionsformultipleuav [33] S. Velhal, B. R. Srikrishna, M. Bharatheesha, and S. Sundaram,
taskallocation,”in2007Amer.ControlConf.,2007,pp.3955–3960. “A dynamic heterogeneous team-based non-iterative approach for
[17] Y. Jin, Y. Liao, A. Minai, and M. Polycarpou, “Balancing search and online pick-up and just-in-time delivery problems,” arXiv preprint
target response in cooperative unmanned aerial vehicle (uav) teams,” arXiv:2304.07124,2023.
IEEE Trans. Syst., Man, Cybern. Part B (Cybern.), vol. 36, no. 3, pp. [34] S.Velhal,S.Sundaram,andN.Sundararajan,“Dynamicresourceallo-
571–587,Jun.2006. cationwithdecentralizedmulti-taskassignmentapproachforperimeter
[18] W. Zhao, Q. Meng, and P. W. H. Chung, “A heuristic distributed task defense problem,” IEEE Trans. Aerosp. Electron. Syst., vol. 58, no. 4,
allocationmethodformultivehiclemultitaskproblemsanditsapplication pp.3313–3325,Aug.2022.
tosearchandrescuescenario,”IEEETrans.Cybern.,vol.46,no.4,pp. [35] L. Luo, N. Chakraborty, and K. Sycara, “Distributed algorithms for
902–915,Apr.2016. multirobottaskassignmentwithtaskdeadlineconstraints,”IEEETrans.
[19] S. Velhal, S. Sundaram, and N. Sundararajan, “A decentralized mul- Autom.Sci.Eng.,vol.12,no.3,pp.876–888,Jul.2015.
tirobot spatiotemporal multitask assignment approach for perimeter [36] J. Turner, Q. Meng, G. Schaefer, A. Whitbrook, and A. Soltoggio,
defense,”IEEETrans.Robot.,vol.38,no.5,pp.3085–3096,Oct.2022. “Distributedtaskreschedulingwithtimeconstraintsfortheoptimization
[20] J. Ahn and H.-J. Kim, “A branch and bound algorithm for scheduling oftotaltaskallocationsinamultirobotsystem,”IEEETrans.Cybern.,
of flexible manufacturing systems,” IEEE Trans. Autom. Sci. Eng., pp. vol.48,no.9,pp.2583–2597,Sep.2018.
1–15,2023. [37] A.Whitbrook,Q.Meng,andP.W.Chung,“Anoveldistributedschedul-
[21] K.Dorling,J.Heinrichs,G.G.Messier,andS.Magierowski,“Vehicle ingalgorithmfortime-criticalmulti-agentsystems,”inProc.IEEE/RSJ
routingproblemsfordronedelivery,”IEEETrans.Syst.,Man,Cybern., Int.Conf.Intell.RobotsSyst.,2015,pp.6451–6458.
vol.47,no.1,pp.70–85,Jan.2017. [38] S. Wang, Y. Liu, Y. Qiu, S. Li, and J. Zhou, “An efficient distributed
[22] X.Bai,M.Cao,W.Yan,andS.S.Ge,“Efficientroutingforprecedence- task allocation method for maximizing task allocations of multirobot
constrainedpackagedeliveryforheterogeneousvehicles,”IEEETrans. systems,”IEEETrans.Autom.Sci.Eng.,2023.
Autom.Sci.Eng.,vol.17,no.1,pp.248–260,Jan.2020. [39] V.Pillac,C.Gueret,andA.L.Medaglia,“Aparallelmatheuristicforthe
[23] M. Sajid, H. Mittal, S. Pare, and M. Prasad, “Routing and scheduling technicianroutingandschedulingproblem,”Optim.Lett.,vol.7,no.7,
optimizationforuavassisteddeliverysystem:Ahybridapproach,”Appl. pp.1525–1535,Oct.2013.
SoftComput.,vol.126,p.109225,Sep.2022. [40] F. Afrati, S. Cosmadakis, C. H. Papadimitriou, G. Papageorgiou, and
[24] K.NishidaandT.Nishi,“Dynamicoptimizationofconflict-freerouting N.Papakostantinou,“Thecomplexityofthetravellingrepairmanprob-
lem,”RAIRO-Theor.Inform.Appl.,vol.20,no.1,pp.79–87,Jan.1986.1
SUPPLEMENTARYMATERIAL and U
2
wins f
4
during conflict resolution. The UAVs move to
the fire location and quench the fire by spraying water along
A. Working of CREDS
thefirefront.Afterfinishingtheassignedtasks,theUAVsmove
AfirefightingscenariowithsixfirelocationsandtwoUAVs to the next task in the path. The UAVs replan their path if
is considered as a demonstrative case to explain the working there is any new observation in their detected task list. The
of CREDS. The center coordinates of the six fire locations different time frames of UAVs following the generated path
are (100,400) m, (200,600) m, (300,400) m, (480,480) m, for fire mitigation are shown in Fig. 6a- 6f. The U 2 employs
(600,700) m, (800,200) m. The initial fire radii are 5 m, OMSsearchafterthemitigationoff 4 astherearenodetected
50 m, 15 m, 15 m, 10 m, and 5 m respectively. Let the fires. The OMS helps in the exploration and exploitation of
initial positions of two UAVs be (200,385) m and (700,610) the search space, and Fig. 6g shows the detection of f 6 by U 2
m. The U 1 has higher speed and quench capabilities than before the deadline time. After the mitigation of f 1 and f 6,
U 2. The UAVs have partial observability and sense the tasks both UAVs U 1 and U 2 have zero fire detections, and Fig. 6h
located within their sensing radius of 300 m. The different showsUAVsemployingOMSfordetectingpossiblefireareas.
steps associated with the working of CREDS are shown in The scenario is also analyzed for a full observability scenario
Fig. 6. The UAV, U , can observe fires, f , f , f , and f where all the fires are observable to all UAVs. The feasible
1 1 2 3 4
and UAV, U 2, can observe fires f 4 and f 5 as shown in Fig. paths generated using CREDS with DPMC is µ 1 = [1,3,2]
6a. The UAVs compute their bids for all observed tasks from and µ 2 =[5,6,4].
their initial position and identify their valid tasks. A task is The same scenario is analyzed with baseline cost, and the
valid for a UAV if its bid is smaller than the known winning path generated was [1,3,4] and [5,6] for partial observability.
bidvalue.Thetaskhavingthesmallestbidfromthevalidtask Thebaselinefailstogenerateafeasiblepathduetotheexclu-
listgetsaddedtothebundlesandpathsofUAVs.Thetasksare sion f 2. The baseline adds tasks with the smallest completion
addedtothe locationofthepathto obtaintheminimumscore time,andf 2 isnotaddedtothebundleintheinitialiterations.
improvement. The bundle generated using DPMC for the U The baseline fails to generate a feasible path for this scenario,
1
andU fromtheirinitialpositionis[2,1,3]and[5,4]andtheir evenforthefullobservabilityscenario.Thepathgeneratedfor
2
correspondingpathsare[1,3,2]and[5,4].Thelargestfirewith full observability scenario is [1,3,6] and [5,4].
an earlier deadline gets added to the bundle of U first, and
1
B. Monte-Carlo Analysis- Mean Performance Indices
tasks are strategically positioned to achieve a feasible path.
The bid, C becomes ∞ as f is infeasible due to the large The mean value of performance indices for CREDS and
14 4
fireareainthepath.Thebid,C ofU forf isthelowestbid baseline for homogeneous and heterogeneous teams are tab-
24 2 4
1200 1200 1200 1200
1000 1000 1000 1000
800 800 800 800 f f f f
f 5 f 5 f 5 f 5
600 2 f U 600 2 f U 2 600 2 f U 2 600 2 f U 2
400 f 1 f 3 4 2 400 f 1 f 3 4 400 f 1 f 3 4 400 f 1 f 3 4
200 U 1 f 6 200 U 1 f 6 200 U 1 f 6 200 U 1 f 6
0 0 0 0
-200 -200 -200 -200
0 500 1000 0 500 1000 0 500 1000 0 500 1000
X - Position (m) X - Position (m) X - Position (m) X - Position (m)
(a) (b) (c) (d)
1200 1200 1200 1200
1000 1000 1000 1000
800 800 800 800 f f f f
f 5 f 5 f 5 5
600 2 600 2 600 2 600 f 2
400 f 1 f U3 f U4 2 400 f 1 U f1 3 Uf 4 2 400 f 1 U 1 f 3 f 4 400 f 1 U 1 f 3 f 4 U 2
200 1 f 6 200 f 6 200 f 6 200 f 6
U
2
0 0 0 0
-200 -200 -200 -200
0 500 1000 0 500 1000 0 500 1000 0 500 1000
X - Position (m) X - Position (m) X - Position (m) X - Position (m)
(e) (f) (g) (h)
Fig. 6. Working of CREDS: (a) Initial positions of UAVs and fire locations (b) UAV, U1 is assigned for fire, f1, (c) UAV, U2 is assigned for fire, f5 (d)
Afterquenchingf1,U1 movestof3 initspath,(e)U2 isassignedforfire,f4 (f)Afterquenchingf3,U1 movestothelargefireareaf1 initspath,(g)U2
withnoobservationsuseOMStosearchforfirelocationsandU2 sensesfiref5 (h)UAVsfinishtasksintheirpathandcontinuesearchingthemissionarea
fornewfires.
)m(
noitisoP
- Y
)m(
noitisoP
- Y
)m(
noitisoP
- Y
)m(
noitisoP
- Y
)m(
noitisoP
- Y
)m(
noitisoP
- Y
)m(
noitisoP
- Y
)m(
noitisoP
- Y2
TABLEIII
PERFORMANCECOMPARISONOFCREDSWITHBASELINECASEFORHOMOGENEOUSTEAM
Typeof Successrate(%) MeanCompletionTime(min) MeanTotalQuenchTime(min) MeanFER
Agents
nt
Baseline CREDS Baseline CREDS Baseline CREDS Baseline CREDS
15 100 100 4.29±1.32 4.55±1.23 11.24±3.07 11.64±2.76 0.75±0.13 0.79±0.10
FO 20 93 100 18.12∗ 10.67±6.18 46.02∗ 23.98±8.61 1.35∗ 1.32±0.22
25 78 91 51.96∗ 32.97∗ 153.00∗ 64.48∗ 2.26∗ 2.06∗
15 100 100 5.43±1.97 5.61±2.18 12.44±3.66 12.45±3.65 0.89±0.19 0.88±0.20
PO 20 100 100 9.80±4.17 11.20±7.27 23.13±7.45 24.46±9.63 1.36±0.25 1.37±0.26
25 66 71 60.79∗ 59.35∗ 101.90∗ 100.04∗ 2.21∗ 2.19∗
∗indicatesfailurecases
TABLEIV
PERFORMANCECOMPARISONOFCREDSWITHBASELINECASEFORHETEROGENEOUSTEAM
Typeof Successrate(%) MeanCompletionTime(min) MeanTotalQuenchTime(min) MeanFER
Agents
nt
Baseline CREDS Baseline CREDS Baseline CREDS Baseline CREDS
15 96 100 11.32∗ 10.39±8.54 27.44∗ 19.22±10.77 1.03∗ 0.95±0.17
FO 20 89 100 26.46∗ 16.87±8.64 82.71∗ 35.43±13.81 1.82∗ 1.40±0.20
25 75 96 76.17∗ 30.25∗ 233.15∗ 65.29∗ 2.95∗ 2.08∗
15 100 100 5.67±2.11 7.45±4.71 12.43±3.42 14.90±5.77 0.92±0.19 0.91±0.19
PO 20 100 100 10.42±4.77 12.95±7.00 23.73±7.87 28.04±10.64 1.49±0.32 1.45±0.33
25 67 84 76.10∗ 48.67∗ 125.14∗ 84.03∗ 2.77∗ 2.38∗
∗indicatesfailurecases
Fig.7. Barplotofmeanperformanceindices.
ulated in Table III and IV, respectively. The performance high-speed, high quench rate UAVs have later deadlines and
indices value with ∗ shown in Table III and IV indicates can mitigate fire areas grown into larger areas, increasing
the failure missions for which the values of performance feasible assignments. The UAVs with low quench capability
indicesarecomputedasaveryhighvalue.Theactualvalueof and low speed have smaller deadlines, but the quench time
performance indices for failure cases will be ∞ for a single with low-capacity UAVs will be higher, increasing the quench
UAV. In smaller fire scenarios, where both the baseline and and completion times. The heterogeneous team handles the
CREDSachievea100%successrate,CREDSexhibitsslightly heterogeneousdeadlinesmoreefficientlywithahighersuccess
higher mean completion time and mean total quench time rate compared to the homogeneous team. Even though the
compared to the baseline. The CREDS prioritizes tasks with completion time and quench time of CREDS are higher than
earlierdeadlinesandtendstoaccomplishtasksneardeadlines, the baseline for certain cases, CREDS has a lower or equal
increasingthemeanperformanceindicesvalue.Butforfailure mean FER for all heterogeneous cases, showing reduced loss
cases, the baseline has a higher mean completion time and of biodiversity compared to the baseline. The quench time
mean total quench time. increasesnon-linearlywiththefirearea,particularlywhenthe
area is close to the critical area. This phenomenon can lead
The mean performance indices of the heterogeneous team
to a scenario where the total quench time for multiple fires
are higher compared to the homogeneous case. The deadline
is significant, even if the total fire area is relatively modest.
time is a function of the quench rate, spread rate, and initial
Furthermore, low quench rate UAVs may also be assigned
area of the fire. Heterogeneous cases have teams of UAVs
to extinguish fires nearing criticality, resulting in extended
with higher and lower quench capabilities than homogeneous
quench times despite a potentially smaller overall fire area
teams. The UAVs with high quench capability increase the
increase along their designated path.
deadline time for a given spread rate and fire area. The