At the junction between deep learning and statistics of
extremes: formalizing the landslide hazard definition
Ashok Dahal1, Rapha¨el Huser2, Luigi Lombardo1
1UniversityofTwente,FacultyofGeo-InformationScienceandEarthObservation(ITC),POBox217,
Enschede,AE7500,Netherlands
2StatisticsProgram,Computer,ElectricalandMathematicalSciencesandEngineering(CEMSE)Division,
KingAbdullahUniversityofScienceandTechnology(KAUST),Thuwal23955-6900,SaudiArabia
Key Points:
• ALandslidehazardmodelisdevelopedbycombiningdeeplearningandtheextended
generalized Pareto distribution from extreme value theory.
• Thirty years of past observations are used to understand landslide hazard in Nepal.
• Landslidehazardispredictedformultiplereturnperiodsbasedonclimateprojections
up to the end of the century.
Corresponding author: Ashok Dahal, a.dahal@utwente.nl
–1–
4202
naJ
52
]GL.sc[
1v01241.1042:viXraAbstract
The most adopted definition of landslide hazard combines spatial information about land-
slide location (susceptibility), threat (intensity), and frequency (return period). Only the
firsttwoelementsareusuallyconsideredandestimatedwhenworkingovervastareas. Even
then, separate models constitute the standard, with frequency being rarely investigated.
Frequency and intensity are intertwined and depend on each other because larger events
occur less frequently and vice versa. However, due to the lack of multi-temporal invento-
ries and joint statistical models, modelling such properties via a unified hazard model has
always been challenging and has yet to be attempted. Here, we develop a unified model to
estimate landslide hazard at the slope unit level to address such gaps. We employed deep
learning,combinedwithamodelmotivatedbyextreme-valuetheorytoanalyseaninventory
of 30 years of observed rainfall-triggered landslides in Nepal and assess landslide hazard for
multiple return periods. We also use our model to further explore landslide hazard for the
same return periods under different climate change scenarios up to the end of the century.
Our results show that the proposed model performs excellently and can be used to model
landslide hazard in a unified manner. Geomorphologically, we find that under both climate
change scenarios (SSP245 and SSP885), landslide hazard is likely to increase up to two
times on average in the lower Himalayan regions while remaining the same in the middle
Himalayan region whilst decreasing slightly in the upper Himalayan region areas.
1 Introduction
Landslidesarenaturalprocessesthatcontributetotheevolutionofanygivenlandscape.
However, as our society has increasingly sprawled over time towards mountainous terrains,
their occurrence threatens lives and infrastructures (Petley, 2012; Ozturk et al., 2022). A
common approach to mitigate their adverse effects is to model their failure and, on this
basis, either plan appropriate mitigation actions or assign a different land use. The term
“model”,though,isabroadumbrellaencompassingdifferentapproaches. Toreconstructthe
complete landslide phenomenon, physically-based models are usually the appropriate tools,
as they can simulate landslide initiation, propagation, and runout (Mergili et al., 2020;
Pudasaini & Krautblatter, 2021). However, these tools are also highly data-demanding be-
causetheinitialconditionsoftherelevanthydro-mechanicalequations,suchasgeotechnical
parameters and triggering factors (e.g., heavy precipitation intensity or earthquake shak-
ing levels) vary in space and time and must be precisely inferred from data. This is why
the application of physically-based models has been confined to small areas, up to single
catchments and rarely beyond this level (van den Bout et al., 2021). Contrastingly, statis-
tical models have been used to estimate landslide-related information over broader areas.
However, the prediction target has historically differed from what physically-based models
have focused on. Specifically, out of the most accepted landslide definition—where, when
orhowfrequentlylandslidesmayoccur,alongwiththeirexpectedintensity(Guzzettietal.,
1999)— statistical models have almost exclusively addressed the “where” component. This
componentistraditionallyreferredtoasthelandslidesusceptibility(see,Reichenbachetal.,
2018). Asforthe“when”or“howfrequently”components,thescientificeffortshaveconsol-
idated into near-real-time or early-warning systems such as the Ground Failure module of
the USGS (Nowicki Jessee et al., 2018) for co-seismic landslides or the LHASA product of
NASA (Stanley et al., 2021) for rainfall-induced landslides. Finally, regarding the intensity
component(Corominasetal.,2014),thisistheelementthathashistoricallyhardlyreceived
any attention from the statistical perspective, with limited models tested for rockfalls (Lari
et al., 2014) and debris flows (Lombardo, Saia, et al., 2018; Lombardo, Opitz, & Huser,
2018, 2019).
Irrespectiveofthenumberandqualityoftheresearchcontextmentionedabove,hardly
anybodyhasjointlymodelledthethreecomponentsaltogetherorevenmodelledthosethree
componentswithinthesamegeneralframeworkexceptfortheseminalworkofGuzzettietal.
(2005). Recently,Aguileraetal.(2022)andBryceetal.(2022)linkedthespatialcomponent
–2–of the hazard definition to the expected size of a landslide. Furthermore, the landslide size,
whichisaproxyforthelandslideintensity,hasbeenjointlymodeledtogetherwithlandslide
counts or density per unit area by Yadav et al. (2023), but this approach still does not fully
comply with the landslide hazard definition. No database of other metrics such as velocity,
kinetic energy and impact force exists for landslides distributed over large areas. Despite
thismethodologicalprogress,thetemporaldimensionwasrarelyaccountedfor. Thisaspect
has been recently tackled by Lombardo et al. (2020), Dahal et al. (2022), and Fang et
al. (2024). In particular, Dahal et al. (2022) adopted a machine learning perspective and
implemented an Ensemble Neural Network (ENN) in their work. The ensemble performed
susceptibility and landslide area density estimation jointly over four years following the
Gorkha earthquake in Nepal. Their architecture relied on a regular partition of the Nepali
landscape, following the same 1 × 1 km2 data structure of the multi-temporal landslide
database mapped by Kincey et al. (2021). However, in a 1 km2, a landscape can host both
streamlines and ridges, making such a regular subdivision far from being representative of
theactuallandscapemorphology. Moreover,duetothenatureofthestatisticaldistribution
inconsiderationaswellasthelimitedtemporalobservationperiod, theirmodelhadlimited
capability in estimating the tail properties and in extrapolating in time.
In this work, we develop a novel formal framework to solve the landslide hazard mod-
elling problem on a regional scale by combining a model motivated by extreme-value the-
ory with deep learning, which facilitates the extraction of complex information from data.
Specifically, to model the landslide intensity, we use the extended Generalised Pareto Dis-
tribution(eGPD;PapastathopoulosandTawn(2013);Naveauetal.(2016)),whichrespects
the heavy-tailed nature of the landslide size (here, represented by the area density) dis-
tribution and has an appropriate tail behavior both in the lower and the upper tail, with
a smooth transition in between. Two main reasons for using such a statistical model in
our context are that (i) it naturally handles heavy-tailed data, while describing the full
data range (lower tail, bulk, upper tail) in a parsimonious way; and (ii) it can be used to
extrapolate further into the tail to estimate potentially high landslide intensities using a
mathematically-justified framework. Our work also extends the analyses over the 30-year
time window that Jones et al. (2021) have used to map landslides yearly, enabling one to
“see” much further into the past and, therefore, provide more reliable estimates. With the
fitted model, we further analyse the landslide hazard under two climate change scenarios:
the middle pathway (SSP245) and fossil-fueled development (SSP585) scenarios.
2 Study Area and Inventory
NepalisamountainouscountryoverlookedbypartoftheHimalayanbelt. Itselevation
rangesfrom60mto8848mwithinanaveragespanof130km. Asaresult,almost82%ofthe
country is classified as mountainous or hilly with gentle to extreme slopes, and its territory
is frequently affected by landslides due to earthquakes and extreme precipitation. For this
reason, slope instabilities in Nepal have been the focus of numerous research studies, also
stressing other relevant predisposing and causative factors such as unplanned construction
(Tiwari & Upadhyaya, 2014), road cuts (McAdoo et al., 2018), and irrigation (Gerrard &
Gardner, 2002).
Jones et al. (2021) produced a multitemporal landslide inventory for a large portion
of Nepal, offering a unique possibility to examine the spatiotemporal distribution of slope
failures and their characteristics. Therefore, to model the spatiotemporal landslide hazard
in this study, we used the mapping extent of the Jones et al. (2021) inventory as our study
area.
Specifically,theirpolygonalinventoryreportsyearlylandslideoccurrencesforeachyear
from 1988 to 2018 in the part of Nepal where most landslides occur (see Figure 1). Inter-
estingly, their mapping efforts excluded any seismic or anthropogenic influences, being a
unique type of inventory within the Nepali landscape and at the global level. This land-
–3–Figure 1. Map showing the study area, mapping units, and observed landslide inventory (top)
for 1988–2018. The bivariate histogram plot (bottom right) shows the intensity of landslides in
individual slope units over the mapping period, together with the landslide frequency.
slide inventory is the first of its kind and, despite ignoring the exact timing of landslides
within each year, it has the potential to provide extensive information for modelling the
year-by-year evolution of landslides in a spatiotemporal fashion. Landslides were mapped
based on satellite imagery. Therefore, with such a large time span, landslides had to be
recognised in different scenes with varying resolutions. This may induce some bias in the
quality (Guzzetti et al., 2012) and completeness (Tanya¸s & Lombardo, 2020) of the data.
However, Jones et al. (2021) kept the same mapping procedure across time and supporting
data, thus reducing any potential bias to the minimum (Jones et al., 2021). Furthermore,
the yearly characteristics of the inventory highlight the landscape evolutionary process in
terms of newly activated and reactivated landslides.
3 Mapping Units
More than thirty years ago, Carrara (1983, 1988) proposed a terrain unit capable of
closelyreflectinglandscapemorphologyindata-drivenstatisticalmodels. Thesewerenamed
slope units (SU, hereafter), representing the physiographic space bounded between ridges
and streamlines. Therefore, in this work, we opted to use a SU partition, which is better
suited than one based on grid cells when modelling landslides over large spatiotemporal
domains. To construct the SU partition automatically, we used the function r.slopeunits
–4–Table 1. Table showing the input parameters to generate the SU partition.
Parameter Selected Value Minimum Range Maximum Range
Minimum Area 40000 20000 50000
Circular Variance 0.4 0.2 0.6
Clean Size 20000 10000 30000
Reduction Factor 10 10 40
Initial Flow
80000 60000 100000
Accumulation Threshold
Maximum Iteration 15 15 15
Figure 2. SamplesofSUsin2Dmapwithshadedrelief(left)and3Dshadedrelief(right)with
camera angle of 30◦ from south to north. Highlighted SUs in both maps show the same location.
(Alvioli et al., 2016), the most common software used for SU delineation. The r.slopeunits
functionimplementsacustomizedversionofthewatershedalgorithmandrequiresaDigital
Elevation Model (DEM), as well as a suite of input parameters that are used to converge to
a deterministic solution. These input parameters are: i) Initial flow accumulation thresh-
old (thresh); ii) Circular variance (cvmin); iii) minimum SU surface area (areamin); iv)
maximum SU surface area (maxarea); v) reduction factor (rf); vi) the threshold value for
the cleaning procedures (cleansize). Their respective meanings are detailed in Alvioli et al.
(2016). Because the choice of input parameters will determine the resulting SU partition,
in this work, we tested several input parameter combinations, whose value ranges and our
final setting are reported in Table 1.
Aside from input parameters, the DEM we used comes from the 30 m SRTM (Berry
et al., 2007) produced by the United States Geological Survey (USGS), which has already
been hydrologically corrected. Note that the latest version of r.slopeunits that we used is
capable of filtering out flat regions, as they are irrelevant from a landslide perspective.
Figure 2 shows the details of our SU partition. Specifically, the left and right panels
presenta2Dand3Drendering,respectively,ofasubdomainwithSUboundarieshighlighted
in blue. For each SU and each year, we have then aggregated the landslide inventory with
landslide polygons and estimated the total area density of landslides, defined as the ratio of
the total area of slope failure over the entire SU area, over a spatiotemporal range of our
study. Theareadensityisusedthereafterasaproxyforthelandslidesize, usedtoestimate
the landslide intensity.
To better understand the distribution of the landslide area density, which is crucial to
designingasensiblelandslidehazardmodel,wethencomparedthe(unconditional)empirical
–5–Figure 3. Empirical distribution of the landslide area density (histogram) and the best-fitting
extended Generalised Pareto Distribution (eGPD) probability density function (dotted red).
distributionofthelandslideareadensity(bypoolingdataoverbothspaceandtime)witha
suiteofprobabilitymodels. Thebest-fittingmodelendedupbeingtheextendedGeneralised
Pareto Distribution (eGPD) (Papastathopoulos & Tawn, 2013; Naveau et al., 2016); its fit
is displayed in Figure 3. We can observe that the eGPD indeed fits the data very well, all
the way from low to high quantiles. The eGPD is an extension of the Generalized Pareto
Distribution (GPD), which is a continuous probability distribution frequently employed to
characterise the extreme tails of another distribution (see, Pickands III, 1975; Castillo &
Hadi,1997;Naveauetal.,2016). WhiletheclassicalGPDisdefinedintermsofscale(σ)and
shape (ξ) parameters, the eGPD includes one more parameter (κ) to model the lower-tail
region of the distribution, thus enabling it to describe extreme and bulk behaviours jointly
viaasinglemodel(Cisnerosetal.,2024). Asaparsimoniousyetrelativelyflexibleparametric
distribution respecting extreme-value theory in its tails, this distribution is suitable for
modeling the landslide area density. The methods section (Section 5) will further describe
why and how we can use the eGPD to model and predict the landslide hazard.
4 Predictor Set: Static and Dynamic Properties
To explain the distribution and size of landslides across space and time, we opted for a
large predictor set. All properties capable of exerting a given influence on the genesis and
evolution of landslides vary with time. However, in a relatively short time window, some
environmentalparameterscanbeapproximatedtobetemporallystationary,whereasothers
exhibit a much higher rate of temporal variation. For this reason, in the remainder of this
manuscript, we will refer to these two predictor types as static and dynamic predictors,
respectively.
Table2listsbothpredictortypes,furtherdividedintofivecategoriesaccordingtotheir
nature and the information they convey to the model. Those categories mainly represent
–6–Table 2. Predictors used in the model, with dynamic predictor categories highlighted in bold.
Parameter Category Data Source Reference
Elevation Mean (meters)
Elevation Standard Deviation
Slope Mean (degrees)
Slope Standard Deviation
Aspect Mean (radians) Morpho- SRTM
FarrandKobrick(2000)
Aspect Standard Deviation Metrics DEM (30 m)
Horizontal Curvature Mean
Horizontal Curvature Standard Deviation
Vertical Curvature Mean
Vertical Curvature Standard Deviation
NDVI Mean
Vegetation Landsat 5,7 Tucker(1979)
NDVI Standard Deviation
Precipitation Max (mm)
Triggering
Precipitation Mean (mm) CHIRPS Funketal.(2015)
Factors
Precipitation Standard Deviation
Clay Content (gm/cu.cm) Soil
Soilgrids Hengletal.(2017)
Organic Content (gm/cu.cm) Properties
Geological categories Geology USGS WandreyandLaw(1998)
morphometrics, vegetation, triggering factors, soil properties, and geology. The mean value
and standard deviation of these variables within each SU are used in the modelling process.
Furthermore, we recall that since landslides are here observed yearly, dynamic predictors
mustalsobeaggregatedonayearlyscale(evenifobservedatahighertemporalresolution).
To compute all the variables listed in Table 2, we used multiple approaches based on
the spatial and temporal resolution of the input datasets. Regarding static (morphometric,
soil-related, geological) predictors, we simply computed their mean and standard deviation
per SU. Dynamic predictors (of a time-varying nature), however, were available at different
spatial and temporal resolutions, so a special treatment was required for each of them.
The high spatial resolution of NDVI allowed us to compute the mean value and standard
deviation per SU from available NDVI scenes in a year. The coarse resolution of CHIRPS
data constrained us to assign to any SU falling within a 5 × 5 km grid cell the actual
precipitation value, aggregated as: i) the daily maximum in a year; ii) the daily mean in
a year; and iii) the daily standard deviation in a year. All these operations were directly
implementedinGoogleEarthEnginetospeedupthewholepreprocessingpipeline, andthe
code is shared in GitHub (https://github.com/ashokdahal/extremevaluelandslides).
Toprovideanoverviewoftheconstructeddynamicpredictors,whichchangeyearly,the
mean and maximum precipitation and mean NDVI empirical distribution are displayed in
Figure4. Wecanobservethatthespatialdistributionofalldynamicvariableshasasimilar
yearlytrend. Thedistributionofthemeanprecipitationinrecentyears(2009–2018)clusters
together, peaking within the range of 3–6 mm/day. Similarly, the maximum precipitation
for all years has a similar spatial distribution, with a right heavy tail. Moreover, NDVI
shows peaks in the range of 0.4–0.6 for data before 1999; this is likely due to spectral and
spatial resolution limitations in old sensors rather than significant environmental changes.
This was later solved (see peaks clustered at around 0.65 from early 2000 onwards) by the
improvement in both spatial and spectral resolutions of Landsat-7 (launched in 1999).
–7–Figure 4. Distribution of Mean Precipitation (mm/day; top left), Maximum Precipitation
(mm/day; top right) and Mean NDVI (unitless; bottom left) over 30 years pooling the data from
all SUs together, obtained using Kernel Density Estimation.
5 Methods
5.1 Hazard Definition and Modelling
ThelandslidehazardwasinitiallyqualitativelydefinedbyVarnesandtheInternational
Association for Engineering Geology commission on landslides and other mass movements
in 1984 as “the probability of occurrence within a specified period and a given area of a
potentially damaging phenomenon”. This definition was later refined by Guzzetti et al.
(1999) to include the intensity of the event. As a landslide can either be present or absent
atagivenpointinspaceandtime,wecanrepresentitbythebinaryrandomvariableL(s,t),
which takes value one if a landslide (or more than one) triggers at spatial location (here, a
SU) s and time (here, a year) t, and is equal to zero otherwise. Similarly, the intensity of
a landslide should reflect its “destructiveness” (e.g., a function of its “size” in terms of the
displaced mass, its volume or planimetric extent); in our study, we express landslide size in
termsoftheareadensity(i.e.,thefractionofeachSUaffectedbyalandslide),representedby
a generic nonnegative random variable A(s,t) (for “area”), also indexed by space and time.
Obviously,L(s,t)andA(s,t)arenotindependentofeachother,giventhatL(s,t)=0ifand
only if A(s,t) = 0. Mathematically, the overall landslide hazard can thus be quantatively
expressed from the above definition as the joint probability
Pr(∪ {L(s,t)=1,A(s,t)≥a }),
(s,t)∈X q
where X is a specified spatio-temporal domain (spatial area and time period) of interest,
and a > 0 is some critical landslide size of “severity” q ∈ (0,1); there are different ways
q
to define a , for example as the (100×q)-percentage of the area of SU failure, or as the
q
q-quantile from the unconditional distribution of observed landslide sizes (i.e., pooled over
space and time). Both have pros and cons, but in this work, we choose the latter because
q can be directly interpreted as an overall landslide size level. From a practical mitigation
perspective, rather than computing the overall landslide hazard for an entire domain and
time period, it is often more helpful to estimate the local hazard at each specific location
–8–s and time t, and to understand how it relates to the main triggering driver (e.g., heavy
precipitation) summarised in a vector X (s,t) of features, and other important covariates
D
summarised in a vector X (s,t). Therefore, inspired by the above definition, we shall here
O
formalise the q-level (local) landslide hazard at location s and time t as
h (s,t)=p(s,t)×i (s,t), (1)
q q
where p(s,t) = Pr{L(s,t) = 1 | X (s,t) = x (s,t),X (s,t) = x (s,t)} is the landslide
D D O O
susceptibility(i.e.,thelandslideoccurrenceprobabilitygiventhemaindriverandcovariates)
and i (s,t) = Pr{A(s,t) ≥ a | L(s,t)=1,X (s,t) = x (s,t),X (s,t) = x (s,t)} is the
q q D D O O
landslide intensity expressed as the probability that the landslide size exceeds the chosen
threshold a given that a landslide has occurred, and given the main driver and covariates.
q
Whilethisformalismsuperficiallyresemblestheprobabilistichazarddefinitionintroducedby
Guzzettietal.(2005),therearekeydifferenceswiththeirapproachthatwehighlightfurther
below. Thechoiceofq ∈(0,1)should,inprinciple,dependonthenature/vulnerability/cost
of the elements at risk in each SU, as this may determine the local hazard level that can be
toleratedoraccepted. Inpractice,q shouldthusideallybesetaccordingtotheGovernment
rules and guidelines for the different infrastructures and be SU-specific in a potentially
time-varying manner. Here, however, for simplicity in the absence of such governmental
information, we keep q (and thus, a ) fixed over space and time, but we showcase the
q
landslide hazard for different critical levels, namely with q =5%,50%,95%.
Inordertoaccountforthefrequencyofthelandslidetriggereventinthehazardcompu-
tation and to assess how the landslide hazard changes according to different possible future
scenarios, we additionally build a statistical extreme-value model for the main triggering
driver (here, precipitation), from which we compute long-term return levels for each spa-
tial location (i.e., each SU). Specifically, assuming temporal stationarity, we estimate the
vector RL (s) of return levels for each of the relevant components of the feature vector
P
X (s,t) = x (s,t), defined componentwise as the level that is expected to be exceeded
D D
oncebytheselectedvariableintheperiodP (e.g.,withP =5,10,15,20years)atlocations.
Then,foragivenreturnperiodP,weplugtheestimatedreturnlevels(alongwiththeother
static covariates and the time-averaged NDVI covariate) into the fitted local hazard model
h (s,t) in (1) by replacing the observed triggering driver variables X (s,t) with RL (s).
q D P
This allows us to estimate the “hypothesised” q-level spatial landslide hazard, h (s) that
q;P
would be obtained should each summary feature of the triggering driver reach its P-year
returnleveleverywhereinspace. Suchhypothesisedscenario-basedhazardmapsgobeyond
the approach advocated by Guzzetti et al. (2005) and provide useful information on the
potential impact of future landslides for periods of time of specified lengths.
We recall that in our study, landslide data are observed yearly and are spatially ag-
gregated at the SU level, so L(s,t) indicates the presence/absence of at least one landslide
per SU s during year t, and similarly, X (s,t) and X (s,t) denote features of the main
D O
triggeringdriverandothercovariatessummarisedyearlyattheSUresolution. However,the
sameconceptsandmethodologycouldbeformulatedwithdataatdifferentresolutions(e.g.,
withdataobserveddailyormonthlyatapixelresolution)withonlyslightadjustments. We
nowgivemoredetailsonthemodellingofeachcomponent(landslidesusceptibility,landslide
intensity, triggering driver frequency through return level estimation).
5.1.1 Susceptibility Component, p(s,t)
The binary variable L(s,t), representing the presence/absence of landslides per SU s
at time t, can be modelled using a Bernoulli distribution, i.e.,
L(s,t)∼Ber(p(s,t)), (2)
where the probability p(s,t)∈(0,1) is the landslide susceptibility that we seek to estimate.
To this end, we express the susceptibility p(s,t) in terms of the main triggering driver vari-
ables X (s,t) = x (s,t) and the other covariates X (s,t) = x (s,t) through a flexible
D D O O
–9–deep-learning model, i.e., a potentially highly nonlinear function estimated from the data
(seeSection5.3). Wenotethatwhilethedriverandcovariatesmaychangeoverspaceand/or
time, the functional relationship between them and the landslide susceptibility, p(s,t), is
assumed to be constant. This assumption allows us to use our model to predict the suscep-
tibility under new triggering driver and covariate values (e.g., under more extreme trigger
conditions), but it also requires a leap of faith as the ability of a model to extrapolate to
yet-unseen conditions cannot be easily verified in practice.
5.1.2 Intensity Component, i (s,t)
q
The landslide intensity is defined as the probability that the landslide size (here, ex-
pressed in terms of landslide area density), A(s,t), exceeds a certain critical threshold a
q
conditional on a landslide occurrence (i.e., conditional on A(s,t) > 0) in a given SU s and
specific year t. The nonnegative random variable A(s,t) has a right-skewed distribution
and often exhibits a relatively heavy upper tail (recall Figure 3) despite having a finite
upper bound due to the physical constraint that the area of each SU is always finite. We
therefore seek a flexible probability distribution that can suitably capture these features.
Moreover, because we shall compute the landslide hazard at low-to-high critical levels, e.g.,
q = 5%,50%,95%, we need a distribution that can accurately capture both the bulk be-
haviour and the lower/upper tails of the landslide area density. To this end, joint bulk-tail
models motivated by extreme-value theory are thus ideally placed.
Oneparticularlyinterestingmodelistheso-calledextendedgeneralisedParetodistribu-
tion (eGPD; Papastathopoulos and Tawn (2013); Naveau et al. (2016)), which is controlled
by three parameters. The corresponding distribution function can be written as
(cid:110) (cid:111)κ
F (x;κ,σ,ξ)= 1−(1+ξx/σ)−1/ξ , x>0, (3)
eGPD
whereκ>0isthelower-tailshapeparameter,σ >0isthescaleparameter,andξ >0isthe
upper-tail shape parameter. With ξ > 0, the eGPD is heavy-tailed and the tail heaviness
increases as ξ increases. When κ = 1, the eGPD reduces to the widely-used generalised
Pareto distribution (GPD), which is the only possible limiting tail behaviour according to
extreme-valuetheory(DavisonandHuser(2015)). TheeGPDhasnotonlylowerandupper
tailbehaviorsthatcomplywithextreme-valuetheory, butitalsohasasmoothtransitionin
between(i.e.,inthebulk). ThisallowsonetousetheeGPDformodelingthefullrangeofthe
data (from low to high quantiles), while bypassing the specification of low/high thresholds
ascommonlyrequiredinextreme-valueanalyses. Thisparsimoniousyetflexibledistribution
has thus been used extensively for the statistical modelling of natural hazards, including
precipitation (Naveau et al. (2016)), wildfires (Cisneros et al. (2024)), and even landslides
(Yadav et al. (2023)). However, it is the first time that it is used in a full landslide hazard
assessment context, particularly with the proposed deep regression modelling approach.
While the eGPD does not have a finite upper endpoint (required given that the maximum
possible area density is equal to 100%), it would be possible to use a truncated eGPD
instead, whereby the model (3) would be replaced by F (x;κ,σ,ξ)/F (1;κ,σ,ξ) for
eGPD eGPD
x ∈ [0,1]; however, as seen in Figure 4, the distribution of area densities has almost all its
mass in the interval [0,20]%; therefore, F (1;κ,σ,ξ)≈1 in our case, which means that
eGPD
the truncated and untruncated models are almost equivalent to each other, and we have
foundthattheuntruncatedeGPDin(3)stillprovidesanexcellentfitinpractice, especially
if we do not used the fitted model to extrapolate too far into the upper tail.
Assuming that the scale σ depends on the main triggering driver variables X (s,t)
D
andtheothercovariatesX (s,t),butkeepingtheshapeparameters,κandξ,constantover
O
space and time to get a parsimonious representation, we thus model positive landslide sizes
using (3) as
A(s,t)|A(s,t)>0∼F (x;κ,σ(s,t),ξ),
eGPD
–10–from which we easily derive the landslide intensity as
i (s,t)=1−F (a ;κ,σ(s,t),ξ)
q eGPD q
(cid:40) (cid:18)
ξa
(cid:19)−1/ξ(cid:41)κ
=1− 1− 1+ q . (4)
σ(s,t)
Similarlytothesusceptibilitycomponent,wemodelthescaleσ(s,t)intermsofapoten-
tially highly nonlinear function of X (s,t) and X (s,t) through a flexible deep-learning
D O
model (see Section 5.3). As before, we assume that the functional relationship linking
X (s,t)andX (s,t)withthescaleσ(s,t)doesnotchangewithlocations,timet,ortrig-
D O
ger/covariate values. This allows us to extrapolate the intensity to new trigger/covariate
conditions as well as to the unobserved (potentially extreme) severity levels q.
5.1.3 Frequency Component: Return levels for the triggering driver
The major problem when assessing landslide hazard is that it is a “cascading event”
(Tilloy et al., 2019) and therefore, one should take the frequency of the landslide trigger
intoaccount—animportantaspectthathasrarelybeenconsideredpreviouslyinthedata-
driven landslide modelling literature. In other words, the occurrence of a landslide mainly
depends on whether sufficient precipitation has occurred (for rainfall-induced landslides) or
whether sufficient ground shaking has occurred (for earthquake-induced landslides). Hence,
in practice, landslide hazard is only meaningful as a concept if it involves the frequency of
the trigger (extreme rainfall/shaking) in its calculation. While landslides may sometimes
occuras“conditionalhazards”(Tilloyetal.,2019),suchaslandslidesoccurringduetolong-
term preconditioning factors rather than being due to an external trigger, these landslide
types are out of the scope of this paper. So, rather than asking when or how frequently
landslides of a given intensity occur (as, e.g., done by Guzzetti et al. (2005)), it is more
natural to ask how frequently a specific triggering event (rainfall/shaking) reaches extreme
levels, assuming everything else remains constant (which is justified when the study area
does not go under rapid change), and how such extreme conditions may, in turn, modify
the landslide hazard.
Inthiswork, wehavepreciselydefinedthehypothesisedlandslidehazardtoreflectthis
notion: namely,whatthehazardwouldbeshouldthetriggerreachaspecifiedextremelevel.
Tothisend,wecomputelong-termreturnlevelsforsummaryfeaturesofthemaintriggering
driver (in the vector X (s,t) = x (s,t)) by building separate extreme-value models for
D D
each of the relevant components of x (s,t).
D
Specifically,webuildtwoseparatedeep-learning-basedeGPDmodelsthatresemblethe
landslideintensitymodel,butfittedtobothannualmaximumandannualmeanprecipitation
data; we treat the annual precipitation standard deviation differently (as described at the
endofthissection). Forsimplicity,withsomeslightabuseofnotation,letX (s,t)=x (s,t)
D D
denote either the annual maximum precipitation or the annual mean precipitation. Note
that because we here model precipitation data at the yearly scale, we avoid complications
with temporal dependence and non-stationarity. Moreover, as zero annual precipitation
is never observed, we can neglect the point mass at zero. Assuming that the data are
independent and identically distributed over the years, our model may be expressed as
X (s,t)∼F (x;κ˜,σ˜(s),ξ˜),
D eGPD
where κ˜ > 0,ξ˜> 0 are constant lower-tail and upper-tail shape parameters, respectively,
and σ˜(s) > 0 is now assumed to only vary across space through a similar deep-learning
formulation, yet without the use of covariates.
Wenotethatwhilethegeneralisedextreme-value(GEV)distributionisamorecommon
choice to model annual maxima, the eGPD is a valid model for block maxima from eGPD
–11–data. Inotherwords,ifdailyrainfallfollowsaneGPD,thenannualrainfallmaximawillalso
followaneGPD,yetwithadifferentlower-tailκparameter. Moreover,itcanbeshownthat
the eGPD is close to a GEV distribution when κ → ∞, and unlike the GEV distribution,
it is always supported over (0,∞), which makes sense for precipitation observed on any
scale. Our model is, therefore, sensible for both annual maximum and mean precipitation.
Once the models are trained, estimated parameters can be plugged into the eGPD quantile
functiontocomputereturnlevelsofthemaximumandmeanprecipitation. Specifically, the
P-year return level of X (s,t) at location s (i.e., the level that is expected to be exceeded
D
once in P years at location s) is obtained as
σ˜(s)(cid:104) (cid:105)
RL (s)=F−1 (1−1/(Pn );κ˜,σ˜(s);ξ˜)= (1−{1−1/(Pn )}1/κ˜)−ξ˜ −1 ,
P eGPD y ξ˜ y
where n is the number of independent observations of X (s,t) within a year. Since our
y D
precipitation data are modelled on an annual basis, we here set n =1.
y
Regarding the annual precipitation standard deviation (which is also an element of the
feature vector X (s,t) = x (s,t)), it does not make sense to compute return levels for
D D
it. Therefore, we used an ad-hoc approach, whereby the most likely precipitation analogue
was identified from the observed yearly data, from which the standard deviation was then
extracted. More precisely, for each considered return period, we identified a year with
the closest mean and maximum precipitation to that of the estimated annual mean and
maximumprecipitationreturnlevels. Theyearwiththemostsimilarprecipitationanalogue
was identified by minimizing the Euclidean distance between observed and modelled mean
and maximum precipitation return levels across all years.
Return level estimates for the annual maximum and mean precipitation, as well as the
annual precipitation standard deviation of the closest analogue, were then combined into
the vector RL (s), plugged into (1) to compute the hypothesized landslide hazard h (s).
P q;P
5.2 HazardComputationandFutureProjectionsBasedonClimateChange
Scenarios
One of the main reasons to build a landslide hazard model is to understand the threat
posedbylandslides,whichisoftendependentontheintensityoftriggeringevents. Landslide
hazard posed by different intensities of triggering events (represented by return levels for
various return periods) can be used to understand the landslide risk and mitigate it. Thus,
to develop a test case for our landslide hazard model, we designed multiple hypothesised
(spatially-varying)rainfallscenarioscorrespondingtothe5,10,15,and20-yearreturnlevels,
estimated based on the eGPD model presented in Section 5.1.3 using the CHRIPS rainfall
data recorded from 1988–2018. Such designed rainfall scenarios allow us to understand
how landslide hazard changes depending on the intensity of the rainfall trigger, assuming
everything else remains constant. Using precipitation data up to 2018 allowed us to assess
the landslide hazard under different scenarios, by varying the rainfall return period.
While our model gives us access to the full landslide hazard distribution for different
exceedance probability thresholds (q), we have computed the hazard for three different
failure scenarios corresponding to the 5%, 50%, and 95% of the observed landslide area
distribution in the past 30 years. The associated landslide area density per SU are 0.017%,
0.423% and 4.245%, respectively.
Notably, the precipitation patterns can vary over time due to climate change. This
may result in extended periods of extreme drought and intense precipitation. In turn, this
should affect the landslide hazard. To understand how landslide hazard may change in
the future under different climate change scenarios, we repeated our analysis based on two
climatechangepathways, namely, themiddlepathway(SSP245)andthefossil-fueleddevel-
opmentpathway(SSP585). Theprojectedprecipitationdatawereobtainedfromensembled
climatechangeprojectionsoftheCoupledModelIntercomparisonProject(CMIP6)(Taylor
–12–et al., 2012), downscaled and bias corrected by Thrasher et al. (2022). In this research,
we only used the models downscaled by Thrasher et al. (2022) from the original CMIP6
database because including other models would require significant effort on bias correction
and downscaling, which is beyond our capabilities. The time period of 2020–2100 was con-
sidered to design the hypothesised rainfall scenarios (i.e., to compute rainfall return levels).
Therefore, the predicted hazard results can potentially reflect the average landslide hazard
up to the end of the century. Notably, climate projection data are usually produced at a
coarse resolution of 30×30 km, making their spatial distribution biased and less relevant
foraSU-basedmodel. Therefore,thelandslidehazardprojectionsdisplayedinthisresearch
should be treated as an indication of the model’s usability and interpreted with care.
5.3 Deep-Learning Framework
5.3.1 Neural Network Architecture
Theproposedlandslidehazardmodelhastwoprobabilitydistributionstolearn: namely,
Bernoulli and eGPD, each having a parameter (i.e., p(s,t) and σ(s,t), respectively) vary-
ing nonlinearly over space and time through a complex interaction of multiple static and
dynamic covariates. In addition, the eGPD model has two extra parameters held constant
over space and time (namely κ and ξ). The joint estimation of all parameters given the
input covariate data X (s,t) and X (s,t) is performed efficiently through a shared deep-
D O
learning architecture with two output layers. The architecture is “shared” here since we
use a single deep-learning model (with the same underlying parameters) to generate the
two outputs. This shared architecture is a natural framework to use here as the parameters
p(s,t) and σ(s,t) are expected to be correlated, and it also makes the neural network more
parsimonious while retaining high flexibility. More specifically, the designed model consists
of 16 artificial neural network blocks, each consisting of a dense layer with a width of 64
neurons followed by a dropout layer, a batch normalisation layer, and a rectified linear unit
(ReLU) activation function (for further details on those layers, see Dahal and Lombardo
(2023)). The dropout and batch normalisation layers prevent the model from overfitting
(Srivastava et al., 2014). At the same time, the ReLU activation function allows the model
to be very flexible and to capture complex nonlinear patterns in the data. The two output
layers are then passed through different final activation functions to constrain their range
within the acceptable domain of the predicted parameters. Specifically, the p(s,t) parame-
ter is passed through a sigmoid function to constrain it within the interval (0,1), while the
σ(s,t) parameter is passed through a ReLU layer to enforce nonnegativity, i.e, σ(s,t)≥0.
5.3.2 Loss Function
To train the model, we designed the loss function as a weighted summation of the
weighted binary cross-entropy loss, which is a popular loss function for imbalanced binary
data in machine learning (similar to a weighted negative Bernoulli log-likelihood), and the
negativelog-likelihoodoftheeGPDdistribution(Papastathopoulos&Tawn,2013;Cisneros
et al., 2024). Precisely, assume that we have observed landslide presence/absence and
landslidesize(arealdensity)dataatnspace-timelocations,denotedby(s ,t ),i=1,...,n,
i i
andletℓ anda denotetherealisedvaluesofL(s,t)andA(s,t)at(s ,t ). Similarly,letp (φ)
i i i i i
andσ (φ)denotethevaluesofp(s ,t )andσ(s ,t ),respectively,foreachi=1,...,n,which
i i i i i
dependontheunknownvectorφcontainingallthelearnableneuralnetworkparameters(i.e.,
so-called“weights”and“biases”). Inpractice,ratherthanusingthefulltrainingdataateach
optimisation iteration, we often use a smaller (randomly selected) batch B ⊂ {1,...,n}
N
of size N < n, which makes it more computationally affordable. Then, the combined loss
–13–function that we minimised can be expressed as
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:88)
Ψ(φ,κ,ξ)=γ − {0.9ℓ log(p (φ))+0.1(1−ℓ )log(1−p (φ))} +
i i i i
i∈BN
(5)
(cid:20) (cid:21)
(cid:88) (cid:0) (cid:1)
(1−γ) − ℓ log f (a ;κ,σ (φ),ξ)
i eGPD i i
i∈BN
where γ ∈ (0,1) is a fixed regularisation hyperparameter controlling the balance between
theBernoulliandeGPDparts,andf istheeGPDdensityfunctionobtainedasthefirst
eGPD
derivative of the distribution function in (3). In this case, γ was tuned in the range 0.3–0.7
with a step size of 0.05, and we identified 0.5 as the best value, but this might change with
each dataset. Thus, tuning the γ parameter is always recommended. Furthermore, in the
first part of the equation, the weighted binary cross-entropy loss has a weight of 0.9 and 0.1
for landslide presences and absences, respectively. This factor is mainly added to mitigate
the data imbalance between the two classes (which roughly occurs within our dataset in
10% and 90% of cases, respectively).
NotethattheeGPDlog-densityismultipliedbythebinaryvariableℓ becauseitisonly
i
defined whenever a landslide occurs (i.e., when ℓ = 1), which also naturally respects the
i
obvious dependency between landslide occurrences and sizes. When ℓ = 0, the rightmost
i
expression in (5) cancels out and need not be computed.
5.3.3 Model Training
To efficiently train the model with backpropagation, we used the popular Adam opti-
miser(Kingma&Ba,2014)withaninitiallearningrateof10−3,whichwasfurtherdecayed
every 50000 step by a factor of 0.95 until the model converged. Various training batch sizes
were tested, but with a batch size of N =2048 the model converged quickly and prevented
the vanishing gradient problem. The entirety of the dataset was randomly divided into
training and test sets, which consisted of 70% and 30% of the total data, respectively. Fur-
thermore, thetrainingsetwasrandomlydividedintoavalidationsetof30%ateveryepoch
totestthemodels’generalisationcapability. Furtherdetailsonthesetsofhyperparameters
used to train the model are reported in the code-base.
5.3.4 Evaluation Metrics
Toevaluatethemodelperformance,weconsideredtwoapproaches. Firstly,weusedthe
area under the curve (AUC) of the receiver operating characteristic curve (ROC; Hosmer
& Lemeshow, 2000) to assess the model’s classification results, i.e, the probability p(s,t)
correspondingtothepresence/absenceoflandslidesinagivenSUsandyeart. Thisisawell-
known and accepted method in landslide susceptibility modelling (Chen et al., 2018; Dahal
& Lombardo, 2023). Second, to validate the intensity component i (s,t), we followed the
q
approachpresentedbyCisnerosetal.(2024). Theauthorsusequantile-quantile(Q-Q)plots
to visually assess whether quantiles from the estimated eGPD distribution of the wildfire
magnitude and qualitatively match their empirical counterparts. In this paper, we did the
samebutusedQ-Qplotsforthearealdensityinstead. Togetamorepreciseandquantitative
model diagnostic, we also used the continuous ranked probability score (CRPS), which is
a proper scoring rule widely used to assess the calibration and sharpness of probabilistic
forecasts (Gneiting & Raftery, 2007). Suppose that, at a given space-time point (s ,t ), our
i i
deep-learningregressionmodelprovidesanestimatedprobabilitydistributionFˆ forthesize
i
variable A(s ,t ), and denote the observed area density at (s ,t ) as a . Then, the CRPS is
i i i i i
defined as
(cid:90) ∞
CRPS(Fˆ,a )= {Fˆ(x)−I(a ≤x)}2dx, (6)
i i i i
0
where I(·) is the indicator function taking value 1 if the argument is true and 0 otherwise.
NotethattheCRPSisminimised(i.e.,itequalszero)whenFˆ isthedegeneratedistribution
i
–14–Figure 5. Overall performance of the developed model. (a) The model performance on the
classificationoflandslides(i.e.,landslidesusceptibility),and(b)theQ-Qplotofdisplayingmodel-
based vs empirical quantiles.
that puts all its mass at a ; therefore, low values of the CRPS indicate that the estimated
i
distribution Fˆ is not only well-calibrated with the observed value a , but it also has low
i i
variance. To assess the overall model fit over space and time, we then sum up all CRPS
values for all observed data, i.e., we compute (cid:80)n CRPS(Fˆ,a ).
i=1 i i
6 Results
Thissectionreportsthemodel’sperformance,itsapplicationforhazardmodelling,and
its use for future landslide hazard predictions in three separate sub-sections.
6.1 Model Evaluation
With the fitted model, we evaluated the model’s performance by assessing the AUC
scoreforthesusceptibility(p(s,t)). Theintensitycomponent(i (s,t))wasevaluatedthrough
q
CRPS scores and Q-Q plot. Figure 5 shows the ROC curve and the Q-Q plot. The model
showsexcellentpredictiveperformancewithanAUCvalueof0.86andaCRPSscoreof3.25.
We can observe that the Q-Q plot has an overall good fit with almost a 45◦ line, though
there is some slight deviation in the upper quantiles, indicating that our model has a ten-
dency to underestimate the size of the biggest landslides. Neverthess, the model provides a
satisfactory performance overall.
6.2 Current Hazard Estimates
With the trained model, we predicted the (hypothesised) landslide hazard h (s) over
q;P
the study area for four different return periods P and severity levels q. Specifically, we
considered four return periods (with P = 5,10,15,20 years). These return periods are
directlylinkedtothereturnperiodforthelandslidehazarditself,giventhatprecipitationis
the primary trigger in this case. Moreover, we computed the landslide hazard for the three
different severity levels, setting q =5%,50%,95% to understand different possible landslide
hazardscenarios. Werecallherethateachlevelofq representsapproximately0.02%,0.42%,
and 4.25% of the area density per SU, respectively.
–15–The estimated hypothesised landslide hazard based on historical precipitation data
(“current scenario”) is shown in Figure 6. In a nutshell, we can observe that the landslide
hazard generally increases with higher return periods. When q = 5%, this increase is
particularly visible because the estimated hazard h (s) often changes from 10–25% to
q;P
50–100%. Similarly, when q = 50%, for most of the area h (s) changes from 5–10% to
q;P
25–50%andwhenq =95%,thesamechangesfrom1–5%to5–10%. Whenq =95%,wecan
observe that the majority of the area has extremely small hazards (category “None” and
“Very low”) for the 5-year return period while the majority of the locations have a “Low”
and “Very Low” hazard for the 20-year return period. In other words, irrespective of the
column one looks at, from the first row to the last, we can see an increase in the expected
hazard (the colours shift towards the red side of the spectrum). Looking at the plot across
rows shows a shift towards the left side of the hazard colorbar, this being due to the fact
that the probability of a failure to cover most of a SU becomes increasingly unlikely.
Figure 6 alone, however, does not provide a complete overview of the expected land-
slide hazards because we do not know how big the SUs are, thus limiting the true extent
of landslide hazard information. A possible solution to mitigate this visualization issue is
presentedinFigure7fora20-yearreturnperiodhazardwithaq =95%exceedancethresh-
old, representing the worst case scenario from Figure 6. This is intended to represent how
we can use landslide hazard predictions in decision-making. For instance, we can observe
dark-coloured locations with high SU areas and high hazard, meaning those locations need
particular attention in terms of potential mitigation measures. In fact, if the SU area is
large and the model estimates a large hazard for it, this implies that one should expect a
much larger landslide compared to a large area density predicted for a small SU. Addition-
ally, in Figure 7, a dark band (within the red polygon) appears in northern Nepal. This
region is characterized with the highest hazard with the largest SU areas and is located
in the upper-mountain region of Nepal, which is affected by landslides every year. This
representation can be further used for landslide risk purposes by overlaying the information
related to population density, buildings, economic assets, etc. As a result, one could assess
the exposure of elements-at-risk at varying levels of landslide hazards.
6.3 Future Hazard Projections
Before showing the estimated landslide hazard under various climate change scenarios,
weexplorethechangeintherainfallreturnlevelsforfutureprecipitation(underbothSSP245
and SSP585 pathways) compared to the current situation. Figure 8 reports the results. We
can observe that the mean precipitation has particularly increased in all climate change
scenarios compared to the current situation (historical period). For the annual maximum
precipitation, all return periods have major increases except for the 20-year return period.
Moreover, for the SSP245 and SSP585 pathways, the difference in maximum and standard
deviationissmall,withSSP585havingslightlyhighervaluesinallcases,whereastheSSP585
has a major increase in mean precipitation compared to both the current scenario as well
as the SSP245 pathway. Since this research focuses on landslide hazard modelling and the
climate change scenarios are mostly used to test our model, we do not focus much on the
reasons behind such climatic behaviour, and readers should recall that downscaled climate
projection data are usually affected by bias and uncertainties which may lead to hazard
misrepresentation.
Withthedesignedprecipitationforclimatechangescenarios,weestimatedthelandslide
hazard for the next 80 years (from 2020) for four different return periods. Since it is
moremeaningfultovisualisehowthelandslidehazardchangesoverdifferentclimatechange
scenarios than to see the actual hazard values, we plot the change in the median landslide
hazard (i.e., with q = 50%), compared to current scenarios in Figure 9 (SSP245) and
Figure 10 (SSP585). Interestingly, most locations under both climate change scenarios
experience a change within the ±20% range. We classify this range as a “no-change” range
becauseourdatasethasmanyuncertaintiesthatdonotallowustomonitorrelativelysmall
–16–Figure 6. Predicted landslide hazards for four return periods and three exceedance thresholds.
It represents how landslide hazard changes over higher intensity of precipitation and over different
q thresholds.
changes in the hazard. These include the uncertainties in climate projections and their
bias with respect to the CHIRPS dataset, as well as the uncertainties and bias in CHIRPS
data itself. Nevertheless, under both SSP245 and SSP585 scenarios, the landslide hazard
increasesinthemiddleandlowerHimalayas(representedbythelowerhalfofthestudyarea).
We can also observe that under both climate change scenarios, the hazard increases with
larger rainfall return periods. Interestingly, the hazard decreases in the upper Himalayas
under the SSP245 pathway, while this is less prominent under the SSP585 pathway. In the
SSP585 case, we further see that in the upper Himalayas, the hazard increases, which is
not the case in SSP245 cases. We can further observe that the spatial pattern of changing
landslide hazards is similar in both pathways, even though their spatial density is different.
–17–Figure 7. Landslidehazardwithq=95%fora20-yearreturnperiodprecipitationevent,plotted
jointlytogetherwiththeSUarea. TheareadelimitedbytheredlinesshowstheHimalayanregion
with a high landslide hazard associated with the largest SU.
Figure 8. Return levels of the annual maximum (left), mean (middle) and standard deviation
(right) of overall precipitation in the study area in the current scenario (historical period, blue) as
wellasfutureprojectionsunderdifferentclimatechangepathways(SSP245,red,andSSP585,dark
red) for four different return periods (P =5,10,15,20 years, from left to right bars). The vertical
dark lines represent the range of precipitation values.
7 Discussion
7.1 Interpretation
Our model is able to satisfy the landslide hazard definition, testing it over 30 years of
landslide history in Nepal. The advantage of generating exceedance threshold hazard esti-
matesatvariousreturntimesmainlytranslatesintoobtainingafullpictureofthelandslide
process in a complex terrain such as the Himalayas. Figure 6 decomposes the probability
of the hazard exceeding a given landslide density per SU (looking at single rows). This
highlights a generic trend where most of the Nepali landscape appears to be potentially
–18–Figure 9. The change in landslide hazard for the q = 50% exceedance threshold and different
rainfall return periods (different panels) under the SSP245 climate change pathway.
Figure 10. The change in landslide hazard for the q=50% exceedance threshold and different
rainfall return periods (different panels) under the SSP585 climate change pathway.
–19–subjected to high probabilities of landslide occurrence, associated with high expected land-
slide area densities. This trend decreases moving from the left to the right panels. The last
panel boils down to the worst-case scenario, the typical target of hazard and risk models,
where a few large hazard hotspots are marked in the highest sector of the Himalayan belt.
These translate into the probability of a failure to mobilize more than the 95th percentile
of the landslide area density based on the past 30 years’ observations, which naturally is
a very unlikely phenomenon. Exploring the same figure vertically, one can see variations
in landslide hazard estimates at increasing return times. Notably, the 5-year return time
consistently represents the best-case scenario, which increasingly worsens moving towards
the 20-year return time map. An important visualization tool is offered in Figure 7, where
the estimated hazard for the current scenario is combined together with the SU area, in
a bivariate colorcoded map. What stands out the most is that the highest section of the
upper Himalayas (displayed in yellow) present a relatively low landslide hazard, associated
with relatively small SUs. This is mainly due to the fact that these areas are permanently
frozen when it comes to interpreting the low hazard estimates. As for the small SU extent,
this is due to the heavily tectonized and thus dissected landscape, which in turn produces
small slopes. Therefore, the hazard at these locations appears to be reasonably low overall.
Looking at the section between upper and middle Himalayas (encompassed in the red poly-
gon), onecannotice the darkestamong thebivariate colorcodes. Thisimplies thatnotonly
is the hazard estimated to be high there, but also the SU size is at its highest. Because we
model landslide hazard as a function of area density per SU, a higher percentage of SU fail-
ing, associated with a large SU, has the potential to release large and very dangerous mass
movements. As for the topographic section that occupies the middle and low Himalayas,
this is associated with a mixture of hazard and SU size estimates. Therefore, here it is
more difficult to cluster a single behavior and the spatial pattern of the two parameters
becomes more erratic. To conclude the interpretation of our model output, we focus on
Figures 9 and 10. There, we geographically translated the output of our model when used
for simulation purposes. Specifically, plugging-in the spatio-temporal rainfall signal coming
from climate projections, we obtained scenarios of landslide hazard for two cases where: i)
theunderlyingmodelassumesthatclimateprotectionmeasuresarebeingtakentomitigate
global warming; ii) the underlying model assumes our society continues to develop, relying
on fossil fuels. What stands out is that the conservative climate pathway (SSP245) depicts
an increase with respect to the current scenario along the lowest portion of the Himalayan
belt. Moreover, amarkeddecreasealongthetopofthetopographicprofilebecomesevident
(areasinblue)acrossallreturntimesunderconsideration. Whencomparingthisprojection
tothemostenvironmentallynegativepathway,onecannoticeanevenlargerincreaseinthe
landslide hazard across all respective return times. Interestingly, the upper Himalayas also
experience an increase, with the blue areas diminishing significantly.
7.2 State of the art
In the case of landslide hazard modelling, the seminal work of Guzzetti et al. (2005)
usedaprobabilisticapproachtoseparatelysolvethreedifferentcomponentsofthelandslide
hazard equation (Guzzetti et al., 1999). Their approach predicted susceptibility over a SU
partition and estimated the area density and frequency through an empirical distribution
function rather than conditioning it to environmental factors. The major limitation of that
work was to have a fixed distribution of landslide area density, which might not hold as
the intensity of triggering events changes over time due to many factors, such as climate
change. Moreover, using a fixed empirical distribution for both intensity and frequency did
not reflect the spatio-temporal characteristics of the data. In fact, assuming that all slopes
are capable of having the same frequency and intensity of landslide is a strong assumption
that may hold only theoretically rather than in a realistic experiment.
Improvingonthis, ourmodelattemptedtopredictthelandslideintensityasafunction
of environmental conditions, while jointly considering the dependence between landslide
occurrence and size. As for the frequency component, we assume the frequency of the
–20–triggering event instead of modelling the frequency of landslides directly, which explicitly
recognises landslides as a cascading event.
This approach, in particular, is a more flexible solution with potential applications
to modelling the future evolution of landslides. Compared to other works that focus on
intensity as a landslide area density and counts (Guzzetti et al., 2002; Lombardo et al.,
2021; Aguilera et al., 2022; Bryce et al., 2022; Yadav et al., 2023), this approach provides
a complete picture of the landslide hazard by modeling their occurrence probability as well
as intensity exceedance probability both over space and time.
Moving beyond the comparison with respect to the work of Guzzetti et al. (1999),
below we list improvements with respect to other research contributions. Let us recall
that classical susceptibility models only estimate the probability of landslide occurrence
locations, under the assumption that such value does not change in time. Our proposed
model introduces elements of spatio-temporal analyses, together with a joint susceptibility-
intensity estimation.
With respect to examples of intensity models built for large regions, most of them also
perform purely spatial operations, whether the intensity is expressed as counts (Lombardo,
Bakka, et al., 2019) or landslide area (Lombardo et al., 2021) per SU. Even in this case,
we believe our space-time extension does provide a more informative hazard estimation.
Few examples do exist where the probability of landslide occurrence and area density is
addressed. This is the case of Fang et al. (2024). However, the authors built two separate
models, one for the susceptibility component and one for the intensity. Our model expands
ontheirresearchbyjointlymodellingsusceptibilityandintensityandalsobecausewefitted
an eGPD rather than a log-Gaussian model for the area density component.
7.3 Supporting Arguments
Moreover, our approach allows one to monitor the full spectrum of landslide hazards
for different trigger and exceedance thresholds. This is not only limited to the observed
realm but also to the time and intensity beyond the range of the observed data, because it
is well supported by the extreme value theory, which is designed to do so (Naveau et al.,
2016). From the planning perspective, this may well be the most interesting element of
our proposed model (Ozturk et al., 2019). Any engineering design requires, by definition, a
specific return time to use as a mark for the construction to be deemed reliable and usable.
For instance, bridges are designed knowing the estimates of flood return times, which are
usuallytranslatedinwaterheights,whichthebridgeneedstobecomparativelyhigher. Ina
similarmanner,landslidessharethesamerequirements. Forinstance,PopescuandSasahara
(2009) recommend designing retaining walls with a 100–year return period when subjected
to the stress of a moving landslide body. However, currently the calculation of exceedance
probability related to landslides has been mostly confined to site-specific conditions. Our
contribution allows one to extend this paradigm towards large geographic extents. What
shouldbestressedatthisstageisthefactthatforengineeringdesign,thelandslideintensity
is typically assessed in terms of landslide velocity, kinetic energy or impact force. These are
physical quantities that can be naturally brought into geotechnical calculations, as they
share the same dimensions the construction is based on. However, estimates on landslide
densityarestillonestepawayfrombeingtranslatableintousefulinformationforengineering
design. Future development could involve expressing the landslide intensity not in the form
of area density but rather as velocity. However, such an experiment should involve first
running spatially and temporally distributed simulations of landslide kinematic behaviors,
from which an architecture such as the one presented in this contribution could learn and
further simulate hazard.
Asidefromthefutureengineeringapplicabilityofourmodel,weseeamorestraightfor-
ward use for master planning. Specifically, our model could be used to prioritize land use
development plans because decision-makers will have the full spectrum of landslide hazard
–21–and its expected temporal variation at their disposal. Therefore, they can decide whether
to invest in specific projects minimizing the risk their capital will be subjected to.
Takingastepback and focusingoncomputational aspects, non-linear methodssuch as
neural networks typically require substantial resources. However, our model can be scaled
up to take advantage of high-performance-computing solutions that involve GPU-heavy
machines. In such case, the number of input features and data points can be increased
to the point of supporting regional or even global scales (assuming landslide polygonal
inventories with good quality and completeness are available).
For example, inference in the entirety of our study area takes ≈ 7.25 seconds in a
Pascal P100 GPU, which is achieved via a parallelised and GPU-compatible model and
datapipeline. Thus, thismodelensuresscalabilitytolargerspatiotemporalregionswithout
a significant performance plunge.
7.4 Opposing arguments
Despite the strengths we highlighted in the previous sections, our modeling approach
still has some limitations which are worth examining and reflect on as the starting point of
future development.
First,wehavebasedourmodelontheeGPDdistribution. Thishasperformedquitewell
inthecaseofthespatio-temporaldataweexamined,butitisnotguaranteedtobethecase
elsewhere. Therefore, further tests in other geographic contexts and with other landslide
typesshouldbecarriedouttoexamineiftheeGPDassumptionstillholdsorwhetherother
distributions inspired by statistics of extremes should be implemented as well. It is worth
stressing that the way we have scripted our modeling protocol can be extended to other
parametric distributions (e.g. Gumbel, Weibull) with relative ease.
Aside from the technical aspects, something else we should highlight involves the
scenario-making procedure we put in place. Currently, we have assumed that the return
period of the landslide hazard is the same as the return period of the triggering rainfall
extremes. This is possible because our inventory only considers the landslides caused by
rainfall, not other anthropogenic and seismic factors. This is an exceptional case, and it
is not common to inventories in other regions. Thus, when there are multiple triggering
factors, it is ambiguous which triggering event and respective return period to use. More-
over, how to combine multiple return periods of different triggering events in a cascading
hazard is an ongoing research question for which we do not know the answer yet. For ex-
ample, to understand existing hazards, the combined effect of predisposing factors such as
road construction, precipitation, and ground shaking can be included in the model as input
covariates, but when we need to include them in future scenarios, identification of their
combined effect and return period is extremely challenging. As a result, using our model as
is may require some simplification in the form of limiting the return period of landslides to
the return period of the primary triggers, such as precipitation or earthquakes.
8 Conclusion
Ourstatisticaldeep-learningmodelformallysatisfiesthelandslidehazarddefinitionpro-
posedbyGuzzettietal.(1999)forthefirsttimeinasinglearchitecture. Thisisachievedvia
a joint model capable of explaining the spatio-temporal variability of the landslide occur-
rencedistributionaswellastheassociatedarealdensityperSU.Solvingforthesusceptibility
componenthasbecomeastandardintheliterature,whileaddressingtheintensityelementis
much less consolidated. Here we solve for the intensity with an original modeling archetype
that flexibly estimates the two tails and the bulk of the distribution via the eGPD model.
Another element of innovation is in the estimation of the eGPD, whose parameters varying
through a complex interaction of spatio-temporal covariates are retrieved via Neural Net-
–22–works. Ultimately, we test our model as a simulator for scenario-based hazard assessment,
plugging in climate projections at specific return times.
It is important to stress that in space-time modeling, one can contract or expand time
andspacedependingonthedata,modelingtargetandresearchquestionathand. Currently,
we tested our model partitioning space via SUs and partitioning times on a yearly basis.
A potential extension to be tested would require shrinking time on a daily basis (assuming
daily landslide polygonal inventories are available). In such a case, rather than modeling
long-term landslides, one could generate predictions on a more frequent basis, de facto
converting our model into an early-warning-system equipped with a full landslide hazard
estimation.
Ultimately, werecallthatthemostrecentdefinitionoflandsliderisk(Corominasetal.,
2023)requirestherecurrenceintervaltoquantifylandslidehazard. Ourmodelsolvesforthe
hazard definition allowing one to simulate for specific return times. Therefore, differently
from other data-driven applications, our model can be directly of use for risk assessment
protocols. This further adds to the positive aspects listed above, although its inclusion in
risk assessment is yet to be verified.
–23–9 Open Research
The data and code used in this research are available via the FAIR repository at
https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.10567233andhttps://zenodo.org/doi/10.5281/zenodo.10567256,
respectively.
Acknowledgments
WewouldalsoliketothanktheKAUSTcompetitiveresearchgrant(CRG)officeforfunding
supportforthisresearchundergrantURF/1/4338-01-01. ThisworkusedtheDutchnational
e-infrastructure with the support of the SURF Cooperative using grant no. EINF-7984
References
Aguilera,Q.,Lombardo,L.,Tanyas,H.,&Lipani,A. (2022). Onthepredictionoflandslide
occurrences and sizes via Hierarchical Neural Networks. Stochastic Environmental
Research and Risk Assessment, 1–18.
Alvioli, M., Marchesini, I., Reichenbach, P., Rossi, M., Ardizzone, F., Fiorucci, F., &
Guzzetti, F. (2016). Automatic delineation of geomorphological slope units with
r.slopeunits v1.0 and their optimization for landslide susceptibility modeling. Geosci-
entific Model Development, 9(11), 3975–3991.
Berry, P., Garlick, J., & Smith, R. (2007). Near-global validation of the SRTM DEM using
satellite radar altimetry. Remote Sensing of Environment, 106(1), 17–27.
Bryce, E., Lombardo, L., van Westen, C., Tanyas, H., & Castro-Camilo, D. (2022). Uni-
fied landslide hazard assessment using hurdle models: a case study in the Island of
Dominica. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, 1–14.
Carrara, A. (1983). Multivariate models for landslide hazard evaluation. Journal of the
International Association for Mathematical Geology, 15(3), 403–426.
Carrara, A. (1988). Drainage and divide networks derived from high-fidelity digital ter-
rain models. In Quantitative analysis of mineral and energy resources (pp. 581–597).
Springer.
Castillo, E., & Hadi, A. S. (1997). Fitting the generalized Pareto distribution to data.
Journal of the American Statistical Association, 92(440), 1609–1620.
Chen, W., Peng, J., Hong, H., Shahabi, H., Pradhan, B., Liu, J., ... Duan, Z. (2018).
Landslide susceptibility modelling using GIS-based machine learning techniques for
Chongren County, Jiangxi Province, China. Science of the Total Environment, 626,
1121–1135.
Cisneros, D., Richards, J., Dahal, A., Lombardo, L., & Huser, R. (2024). Deep graphical
regression for jointly moderate and extreme Australian wildfires. Spatial Statistics.
(To appear)
Corominas, J., Guzzetti, F., Lan, H., Macciotta, R., Marunteranu, C., McDougall, S., &
Strom, A. (2023). Revisiting landslide risk terms: IAEG commission C-37 work-
ing group on landslide risk nomenclature. Bulletin of Engineering Geology and the
Environment, 82(12), 450.
Corominas, J., van Westen, C., Frattini, P., Cascini, L., Malet, J.-P., Fotopoulou, S., ...
others (2014). Recommendations for the quantitative analysis of landslide risk. Bul-
letin of engineering geology and the environment, 73(2), 209–263.
Dahal, A., & Lombardo, L. (2023). Explainable artificial intelligence in geoscience: A
glimpseintothefutureoflandslidesusceptibilitymodeling. Computers&Geosciences,
176, 105364.
Dahal, A., Tanyas, H., van Westen, C. J., van der Meijde, M., Mai, P. M., Huser, R., &
Lombardo, L. (2022). Space-time landslide hazard modeling via Ensemble Neural
Networks. EarthArXiv.
Davison, A.C.,&Huser, R. (2015). Statisticsofextremes. Annual Review of Statistics and
its Application, 2, 203–235.
–24–Fang, Z., Wang, Y., van Westen, C., & Lombardo, L. (2024). Landslide hazard spatiotem-
poralpredictionbasedondata-drivenmodels: Estimatingwhere, whenandhowlarge
landslide may be. International Journal of Applied Earth Observation and Geoinfor-
mation, 126, 103631.
Farr, T. G., & Kobrick, M. (2000). Shuttle Radar Topography Mission produces a wealth
of data. Eos, Transactions American Geophysical Union, 81(48), 583–585.
Funk,C.,Peterson,P.,Landsfeld,M.,Pedreros,D.,Verdin,J.,Shukla,S.,... others (2015).
Theclimatehazardsinfraredprecipitationwithstations—anewenvironmentalrecord
for monitoring extremes. Scientific Data, 2(1), 1–21.
Gerrard, J., & Gardner, R. (2002). Relationships between landsliding and land use in the
Likhu Khola drainage basin, Middle Hills, Nepal. Mountain Research and Develop-
ment, 22(1), 48–55.
Gneiting, T.,&Raftery, A.E. (2007). Strictlyproperscoringrules, prediction, andestima-
tion. Journal of the American statistical Association, 102(477), 359–378.
Guzzetti, F., Carrara, A., Cardinali, M., & Reichenbach, P. (1999). Landslide Hazard
Evaluation: A Review of Current Techniques and Their Application in a Multi-Scale
Study, Central Italy. Geomorphology, 31(1), 181–216.
Guzzetti, F., Malamud, B. D., Turcotte, D. L., & Reichenbach, P. (2002). Power-law
correlations of landslide areas in central Italy. Earth and Planetary Science Letters,
195(3-4), 169–183.
Guzzetti, F., Mondini, A. C., Cardinali, M., Fiorucci, F., Santangelo, M., & Chang, K.-
T. (2012). Landslide inventory maps: New tools for an old problem. Earth-Science
Reviews, 112(1-2), 42–66.
Guzzetti,F.,Reichenbach,P.,Cardinali,M.,Galli,M.,&Ardizzone,F.(2005).Probabilistic
landslide hazard assessment at the basin scale. Geomorphology, 72(1-4), 272–299.
Hengl, T., de Jesus, J. M., Heuvelink, G. B., Gonzalez, M. R., Kilibarda, M., Blagoti´c, A.,
... others (2017). SoilGrids250m: Global gridded soil information based on machine
learning. PLoS one, 12(2), e0169748.
Hosmer, D. W., & Lemeshow, S. (2000). Applied Logistic Regression (2nd ed ed.). New
York: Wiley.
Jones,J.N.,Boulton,S.J.,Stokes,M.,Bennett,G.L.,&Whitworth,M.R. (2021). 30-year
record of Himalaya mass-wasting reveals landscape perturbations by extreme events.
Nature communications, 12(1), 1–15.
Kincey,M.E.,Rosser,N.J.,Robinson,T.R.,Densmore,A.L.,Shrestha,R.,Pujara,D.S.,
... Swirad, Z. M. (2021). Evolution of coseismic and post-seismic landsliding after
the 2015 Mw 7.8 Gorkha earthquake, Nepal. Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth
Surface, 126.
Kingma, D. P., & Ba, J. (2014). Adam: A method for stochastic optimization. arXiv
preprint arXiv:1412.6980.
Lari, S., Frattini, P., & Crosta, G. (2014). A probabilistic approach for landslide hazard
analysis. Engineering Geology, 182, 3–14.
Lombardo, L., Bakka, H., Tanyas, H., van Westen, C., Mai, P. M., & Huser, R. (2019).
Geostatistical modeling to capture seismic-shaking patterns from earthquake-induced
landslides. Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface, 124(7), 1958-1980. doi:
10.1029/2019JF005056
Lombardo, L., Opitz, T., Ardizzone, F., Guzzetti, F., & Huser, R. (2020). Space-time
landslide predictive modelling. Earth-Science Reviews, 103318.
Lombardo, L., Opitz, T., & Huser, R. (2018). Point process-based modeling of multi-
ple debris flow landslides using INLA: an application to the 2009 Messina disaster.
Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment, 32(7), 2179–2198. doi:
10.1007/s00477-018-1518-0
Lombardo, L., Opitz, T.,&Huser, R. (2019). NumericalRecipesforLandslideSpatialPre-
dictionUsingR-INLA:AStep-by-StepTutorial.InH.R.Pourghasemi&C.Gokceoglu
(Eds.),Spatial Modeling in GIS and R for Earth and Environmental Sciences (pp.55–
83). Elsevier. doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/B978-0-12-815226-3.00003-X
–25–Lombardo, L., Saia, S., Schillaci, C., Mai, P. M., & Huser, R. (2018). Modeling soil
organic carbon with Quantile Regression: Dissecting predictors’ effects on carbon
stocks. Geoderma, 318, 148–159.
Lombardo, L., Tanyas, H., Huser, R., Guzzetti, F., & Castro-Camilo, D. (2021). Landslide
sizematters: Anewdata-driven,spatialprototype.EngineeringGeology,293,106288.
McAdoo, B. G., Quak, M., Gnyawali, K. R., Adhikari, B. R., Devkota, S., Rajbhandari,
P.L.,&Sudmeier-Rieux,K. (2018). RoadsandlandslidesinNepal: howdevelopment
affectsenvironmentalrisk. NaturalHazardsandEarthSystemSciences,18(12),3203–
3210.
Mergili, M., Jaboyedoff, M., Pullarello, J., & Pudasaini, S. P. (2020). Back calculation of
the 2017 Piz Cengalo–Bondo landslide cascade with r.avaflow: what we can do and
what we can learn. Natural Hazards and Earth System Sciences, 20(2), 505–520.
Naveau,P.,Huser,R.,Ribereau,P.,&Hannart,A. (2016). Modelingjointlylow,moderate,
andheavyrainfallintensitieswithoutathresholdselection.WaterResourcesResearch,
52(4), 2753–2769.
Nowicki Jessee, M., Hamburger, M., Allstadt, K., Wald, D., Robeson, S., Tanyas, H., ...
Thompson, E. (2018). A Global Empirical Model for Near-Real-Time Assessment
of Seismically Induced Landslides. Journal of Geophysical Research: Earth Surface,
123(8), 1835–1859.
Ozturk, U., Bozzolan, E., Holcombe, E. A., Shukla, R., Pianosi, F., & Wagener, T. (2022).
How climate change and unplanned urban sprawl bring more landslides. Nature,
608(7922), 262–265.
Ozturk, U., Malik, N., Cheung, K., Marwan, N., & Kurths, J. (2019). A network-based
comparative study of extreme tropical and frontal storm rainfall over japan. Climate
dynamics, 53, 521–532.
Papastathopoulos, I., & Tawn, J. A. (2013). Extended generalised pareto models for tail
estimation. Journal of Statistical Planning and Inference, 143(1), 131–143.
Petley, D. (2012). Globalpatternsoflossoflifefromlandslides. Geology, 40(10), 927–930.
Pickands III, J. (1975). Statistical inference using extreme order statistics. the Annals of
Statistics, 119–131.
Popescu, M. E., & Sasahara, K. (2009). Engineering measures for landslide disaster miti-
gation. Landslides–Disaster Risk Reduction, 609–631.
Pudasaini, S. P., & Krautblatter, M. (2021). The mechanics of landslide mobility with
erosion. Nature communications, 12(1), 1–15.
Reichenbach, P., Rossi, M., Malamud, B. D., Mihir, M., & Guzzetti, F. (2018, May). A
ReviewofStatistically-BasedLandslideSusceptibilityModels. Earth-ScienceReviews,
180, 60–91. doi: 10.1016/j.earscirev.2018.03.001
Srivastava, N., Hinton, G., Krizhevsky, A., Sutskever, I., & Salakhutdinov, R. (2014).
Dropout: a simple way to prevent neural networks from overfitting. The journal of
machine learning research, 15(1), 1929–1958.
Stanley, T. A., Kirschbaum, D. B., Benz, G., Emberson, R. A., Amatya, P. M., Medwedeff,
W., & Clark, M. K. (2021). Data-driven landslide nowcasting at the global scale.
Frontiers in Earth Science, 378.
Tanya¸s,H.,&Lombardo,L. (2020). CompletenessIndexforEarthquake-InducedLandslide
Inventories. Engineering Geology, 264, 105331.
Taylor, K. E., Stouffer, R. J., & Meehl, G. A. (2012). An overview of CMIP5 and the
experiment design. Bulletin of the American meteorological Society, 93(4), 485–498.
Thrasher, B., Wang, W., Michaelis, A., Melton, F., Lee, T., & Nemani, R. (2022). NASA
global daily downscaled projections, CMIP6. Scientific data, 9(1), 262.
Tilloy, A., Malamud, B. D., Winter, H., & Joly-Laugel, A. (2019). A review of quantifica-
tion methodologies for multi-hazard interrelationships. Earth-Science Reviews, 196,
102881.
Tiwari,B.,&Upadhyaya,S. (2014). Influenceofantecedentrainfallonstabilityofslopes. In
Geo-Congress 2014: Geo-characterization and Modeling for Sustainability (pp. 3243–
3251).
–26–Tucker, C. J. (1979). Red and photographic infrared linear combinations for monitoring
vegetation. Remote Sensing of Environment, 8(2), 127–150.
van den Bout, B., van Asch, T., Hu, W., Tang, C. X., Mavrouli, O., Jetten, V. G., &
van Westen, C. J. (2021). Towards a model for structured mass movements: the
OpenLISEMhazardmodel2.0a. Geoscientific Model Development, 14(4), 1841–1864.
doi: 10.5194/gmd-14-1841-2021
Wandrey, C. J., & Law, B. E. (1998). Maps showing geology, oil and gas fields and geologic
provinces of South Asia (Tech. Rep.). US Geological Survey.
Yadav, R., Huser, R., Opitz, T., & Lombardo, L. (2023, 09). Joint modelling of land-
slide counts and sizes using spatial marked point processes with sub-asymptotic
mark distributions. Journal of the Royal Statistical Society Series C: Applied Statis-
tics, qlad077. Retrieved from https://doi.org/10.1093/jrsssc/qlad077 doi:
10.1093/jrsssc/qlad077
–27–