The Tribal Theater Model: Social Regulation for Dynamic
UserAdaptation in Virtual Interactive Environments
HanzhongZhang1,BowenDuan1,HaoyangWang1,ZhijianQiao1,JibinYin1*
1 Faculty of Information Engineering and Automation, Kunming University of Science and
Technology,Kunming650221,China
*CorrespondenceshouldbeaddressedtoJibinYin,yjblovelh@aliyun.com
Abstract：Thispaperproposesasocialregulationmodelfordynamicadaptationaccordingtouser
characteristics in virtual interactive environments, namely the tribal theater model. The model
focuses on organizational regulation and builds an interaction scheme with more resilient user
performance by improving the subjectivity of the user. This paper discusses the sociological
theoretical basis of this model and how it was migrated to an engineering implementation of a
virtual interactive environment. The model defines user interactions within a field that are
regulated by a matrix through the allocation of resources. To verify the effectiveness of the tribal
theatermodel,wedesignedanexperimentalsceneusingachatroomasanexample.Wetrainedthe
matrixasanAImodelusingatemporaltransformerandcompareditwithaninteractionfieldwith
different levels of control. The experimental results showed that the tribal theater model can
improve users’ interactive experience, enhance resilient user performance, and effectively
completeenvironmentalinteractiontasksunderrule-basedinteraction.
Keywords:Socialregulation;Virtualnetwork;Field;TribalismTribalTheaterModel0
1. Introduction
Individualvirtualinteractiveenvironmentscanbeviewedasinherentlystructuredenvironmentsin
whichpeopletakeondesignatedrolesandinteractbyfollowingwell-definedprotocolsandnorms
to achieve common specific goals (Almajano et al., 2013). Among these elements, interaction is
oneofthemostimportantfeaturesof virtualinteractive environmentsandis acentralpartoftheir
conceptual core (Paredes & Martins, 2012). A user’s sense of engagement and community in a
virtual environment is influenced by many factors. These factors are also major concerns in
interactive virtual environments, including the spatial structure of the interaction and the user’s
avatar.
Place-making,ora“senseofspace,”isthecoretechnologyproposedbyresearchersinthefieldof
computer-supported collaborative work (CSCW) to promote social interaction in online spaces
(Ducheneau & Moore, 2004). In fact, physical space can provide a common understanding of
suitableusageandbehavioraswellasasocialexplanationofcluesintheenvironment(Amadeoet
al.,2009).Inthespatialstructureofinteraction,sharedexperiencesandthecollaborativenatureof
most activities are crucial and, most importantly, integrate an individual into a user community
andallowtheearningofreputationrewardswithinit(Hansonetal.,2019).
The design of avatars in virtual environments also affects the interactive experience. Kim (2000)
defined an avatar as “an online representation of oneself in a virtual world, aimed at enhancing
interaction in the virtual space.” Peterson (2005) studied the interaction of non-native users’
avatars in virtual environments and concluded that user interaction in virtual environments is
beneficial for the development of users’second language abilities, and that the design of avatars
canpromoteonlinecommunicationandenhanceusers’senseofparticipationandcommunity.
Atthesametime,thedevelopmentandsuccessofvirtualinteractiveenvironmentsareconstrained
by their usability and sociability. Usability focuses on how users interact to perform tasks, while
sociability involves the planning and formulating of social policies to regulate user behavior and
interaction within the environment (Preece, 2000). Actually, because virtual interactive
environments reflect human evolutionary behavior within them based on user needs and
expectations (Preece, 2001), they are dynamic and adaptive in their sociality and usability
constraints(Abrasetal.,2003).
Therefore, virtual interactive environments can be created to gradually adopt new types of
interaction rules rather than promoting specific interactions. One of these new methods is
interaction regulation, which refers to how cooperation inwork canoccurin a non-entangled way
by delineating and defining communication rules. Becker-Beck et al. (2005) argued that the
reference level of rules is defined as “conceptual relationships,” which refers to the process of
letting a group achieve common cognitive representations. Therefore, interaction regulation
includes individual regulation that defines individual interactions and behavioral rules and
organizational regulation that focuses on the coordination of individual interaction and how to
organizewithintheenvironment.
There are many existing studies on individual regulation. Brota et al. (2009) proposed a generic
interaction framework, iObjectDoor, that allows the creation of avatars conforming to the normsTribalTheaterModel1
of a multi-agent system to provide different object visualizations depending on the client, and to
manage behaviors in the environment. In a dynamic space, the participants are then informed
aboutthe evolution of the activity, and norms are used in it to organize their actions to define the
consequencesoftheactionsandtopreventundesiredparticipantbehavior.
However, the practice of using limiting rules of individual regulation with users also affects the
availability of virtual environments. For example, Almajano et al. (2013) proposed a framework
for hybrid regulation using virtual institutions (VIs) to design a hybrid and structured virtual
environment. However, the inherent limitations of rule-based interface dialogs (e.g., as they are
implementedincommand-basedroboticdialogs)makesomeusersuncomfortable.
ParedesandMartins(2012)proposedamodeltocreateacanonicalinteractionenvironmentbased
onatheatermetaphorthatdynamicallyadaptedinteractionrulestomeetuserneeds.Thismodelis
typical of an interaction rule-based approach in virtual interactive environments. Based on the
authors’ constructed architecture named ASTeaS, it obtained better interaction results. However,
the model also failed to go beyond the limitations of defining interaction rules on user subjects.
Becauseuserswerecategorizedinadvancetoassignsystemrolesandinterfacesthatcorresponded
to them, the model cannot actually adapt dynamically to interaction rules at each moment in time
andprovidesuserswithasenseofexcessivedigitalsurveillance.
Akar andMardikyan(2018)derivedtheexistenceofdifferentusertypes incommunities andtheir
motivations by collecting and analyzing user behavioral data and successfully managing these
communitiestoprovide betterservices.However,thisstudyoverlookedthatthemembers ofthese
communities are likely changing, so user types could also be affected, which would impact the
self-adaption.
Indeed, the limitation of individual regulation that controls a user’s behavior itself is that in
emphasizing the importance of the task, it sacrifices a user’s operational experience. This leads
directlytotheneglectofusersubjectivityinsuchresearch.
One approach involves resilient performance, which refers to the key functional attributes of
complex social technology systems that can prevent system crashes in the face of expected and
unexpected changes and disturbances. It is generated by the self-organized improvisation and
decision-making of individuals. Disconzi and Saurin (2022) point out that previous studies that
havereferredtotheconceptofdesignforresilience(DfR)haveoftenneglectedtheroleofhumans
(Uday & Marais, 2015) in adopting an overly technical perspective (Kusiak, 2020). Thus,
Disconzi and Saurin (2022) proposed the concept and principles of design for resilient
performance (DfRP), which emphasize the role of human factors in system design, including the
support of continuous learning at the individual and organizational levels. Their proposal of the
DfRP actually fully considers human subjectivity, emphasizing the role that humans play in the
studiedsystem.Manyfurtherstudieshavedemonstratedthatutilizingusersubjectivitycanleadto
betterinteractionresults.
For example, Benlamine et al. (2021) studied a framework for game element adaptive player
emotional states that changed the layout of the game elements in the interface by capturing the
facialexpressionsofusersduringinteractions.Theirresearchresultsindicatedthatadaptinggames
tousers’personalfeelingscanenhancetheirexperiences.TribalTheaterModel2
Bezerra and Hirata (2011) studied individual and environmental factors that influence motivation
in virtual communities and explored the mechanisms that increase motivation in virtual
communities. Increasing the enthusiasm of virtual community members indirectly promoted their
participation.
Krishna et al. (2019) established a role-based regulation model that estimated learners’regulation
states through their behaviors, cognition, and motivation to improve their self-regulation skills by
implementing adaptive regulation strategies as needed. The disadvantage of this model was that
theroleoftheframeworkwaslimitedandadaptive,basedonlyontheexistingroles.
However, both the user experience and attention to tasks cannot be ignored in virtual network
environments. The practice of tilting resources in favor of the user simply by diminishing
individualregulation orby some other mechanism certainly increasesuser subjectivity,butit also
naturally decreases the tilting of resources in favor of the task. Therefore, the importance of
organizational regulation needs to be recognized and explored. For example, a more matriarchal
model of group consciousness could be a powerful tool. Strauss and Rummel (2021) confirmed
the role of group consciousness tools. Their research results indicated that timely adjustment of
user interaction processes based on user behavior sequences can help groups achieve equal
participation.
Therefore,aninteractionmodelthatfocusesonorganizationalregulationwithoutsuppressinguser
subjectivityandwithmore resilientuserperformance needsto bediscussed.Giventhe superiority
demonstrated by Paredes’ social theater model (based on a theater metaphor), it is feasible to
constructtheinteractionmodelweneedbycombiningitwithanappropriatesociologicalmodel.
In fact, the literature in sociology does not appear to provide us directly with the specific mature
theoretical tools we need for this particular type of application. Therefore, to enhance user
resilience performance, or in other words, to addressthe core issue of “enhancinguser interaction
freedom” in virtual interactive environments, this article proposes a social regulation model for
users’dynamicadaptationinvirtualinteractiveenvironmentsbasedonBourdieu’sfieldtheoryand
Maffesoli’s tribalism, namely the tribal theater model (TTM). This model emphasizes the
subjectivity of the user; that is, the model focuses on how to maximize the user’s personal
interactive experience through organizational regulation based on deep learning algorithms while
minimizing the need for monitored individual regulation without letting the interaction fall into
unconstrained chaos. Compared to the traditional social theater model used for virtual network
interaction models (Paredes & Martins, 2012), the interaction models constructed through the
TTMareexpectedtohavegreateruserresilienceperformance.
Theproposedinteractionmodelshouldsatisfythefollowinghypotheses:
H1 Inavirtualsocialenvironment,theTTM willprovide betteruserinteractive experience
andenhanceuserresilienceperformance.
H2 In a virtual social environment, the TTM will effectively complete the environmental
interactiontasksthatcanbecompletedunderruleinteraction.
Among them, H1 will be used to determine the advantages of the TTM relative to the social
theater model in emphasizing subjectivity, and H2 will be used to ensure the effectiveness of theTribalTheaterModel3
TTM’s relatively unconstrained interaction. In Section 4, these two hypotheses are validated
separately.
Section 2 of this paper introduces the sociological aspects of the TTM; Section 3 introduces the
TTM in human–computer interaction using a chatroom as an example, as it is a dynamically
regulated social model centered on an artificial intelligence matrix; Section 4 introduces the
experimental evaluation of the TTM and discusses the results obtained; and Section 5 presents
someconclusionsanddiscussesfuturework.
2. SociologicalAnalysis of the TTM
Before formally proposing the TTM, some core concepts in the sociological background need to
be described. Readers who are more interested in TTM as a human–computer interaction model
can skip this section and proceed to Section 3 directly. The process of formally proposing the
TTMfollowstheprogressiveprocessshowninFigure1.
Figure1.TheconstructionprocessoftheTTM.(a)ThebasicstructureoftheTTM.(b)The
overallstructureoftheTTM.(c)ThedetailedstructureoftheTTM.
The core concepts of the tribal theater model are naturally the “tribe” and “theater.” The
sociological conceptofa “tribe” was refined primarily by Maffesoli (2022).He pointed outthat a
tribe refers to a kind of community. People naturally gather together for some reason to form
social groups. Furthermore, he connected the concept of the “tribe” with that of a “theater.”
Maffesoli(2022)pointedoutthat“thecharacteristicofsocialrelationsisthatindividualscanhave
functions in society…. As individuals change stage costumes based on their (cultural, religious,
friendship) taste, they will gain a place in various games of the ‘World Theater’ every day” (p.
104).ItcanbeseenthatMaffesoli’s“tribe”ispartofthe“theater”inthisdescription.
The theater is actually a metaphor that is highly consistent with Bourdieu and Wacquant’s (2015)
description of a “field.” A field can be understood as a place of interaction. In their hypothesis,
each field prescribes its own peculiar regulating principle. These principles define an interaction
space.Insuchaspace,actorscompete basedontheirpositioninthe spacetochange orattemptto
maintainthescopeorformoftheirspace.
Merleau-Ponty (1983) provided a case in point. When playing rugby, the field is seen by the
players as covered with various constraint lines that divide and connect, for example, different
kicking areas that require players to take certain determined actions. Each action taken by theTribalTheaterModel4
players adjusts the characteristics of the field in their eyes and establishes new offensive routes.
Their actions, in turn, unfold within a new range, once again changing the field as it is perceived
bytheplayers(Merleau-Ponty,1983).
It can be seen that the field is changed by the actions of the users, but what is directly changed is
not the “tribe” aspect of the field mentioned earlier, but another more abstract aspect, namely its
“atmosphere” (Norberg-Schulz, 2010). In turn, the content of the action is strongly related to the
current field. However, it is obvious that each person may take different actions when facing the
samescene.Therefore,thegenerationofactionalsorequiresanindividuallyrelatedfactor,namely,
the “habitus.” This concept is similar to what we would understand as the habits of an individual
(itisactuallytheLatinwordfor“habits,”anditspluralformis“habiti”),butintheTTM,itcanbe
understood as a decision tree of actions. When we are within an environment, a corresponding
decision tree is activated, and we decide on an action to take based on our action habits. This is
similartothelogicofreinforcementlearning, inwhichtheenvironmentandagentsinfluenceeach
other.Thefieldshapesthehabitus,andthehabitusbecomesaproductmanifestedbythebodyasa
resultoftheinherentandinevitableattributesofacertainfield(Bourdieu,2017).
Fromthis,wecanobtainabasicclosed-loopstructure,suchasthatshowninFigure 1(a):thefield
shapes the habitus, and the field and habitus together lead to action, which in turn changes the
field. We can continue the analogy with the logic of reinforcement learning: in reinforcement
learning, feedback from the environment constructs the model of the agent, the environment and
the model together lead to the action of the agent, and the action of the agent leads to changes in
theenvironment.
Infact,ifwehadonlyastructuresimilartoreinforcementlearning,itwouldstillbeinsufficientto
model human interactions (Hackel et al., 2020). According to Grenfell (2012), Bourdieu thus
pointed out a key to interactive regulation, namely “capital.” Sociology uses this term in a broad
sense to expand the concept and enable it to be applied to complex interpersonal networks and to
different types of transformations and exchanges between different fields. Concepts such as
literacy level and social status have been introduced into the scope of capital and play a role in
interactionscenes.IntheTTM,itcanthereforebereferredtoas“resources.”
For example, when we play a certain game, the various strategies of players and the different
factors that determine their game are not only a function of the quantity and structure of their
resourcesatthemomentofconsiderationbutarealsoafunctionoftheevolutionofthequantityof
theseresourcesandtheirstructureovertime,thatis,afunctionoftheirsocialtrajectory.
Therefore, changing the distribution and relative weights of the various resource forms is
equivalenttochangingthestructure ofthisfield.By consideringfieldsin thisway,theyallhave a
certain degree of dynamic change and adaptability and avoid the inflexibility and resilience of
socialtheater (Lehmann,2006) or traditionalstructuralism, such asreinforcement learning, which
wasmentionedearlier.
Onthisbasis,BourdieuandNice(1980)providedaformulaforaction(withsomemodifications):
（1）
As described in Figure 1(b)A,cotniotnhe b=ashfi(saboiftuthse o+rreigsionuarlccelos)ed+fieloldop, resources participate in theTribalTheaterModel5
generation of action, while the resources themselves are determined by the combination of the
field content and action. Figure 1(c) provides a more detailed division; that is, actions affect the
atmosphere portion of the field, relationships and resources are influenced by the tribe portion of
the field, and the overall field (including the tribe and atmosphere) directly leads to actions as an
environment.Theroleofthismoredetaileddivisionwillbeprovidedinthenextsection.
From this equation, we can obtain the TTM as a foundational sociological model. As mentioned
above, the structure of this model provides flexibility and adaptability that is not contained in
traditional models of social theater. In social theater and a series of similar theater metaphor
approaches, actors must perform with scripts; this provides an order but loses the subjectivity of
the actors themselves (Nacache, 2007). However, the TTM operates in the style of Boal (2008).
There is no longer the need for an order that provides requirements, serves as a “director,” and
forces individuals to follow. In contrast, people have gathered into a small-group consciousness,
that is, in the matrix of a tribe; it has taken the position of the director. According to Simmel
(2002),thisisexplainedbyZimmerandhissensorysociologyasastageof“sharedbyall.”
3. Structure of the TTM
In Section 2, we connected several important concepts and proposed a tribal theater model that is
moreresilient thantraditionalsocialtheater models.Asdepicted inFigure 1, theconceptualchain
oftheTTM isconnectedheadtotailasaclosedloop,whichconstitutesade-identifiedinteraction
structure.
Based on this sociological model, we can establish its relationship with a virtual social network
interaction scene; that is, the interaction environment of social networks serves as the field (in
which the interaction space serves as the tribe, and the user interaction theme serves as the
atmosphere),theuser’s operatinghabitsserve asthehabitus,the materials requiredfor interaction
serveastheresources,andamodelforresourceallocationservesasthematrix.
Public spaces such as chatrooms are typical complex social technology systems with
characteristics such as diversity, dynamism, and uncertainty, which can be used as a typical
example to verify user resilience performance. As an example, and to provide definitions of the
corresponding concepts in the virtual social network interaction model, we consider designing a
chatroomenvironmentasaninstantiationoftheTTM.
3.1 Field
InthesociologicaldefinitionoftheTTM,thestructureofthefieldcanbeconsideredcomposedof
the atmosphere and the tribe and analyzed based on the classification of “space” and
“characteristics.” “Space” implies the elements that constitute a field, that is, the tribe.
“Characteristics” generally refer to the atmosphere, which is the most abundant attribute in any
place.
Therefore, in a virtual network environment, a number of key terms can be defined.A tribe is a
socialspaceinwhichallinteractionsarelimitedwithinacertaingroup.Theatmosphereisatheme
ofinteraction,andallinteractionsrevolvearoundtheatmosphere.Specifically,intheexampleofaTribalTheaterModel6
chatroom,thefieldofanonlinechatroomisgeneratedbyachatgroupprovidedbyaplatformand
a chat topic. This topic can be proposed by chatroom members, or it can also be generated based
on an order when everyone agrees on the need to complete a task, whether voluntary or
involuntary(justas,nomatterhowunwilling, studentsalwayshavetogathertogetheringroupsto
organizeandcreateaclassroompresentation).
3.2 Habitus
Thehabitusisnotonlyaphysicalmanifestation butalsoapsychologicalandsocialmanifestation.
Itincludesarangeofwaysindividualsapplyperception,cognition,andaction(Bourdieu,2017).
Therefore, in theTTM, habitus can be considereda series of user perceptions and actions applied
ininteractingwithinaspecificfield,whichthencompriseadecisiontreeofuseraction.According
to different field conditions, users exist and are shaped by different habiti. For example, in an
onlinechatroom,usersmay developdifferenthabiti(suchaswhatlanguage touse,whatemotions
to express, and what identity to display) based on factors, such as chat group members, topics,
tasks, and orders. These habiti not only reflect the user’s personality and preferences, but also
reflecttheircognitionandevaluationofthisonlinechatroom.
3.3 Resources
In theTTM, the materials relied onby user actioncan be seen as resources.Users have their own
initialresources,whichcanbeusedtocarryouttheirownactionsandacquireresourcesfromsuch
actions. In the production of such resources, their allocation is carried out by the field under the
control of the matrix. Referring to the chatroom example, a resource can be a voting mechanism
within a chatroom. In the voting process for selecting temporary chatroom administrators, users
initially have their own votes forthe election.When a user becomes a temporary administrator of
the chatroom through the voting mechanism, this vote will not only be replenished, but the user
willalsogain more votes insubsequentvotingactivities duetothe benefits generatedby previous
votingactions(suchasbecominganadministrator).
3.4Action
Actionis generated byacombination of field,resources,andhabitus.Suchan actionwill,in turn,
affect resources and the field (the reason why the habitus is not changed by action, as we
mentioned in Section 2, is that it is indirectly changed through the field). Just as in a virtual
environment of a chatroom, after we have had a chat, the topic in the chatroom field will change
dueto thechange oftopic.As theinitiator ofthetopic, theuser’sresources(such asprestige) will
increasewithit.
3.5 Matrix
The concept of the matrix is the core of the instantiated TTM. Due to the de-identification of theTribalTheaterModel7
modelandtheprecariousnessofthevirtualfield,toavoidachaoticinteraction,thereneedstobea
symbol of order that replaces rules and the collective subconscious for regulation, that is, what
Bourdieu (1987) describes as “a generative matrix that exists as a social variable”. At the same
time, resources also require a mechanism for circulation and allocation and an executing entity.
Obviously,thefieldofthe virtualspacedoesnothavethepremiseof Bourdieu’s(1987)statement
that the matrix is “constructed in history and rooted in institutions”, so we need a more specific
alternative.
Due to the premise of the de-identification of the TTM, it is not possible for a human to act as a
transcendentmatrix(suchaschatroomadministratorsintraditionalstructures).Asanalternative,a
transcendentalandproxy-controlledalgorithmmodelcanbeconsidered.
Thismodelshouldfollowastructurethattakes asjointinputtheactionvectorandthefieldvector
quantified by the field content and as output the vector of new resource structures assigned after
the action. Its structure is shown in Figure 2. One possible implementation is deep learning
technology. The form of vector input and output in deep learning, as well as its retraining
mechanism,makeitverysuitableforcompletingsuchtasks.
Figure2.ThematrixmodeloftheTTM.
Therefore,weobtaineda tribaltheater modelforsocialregulation anduserdynamic adaptationin
avirtualnetworkenvironment.TribalTheaterModel8
Figure3.StructureoftheTTM.
3.6 Interaction Flow: Taking a Chatroom as an Example
Intheotherparts ofSection 3,we consideredthedefinition ofthecoreconceptoftheTTM in the
chatroom instance. From this, we can consider the entire interaction flow of the TTM in the
chatroomcase,asshowninFigure4.TribalTheaterModel9
Figure4.TheinteractionflowoftheTTMinthechatroom.
InachatroombasedontheTTM,thereisnoidentitydesignatedasanadministrator.Eachmember
has a certain amount of resources. The matrix model provides the most basic action options, such
as speaking, withdrawing speech, issuing tasks, and voting. Executing an action within it will
consume a certain amount of resources and then delegate the action to the matrix model for
processing. Along with an action, the model takes as input a vector representing the current
resourcestructureofthechatroomandaquantifiedatmospherevectorderivedfromatextanalysis
of the chatroom’s messages. Based on this input, the matrix will adjust the resource structure
withinthechatroomandoutputitasavector.
Therefore, we canobtain the interaction flow of the chatroom instance basedon theTTM.This is
showninAlgorithm1.
Algorithm1.Interactionflowofthechatroominstances.
Initializetheuserbehaviorembeddingmodel
Initializethemodelforanalyzingchatroomatmosphere
UM
Initializethematrixmodelofchatroom
SKEP
Initializetheuseraction

Initializetheresourcestructurevectorofchatrooms
α
Repeat(foreachaction):

Read ,
← ( )
α  
← +
atm SKEP  
atmTribalTheaterModel10
←
← ( )
UM(α)
Updateresourcestructurewith
'         ,  
'
4. Experiments
The implementation of the TTM and the experimental method used to examine it were based on
case study scenes.Totest the hypotheses proposed in Section 1, we evaluated the user interactive
experience, user resilience performance, and completion of environmental interaction tasks to
verify the effectiveness of the TTM.Among them, the user interactive experience was evaluated
through an interactive quality indicator, while the user resilience performance was evaluated
throughaninteractivefreedomindicator.
To conduct experiments based on the de-identification of the field, we created a controlled
evaluation environment using the social software Tencent QQ. For comparison purposes, we also
collecteddatainatraditionalpresenceidentityenvironmentwithoutanyregulationormatrix.
4.1 Experimental Presupposition
4.1.1Experimental Participants andEnvironment
ThemainpurposeoftheexperimentwastoverifythehypothesesinSection1,thatis,whetherthe
TTM was suitable for providing a better user interactive experience and enhancing userresilience
performance, and whether it could help users complete environmental interaction tasks complete
underrule-basedinteraction.Toachievethis,anexperimentalscenehadtobeconstructed.
Itisgenerallyknownthatthereisapositivecorrelationbetweenuserinteractionenthusiasmanda
familiar environment. Thus, constructing an experimental environment that was unfamiliar to the
participants would not be conducive to examining the factors that impact the effectiveness of the
model. Therefore, we decided to rely on the existing social software Tencent QQ to complete the
constructionoftheexperimentalsceneandusedachatbotcreatedspecificallyfortheexperiment.
TencentQQisapopularWhatsApp-typeonlinechatroominChina.Currently,thevastmajorityof
online socializing among Chinese teenagers takes place on it. There is a hierarchical distinction
amonguserswhoparticipateinoneofitschatroomgroups.Thegroupmaster,asthecreatorofthe
group and the possessor of the highest permissions, has the power to designate group chat rules
and punish those who do not comply.Administrators can be designated by the group master,with
lower levels of permission than the group master, but these individuals can also regulate the
speech standards and topics of group members. By convention, the group master and
administrators also have an obligation to direct the trends of topics within the group. Thus, the
structureofQQitselfprovidesverystrongorderedinteractions.
In order to build a comparative experimental environment, we required such a setting. Therefore,
we created a chatbot using the communication protocol of Tencent QQ. It could collect chatTribalTheaterModel11
messages within a group, and when used as a virtual group master,it could process chat resource
allocation through mechanisms such as “mute,” “set administrator,” “remove members,”
“withdrawmessage,”and“speechfrequencylimit,”whichwereassociatedwithanygroup.
To evaluate the effectiveness of the de-identified TTM, we set up an experimental environment
with three chatgroups onQQ.Twoof thesewere established basedonanexisting group, andone
was newly created to be adapted to the TTM. The members of the three groups had basic
knowledge of each other. The key participants in all three groups were informed about the
experiment.
Thedescriptionsoftheexperimentalgroupsareasfollows:
 Group 1 (high control). This was a group with a primary active population of 20–30
people. The group had a clear hierarchy, and the administrator, as the manager of the
group, basically controlled the direction of the group’s chat topics and removed group
members who violated the rules. The chatbot was here only to collect and analyze chat
contentanddidnotparticipateintheresourceallocationofthechatfield.
 Group 2 (low control). This was a group with a primary active population of 20–30
people. There was no hierarchy in the group. The group master, who was the creator of
thegroup,wasnotinvolvedinthediscussionanddidnotsetupanyadministrators,sothe
group members spontaneously chatted with each other, and there were often situations
where multiple topics coexisted. The chatbot was here only to collect and analyze chat
contentanddidnotparticipateintheresourceallocationofthechatfield.
 Group 3 (main field). This was a group of 10 people created at the beginning of the
experimentandwasusedonlyfortheexperiment.Thegroupmasterwastheexperimental
chatbot, and there was no administrator. The group structure followed the TTM, and the
chatresourcesweredistributedbythechatbot.
4.1.2Experimental EvaluationTools
Based on an existing questionnaire of user satisfaction with a human–computer interface (Chin et
al., 1988), we created a customized questionnaire for evaluating the environment, divided into
several parts, reflecting each parameter in the evaluation. Each parameter was evaluated by the
users based on a scale between 0 and 9. These parameters included user interactive quality, user
interactivefreedom,anddigitalsurveillancesensation.
To quantify the atmosphere and field changes, we used the sentiment knowledge enhanced
pre-training (SKEP) model (Tian et al., 2020) to classify the emotional tendencies of chat texts
and assign the proportion of positive and negative emotional tendencies to samples. Specifically,
this model assigned the chat text a positive probability P, a negative probability N, and a
confidence level C. These three values were all within the range of [0, 1]. To simplify the
calculation,wedefinedanatmospherevalueforachattextusingthefollowingformula:
（2）
Asaresult,theatmospherevalueo  f  a  c  h  a  tℎte  x  t  w=illb  ew−ith  inth∗e  rangeof[−1,1]:lessthanzerois
anegativeatmosphere,andmorethanzeroisapositiveatmosphere.TribalTheaterModel12
4.1.3TheMatrix Model
To allocate resources, we needed to train a matrix model. The structure of the matrix model is
detailed in Section 3.5. In this study, we used a temporal transformer model to train the matrix
model. This is a time-series neural network structure based on the transformer architecture
(Vaswani et al., 2017), which can effectively deal with long-term dependencies and multivariate
time series. The core idea of the temporal transformer is to use a self-attention mechanism to
capture local and global dependencies in temporal data while using positional encoding to
preserve temporal information.Atemporal transformer canbe divided into two parts: the encoder
is responsible for translating the data into high-dimensional feature vectors, and the decoder is
responsible for generating a prediction of the currentstate based on the output of the encoder and
thehistoricalstate.
Tofacilitate theengineering implementation, wealso definedthe partsof thematrix modelinthis
experiment. Resources are defined here as the number of texts that can be sent during a certain
period of time. The resource structure vector,as aninitial input, contains the number of resources
(1-dimensional) and the proportion of resources (1-dimensional) of the actor at this particular
moment in time. The atmosphere vector (10-dimensional) is a vector composed of the textual
analysis of the first 10 messages of an action at a particular moment, each element of which is an
interval of value from −1 to 1 (from negative to positive). The action vector (1,024-dimensional)
is a vector of sentences produced by a user at a particular point in time, which was obtained by
partitioning the sentences into words, assigning weights to the resulting words using the term
frequency–inverse document frequency (TF–IDF) algorithm, and then weighted averaging the
word vectors of these words. As the output of the new resource structure vector, for the
convenience of implementation, we set the output directly as a new value of the current actor’s
resources to achieve the effect of changing the global resource proportions. The engineering
implementationofthematrixmodelisshowninFigure5.
Figure5.Engineeringstructureofthematrixmodel.
To train thisAI matrix, we first established a dataset. We chose a group that interacted according
to specific rules. A resource quantity of five messages per minute was first set and then
dynamically labeled according to the administrators’ subjective assessments. The administrators
increasedordecreasedtheresourcesofusersthroughthespeechrestrictionandbanningfunctions.
The collected dataset contained a total of 7,936 valid data, and all the data were processedTribalTheaterModel13
accordingtotheabovemethod;thatis,eachindividualdatapointcontained1,036dimensions.
Inthis paper,weused thePyTorchframework toimplement atemporaltransformer model, where
the encoder inputdimension was 2,048, the number of multi-attention heads was 8, the activation
function was a rectified linear unit (ReLU), the number of sub-encoder layers was 6, the dropout
was 0.1, the number of sub-decoder layers was 6, and the epsilon of the layer normalization was
1e−5. The model used mean square error (MSE) as the loss function, the stochastic gradient
descent(SGD) optimizer was used to optimize the parameters ofthe model, the learning rate was
set to 1e−5, and the early stopping method was used during training to prevent overfitting. When
the value of the loss function on the test set did not decrease for 10 consecutive epochs, the
trainingwasstopped,andtheoptimalmodelparametersweresaved.
After obtaining the matrix model, we asked 10 people who did not participate in subsequent
experimentstosampleandevaluatethemodelonthetestset.Thescoreoftheobtainedmodelwas
3.50±0.04(outof5).
4.2 ExperimentalAnalysis and Results
We collected chat data from Groups 1 and 2, and required members of Group 3 to transfer their
chats from other places to this group as much as possible within a week.As part of this process,
weorganizedathematicdiscussionineachofthethreegroups.
Aftertheexperiment, aquestionnairewasadministeredtothekey participantsinvolved.Atotalof
62questionnaireswerecollected.
From Group 1, we collected a total of 27 questionnaires, including from 18 males (66.7%) and 9
females (33.3%); 11people aged 17and below (40.7%), 11people aged 18–22 (40.7%), 3 people
aged 22–25(11.1%), and2people aged25 andabove(7.4%); 11people(40.7%) hada secondary
education, 10 people (37.0%) had a bachelor’s degree, 3 people (11.1%) had a master’s degree,
and 3 people (11.1%) were already working; 12 people (44.4%) majored in the humanities and
social sciences, 13 people (48.1%) majored in the natural sciences, and 2 people (7.4%) majored
inotherfields(includinglawandmedicine).
From Group 2, we collected a total of 25 questionnaires, including 19 males (76.0%) and 6
females (24.0%); 8 people aged 17 and below (32.0%), 13 people aged 18–22 (52.0%), 3 people
aged 22–25 (12.0%), and 1 person aged 25 and above (4.0%); 7 people (28.0%) had a secondary
education,12people(48.0%)hadabachelor’sdegree,2people(8.0%)hadamaster’sdegree,and
4 people (16.0%) were already working; 10 people (40.0%) majored in the humanities and social
sciences, 11 people (44.0%) majored in the natural sciences, and 4 people (16.0%) majored in
otherfields(includinglawandmedicine).
FromGroup3,wecollectedatotalof10questionnaires,including6males(60.0%)and4females
(40.0%); 5 people aged 18–22 (50.0%), 5 people aged 22–25 (50.0%); 4 people had a bachelor’s
degree (40.0%), and 6 people had a master’s degree (60.0%); 4 people (40.0%) majored in the
humanities and social sciences, 4 people (40.0%) majored in the natural sciences, and 2 people
(20.0%)majoredinotherfields(includinglawandmedicine).TribalTheaterModel14
An analysis of variance (ANOVA) was conducted on the questionnaire, revealing significant
differences in the mean values among the groups. For the control level, F(2, 59) = 39.53, with p
< .01. For interactive quality, F(2, 59) = 4.14, with p < .05. For interactive freedom, F(2, 59) =
7.09, with p < .01. For digital surveillance sensation, F(2, 59) = 3.68, with p < .05. For task
completion results evaluation, F(2, 59) = 3.32, with p < .05. These results indicate at least one
significantdifferenceinthecomparisonsofmeanvaluesamongthegroups.
ThemeancomparisonresultsindicatedthatGroup3hadsignificantlyhigherscoresforinteractive
quality (7.30±0.54) and interactive freedom (7.70±0.37) than Group 1 (5.85±0.35 and 5.78±
0.35, respectively) and Group 2 (7.08±0.35 and 7.00±0.27, respectively), which is consistent
withthepredictionofH1.However,onthedigitalsurveillancesensation(reversescored),Group3
(3.80±0.85) scored significantly lower than Group 1 (3.93±0.36) and significantly higher than
Group2(2.48±0.37).
Onthetaskcompletionresultsevaluation,theGroup3score(7.20±0.39)wassignificantlyhigher
than that of Group 1 (5.74±0.45) and Group 2 (6.80±0.27), which was consistent with the
prediction of H2. A summary of the questionnaire analysis data is shown in Table 1, and the
between-groupmeancomparisonresultsofthequestionnairesareshowninFigure6.
Table1.Summaryofquestionnaireanalysisdata.
Group1 Group2 Group3
(HighControl) (LowControl (MainField)
ControlLevel 6.22±0.21 2.36±0.28 4.90±0.60
InteractiveQuality 5.85±0.35 7.08±0.35 7.30±0.54
InteractiveFreedom 5.78±0.35 7.00±0.27 7.70±0.37
DigitalSurveillanceSensation* 3.93±0.36 2.48±0.37 3.80±0.85
TaskCompletionResultsEvaluation 5.74±0.45 6.80±0.27 7.20±0.39
*ReversescoredTribalTheaterModel15
Fig.6.Between-groupmeancomparisonresultsofthequestionnaires.
We also randomly sampled chat messages from Groups 1 and 2 for a week, as well as chat
messages from Group 3 during the experiment. We collected 400 points of chat text data from
each of them, and used the SKEPpre-training model to classify their respective natural language
emotions, assigning emotional tendency labels to all the samples for a field atmosphere analysis
usingtheformuladescribedinSection4.1.3.
The atmosphere analysis results showed thatthe score of Group 3 (−0.05 ± 0.04) was higher than
that of Group 1 (−0.19 ± 0.03) and slightly lower than that of Group 2 (0.05 ± 0.04).This further
supports the premise that theTTM can maximize the user’s personal interaction experience while
ensuringorderlyinteraction.
4.3 Discussion
Overall, the experimental results supported H1 and H2, that is, the TTM can better improve the
user interactive experience, enhance user resilience performance, and help users complete
environmental interaction tasks under regular interaction. However, there were some results that
requiredfurtherdiscussionandanalysis.
In terms of the digital surveillance sensation, the main field (Group 3) scored lower than the high
control group (Group 1) and higher than the low control group (Group 2). This indicates that the
TTM still provided users with a digital surveillance sensation to a certain extent, which limited
their freedom of interaction in the environment. One possible reason for this was the limitations
imposed by using QQ as an experimental field. Indeed, a familiar interaction environment can
provide users with a more natural and daily interactive experience and lead to more accurate
interaction behavior. However, the limitations of the QQ environment determined that when the
resource quantity was too low, the restriction on users’speech could only be achieved by muting
them, which inevitably communicated to users the feeling ofbeing supervised.Therefore, we can
saythat,basedontheresultsobtained,wecannotconcludewhethertheTTMnecessarilyincreases
adigitalsurveillancesensation.
The atmosphere analysis results from the chat messages retrieved from the three experimental
fields also contained an important finding. With a higher digital surveillance sensation score than
the comparison field, the main field still had a higher chat content emotional tendency score than
the heavily regulated high-control group. This not only confirmed the previously analyzed
questionnaire results that the TTM performed relatively better in experience indicators, such as
interactive quality, but also implied that there may be other factors that lead to the observed
increaseinthedigitalsurveillancesensation.
In summary, the TTM improved the user interactive experience, enhanced user resilience
performance, and helped users accomplish interaction tasks. This indicates that the TTM was
effective and has the potential to become an important tool for future digital interaction design.
However, there are still some issues. The user still perceived a digital surveillance sensation,
whichmaybeduetolimitationsintheexperimentalfieldenvironment.TribalTheaterModel16
5. Conclusion
Inthis paper,we proposedanddiscussedasocialregulationmodelfordynamic useradaptationin
a virtual interactive environment, namely the tribal theater model (TTM). The goal of this paper
was to establish an interaction model that focuses on organizational regulation without
suppressinguser subjectivity andthat hasmore user resilience performance. Sociological analysis
was used to establish the theoretical foundation of this model and migrate it to the engineering
implementationofvirtualinteractiveenvironments.Themodeldefinesuserinteractionswithinthe
field, which are regulated by a matrix model through resource allocation. We evaluated the TTM
based on research of chatroom cases. The results indicate that the TTM can improve the user
interactive experience, enhance user resilience performance, and help users complete interactive
tasks.
Future work should optimize the regulation mode of this model, restrict the interaction of
low-resource users, encourage the interaction of high-resource users in a more-gentle way, and
reduce the perceived presence of the regulation matrix. In terms of the dynamic adaptation of the
systemtotheuser,effortsshouldbemadetobuildasystemwithmoreuserresilienceperformance
thatbalancestheuser’spersonalinteractiveexperiencewiththeorderlinessoftheinteraction.
Acknowledgements
Funding: This work was supported by the National Natural Science Foundation of China [grant
numbers61741206].
References
Abras,C.,Maloney-Krichmar,D.,&Preece,J.(2003).Evaluatinganonlineacademiccommunity:
“Purpose”isthekey.InHCIInternational2003.
Akar, E., & Mardikyan, S. (2018). User roles and contribution patterns in online communities:A
managerialperspective.SageOpen,8(3).
Almajano, P., Mayas, E., Rodriguez, I., López-Sánchez, M., & Puig, A. (2013). Structuring
interactions in a hybrid virtual environment: Infrastructure & usability. In The 8th
InternationalConferenceonComputerGraphicsTheoryandApplications.
Amadeo, D., Golledge, R. G., & Stimson, R. J. (2009). Person environment behavior research:
Investigatingactivitiesandexperiencesinspacesandenvironments.TheGuilfordPress.
Becker-Beck, U., Wintermantel, M., & Borg, A. (2005). Principles of regulating interaction in
teams practicing face-to-face communication versus teams practicing computer-mediated
communication.SmallGroupResearch,36(4),499–536.
Benlamine, M. S., Dufresne, A., Beauchamp, M. H., & Frasson, C. (2021). BARGAIN:
Behavioral affective rule-based games adaptation interface—towards emotionally
intelligentgames:Applicationonavirtualrealityenvironmentforsocio-moraldevelopment.TribalTheaterModel17
UserModelingandUser-AdaptedInteraction,31(2),287–321.
Bezerra, J. D. & Hirata, C. M. (2011). Motivation and its mechanisms in virtual communities. In
17thCollaborationResearchersInternationalWorkingGroupConferenceonCollaboration
andTechnology.
Boal,A.(2008).Theatreoftheoppressed.PlutoPress.
Bourdieu, P. (1987).The historical genesis ofa pure aesthetics. The Journal ofAesthetics andArt
Criticism,46,201–210.
Bourdieu,P.(2017).Outlineofatheoryofpractice.ChinaRenminUniversityPress.
Bourdieu, P., & Nice, R. (1980). The production of belief: Contribution to an economy of
symbolicgoods.Media,Culture&Society,2(3),261–293.
Bourdieu, P., & Wacquant, L. (2015). An invitation to reflexive sociology: Invitation to reflexive
sociology.TheCommercialPress.
Brota, D., Rodríguez, D., Puig, A., & Esteva, M. (2009).A generic framework to exploit virtual
worlds as normative and dynamic interactive spaces. In International Conference on
ComputerGraphics&VirtualReality.
Chin, J. P., Diehl, V.A., & Norman, K. L. (1988). Development of an instrument measuring user
satisfaction of the human-computer interface. In CHI’ 88: Proceedings of the SIGCHI
ConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,213–218.
Disconzi, C. M. D. G., & Saurin, T. A. (2022). Design for resilient performance: Concept and
principles.AppliedErgonomics,101.
Ducheneaut,N.,& Moore, R. J.(2004).Thesocialsideof gaming:Astudyof interaction patterns
in a massively multiplayer online game. In Proceedings of the 2004 ACM Conference on
ComputerSupportedCooperativeWork.
Grenfell,M.(2012).PierreBourdieu:Keyconcepts.AcumenPublishing.
Hackel, L. M., Mende-Siedlecki, P., & Amodio, D. M. (2020). Reinforcement learning in social
interaction: The distinguishing role of trait inference. Journal of Experimental Social
Psychology,88.
Hanson, S., Jiang, L., & Dahl, D. (2019). Enhancing consumer engagement in an online brand
community via user reputationsignals:Amulti-methodanalysis. JournaloftheAcademyof
MarketingScience,47(2),349–367.
Kim,A.J.(2000).Communitybuildingontheweb.PeachpitPress.
Krishna, S., Pelachaud, C., & Kappas, A. (2019). Towards an adaptive regulation scaffolding
through role-based strategies. In Proceedings ofthe 19thACM InternationalConferenceon
IntelligentVirtualAgents(IVA’19)(pp.263–266).
Kusiak, A. (2020). Open manufacturing: A design-for-resilience approach. International Journal
ofProductionResearch,58(15),4647–4658.TribalTheaterModel18
Lehmann,H.T.(2006).Postdramatictheatre.Routledge.
Maffesoli, M. (2022). The time of the tribes: The decline of individualism in mass society.
ShanghaiPeople’sPublishingHouse.
Merleau-Ponty,M.(1983).Thestructureofbehavior.DuquesneUniversityPress.
Nacache,J.(2007).Filmactors.JiangsuEducationPublishingHouse.
Norberg-Schulz, C. (2010). Genius loci: Towards a phenomenology of architecture. Huazhong
UniversityofScienceandTechnologyPress.
Paredes, H., & Martins, F. M. (2012). Social interaction regulation in virtual web environments
using the social theatres model. Journal of Network and Computer Applications, 35(1),
3–19.
Peterson, M. (2005). Learning interaction in an avatar-based virtual environment: A preliminary
study.PacCALLJournal,1,29–40.
Preece,J.(2000).Onlinecommunities:Designingusabilityandsupportingsociability.Wiley.
Preece, J. (2001). Sociability and usability in online communities: Determining and measuring
success.Behaviour&InformationTechnology,20(5),347–356.
Simmel, G. (2002). Georg Simmel Gesamtausgabe 19: Französisch- und italienischsprachige
Veröffentlichungen,Mélangesdephilosophierelativiste[GeorgSimmelcompleteedition19:
FrenchandItalianlanguagepublications,mixturesofrelativisticphilosophy].Suhrkamp.
Strauss, S., & Rummel, N. (2021). Promoting regulation of equal participation in online
collaboration by combining a group awareness tool and adaptive prompts. But does it even
matter? International Journal of Computer-Supported Collaborative Learning, 16(1),
67–104.
Tian, H., Gao, C., Xiao, X. Y., Liu, H., He, B. L., Wu, H., Wang, H. F., & Wu, F. (2020) SKEP:
Sentimentknowledge enhancedpre-trainingfor sentimentanalysis. In 58thAnnualMeeting
oftheAssociationforComputationalLinguistics(ACL)(pp.4067–4076).
Uday, P., & Marais, K. (2015). Designing resilient systems-of-systems: A survey of metrics,
methods,andchallenges.SystemsEngineering,18(5),491–510.
Vaswani, A., Shazeer, N., Parmar, N., Uszkoreit, J., Jones, L., Gomez, A. N., Kaiser, L., &
Polosukhin, I. (2017). Attention is all you need. In 31st Annual Conference on Neural
InformationProcessingSystems(NIPS).