EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING
SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
EKIN UGUREL
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
ugurel@uw.edu
STEFFEN COENEN
DKS Associates, Seattle, WA
scoenen@uw.edu
MINDA ZHOU CHEN
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
mindac@uw.edu
CYNTHIA CHEN
University of Washington, Seattle, WA
qzchen@uw.edu
Abstract
Rapid identification and response to breaking events, particularly those that pose a threat to
human life such as natural disasters or conflicts, is of paramount importance. The prevalence
of mobile devices and the ubiquity of network connectivity has generated a massive amount of
temporally- and spatially-stamped data. Numerous studies have used mobile data to derive in-
dividual human mobility patterns for various applications. Similarly, the increasing number of
orbital satellites has made it easier to gather high-resolution images capturing a snapshot of a
geographical area in sub-daily temporal frequency. We propose a novel data fusion methodology
integrating satellite imagery with privacy-enhanced mobile data to augment the event inference
task, whether in real-time or historical. In the absence of boots on the ground, mobile data is able
to give an approximation of human mobility, proximity to one another, and the built environment.
Ontheotherhand, satelliteimagerycanprovidevisualinformationonphysicalchangestothebuilt
and natural environment. The expected use cases for our methodology include small-scale disas-
ter detection (i.e., tornadoes, wildfires, and floods) in rural regions, search and rescue operation
augmentation for lost hikers in remote wilderness areas, and identification of active conflict areas
and population displacement in war-torn states. Our implementation is open-source on GitHub:
https://github.com/ekinugurel/SatMobFusion.
Date: January 22, 2024.
1
4202
naJ
91
]VC.sc[
1v09801.1042:viXra2EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
Introduction
In an increasingly interconnected world, the ability to rapidly identify and respond to breaking
events, particularly those that pose a threat to human life such as natural disasters or conflicts, is
ofparamountimportance. Theeffectivenessofresponseeffortscanbesignificantlyimpactedbythe
speedandaccuracyofinformationgathering,analysis,anddissemination,withthepotentialtosave
lives and mitigate damage. However, obtaining such information poses significant challenges due
to various factors. For example, there have been instances where news agencies faced difficulties in
promptly or completely delivering information about ongoing events due to a scarcity of reporters
presentintheaffectedareasStelterandCohen[2008]. Theubiquityofmobiledevicesandthenear-
constant network connectivity that characterizes our modern era have resulted in the generation of
a massive amount of temporally- and spatially-stamped data (hereafter called mobile data). These
datasets have been the subject of numerous studies aiming to derive individual human mobility
patterns for various applications, including quantifying urban vitality Sulis et al. [2018], modeling
epidemic spread Alessandretti [2022], and inferring the activities of individuals Liao et al. [2007].
Simultaneously, the increasing number of orbital satellites has facilitated the collection of high-
resolution images, capturing snapshots of geographical areas with sub-daily temporal frequency.
In this paper, we propose a novel data fusion methodology that integrates satellite imagery with
mobile data to identify breaking events in real time. This approach leverages the strengths of both
data types: mobile data provides an approximation of human mobility, proximity to one another,
and the built environment, while satellite imagery offers visual information on physical changes to
the built and natural environment. This method holds significant potential for three critical appli-
cations. First, it can enhance the detection of small-scale disasters such as tornadoes, wildfires, and
floods in rural regions, where sparse populations and limited infrastructure can impede timely de-
tection and response. Second, it can augment search and rescue operations for lost hikers in remote
wilderness areas, providing critical geospatial data to guide rescue teams and improve the chances
of a successful rescue. Before and after images of the Aru Glacier avalanche in Figure 1 suggest
that large-scale changes in the natural environment can be inferred rather straightforwardly using
satellite imagery Tian et al. [2017]. Finally, it can aid in the identification of active conflict areas
and population displacement in war-torn states, offering invaluable insights to humanitarian orga-
nizations and policy-makers. By leveraging the strengths of both satellite imagery and GPS traces,
this approach overcomes the limitations of both data types and augments the ability to monitor,
understand, and respond to dynamic events in diverse contexts. We demonstrate an application of
the proposed method on a small-scale tornado that ripped through Muskogee, Oklahoma on May
15th, 2020. By combining mobile data from the area as well as satellite images before and after
the event, we infer the occurrence of a natural disaster, identify damaged areas, and highlight hot
spots for individuals’ travel through an area (both spatially and temporally).
Our Contributions.
• We develop a practice-oriented data fusion methodology to augment the inference task for
a variety of use cases;
• We outline expected use cases and demonstrate the case study of a small-scale natural
disaster for which the proposed method is appropriate, and;
• We provide an open-source implementation of the discussed methods.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Related Work discusses previous work on leveraging
satellite images, GPS traces, social media posts, and the fusion of such datasets in a variety of
contexts. Dataset and Software describes the datasets and the open-source software we employ.
The Methodology section details our methods, which include data preprocessing steps as well as
analysis specific to each data type. The Experiments section outlines our case study on a tornadoEVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES3
Figure 1. ImagesbeforeandaftertheAruGlaciercollapseon17July2016. Images
are from Sentinel-2 on 18 June 2016 (a) and 21 July 2016 (b) with 10 m resolution.
From [Tian et al., 2017]
in Muskogee, Oklahoma, while the Use Cases section describes other potential use cases for the
proposed method. We conclude with a brief discussion of the implications of our findings.
Related Work
Historically,capturingchangesinthebuiltandnaturalenvironmentofteninvolvedon-the-ground
data collection and analysis Haddad [2011]. Surveys and field observations have been the most
traditional method to capture such changes, and continue to be so today in many industries. Prior
to the advent of modern satellites, aerial photography taken from aircrafts was another common
method to document large-scale changes to the built environment Bewley [2003]. While these
two methods of data collection are sufficient for many studies, they (a) lack the immediacy called
for in urgent real-time scenarios and (b) tend to miss developments in the absence of the proper
equipment or manpower. In the last three decades, new methods of data collection in the built and
naturalenvironmenthavebecomeprominent, includingtheuseofsatelliteimages, GPStracesfrom
mobile devices, and user-generated content from social media platforms Jongman et al. [2015], Ji
et al. [2018], Yin et al. [2021].
This literature review aims to provide a comprehensive understanding of current and recent
research in the fields of mobile data analysis, satellite imagery, and crowdsourcing, highlighting
works that have fused any two of them to assist in the inference task. Table 1 summarizes some of
the papers discussed in the following paragraphs.
Satellite Imagery and Remote Sensing. The use of satellite imagery for event detection and
inference has been well-documented. Satellite images provide a bird’s-eye view of the Earth’s
surface, enabling the detection of physical changes over time. Though the granularity of satellite
images alone may not provide the nuanced information needed in certain scenarios, they are useful
in understanding big-picture changes on the built and natural environment. Particularly in the
last five years, the proliferation of commercial satellite imagery providers has enabled access to this4EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
Table 1. Studiesthathaveusedmobiledata/satelliteimageryforvariouspurposes.
Author Date Datasets Used Applications
Jongman et al. 2015 Satellite imagery, Early flood detection in the Philip-
Twitter posts pines and Pakistan
Molinier et al. 2016 Satellite imagery, Deriving biomass maps of forests
mobile app data
Fayne et al. 2017 Satellite imagery Flood detection in the Lower
Mekong Basin
Ji et al. 2018 Satellite imagery Collapsedbuildingdetectionin2010
Haiti Earthquake
Sulis et al. 2018 Transit smart card Quantifyingdiversityandvitalityin
data, Twitter posts London
Said et al. 2019 Satellite imagery, Natural disaster detection
social media posts
Pokhryiyal et al. 2020 Satellite imagery, EstimationofpovertylevelsinHaiti
GPS traces
Yin et al. 2021 Satellite imagery, Road attribute detection in Singa-
GPS traces pore and Jakarta
Belcastro et al. 2021 Social media posts Small-scale emergency detection
data type at a short notice and in real-time. This has been used in various applications, such as
disaster management Voigt et al. [2007], urban planning Albert et al. [2017], Karunanithi et al.
[2016], and environmental monitoring Xu [2010].
Recent advancements in machine learning have further enhanced the capabilities of satellite
imagery analysis. For instance, convolutional neural networks have been used to automatically
detect and classify objects in satellite images Zhang et al. [2016]. Meta’s novel object classification
method, Segment Anything Kirillov et al. [2023], has been proposed for the geospatial domain
with great promise Wu and Osco [2023]. These developments have opened up new possibilities for
event detection and inference, as it allows for the automated analysis of large volumes of satellite
imagery and greatly reduces image processing time, allowing for subsequent immediate response
on the ground.
GPS Traces from Mobile Devices. Parallel to the advancements in satellite imagery analysis,
the proliferation of GPS-enabled mobile devices has led to an explosion of mobile data, providing
detailed information about the movements of individuals and groups Zheng et al. [2008]. Research
has delved into the use of mobile data for tracking population movements Bengtsson et al. [2011],
understanding social behavior Hong et al. [2008], Calabrese et al. [2010], predicting and managing
traffic patterns Herrera et al. [2010], and more.
The richness of this data source has also led to the development of new methods for event
detection and inference. For instance, GPS traces have been used to detect social events Castro
et al. [2014], Pan et al. [2013], infer the activities of individuals Liao et al. [2007], and understand
where individuals conduct their daily activities Chen et al. [2014]. However, the fusion of mobile
datawithotherdatasourcesforreal-timeeventidentificationandinferenceinthebuiltandnatural
environment, particularly in the context of emergencies and disasters, is an area that deserves
further exploration.
Crowdsourcing and Social Media Data. Crowdsourcing has emerged as a powerful tool for
gatheringandanalyzingdata,particularlyinthecontextofeventdetectionandresponse. Theterm
”crowdsourcing” refers to the practice of obtaining information or input into a task or project byEVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES5
enlisting the services of a large number of people, either paid or unpaid, typically via the internet
Estell´es-Arolas and L. Guevara [2012]. In the context of event detection, crowdsourcing can be
used to gather real-time information from individuals who are directly experiencing or observing
the event Goodchild [2007]. One of the most notable examples of crowdsourcing in event detection
is the Ushahidi platform, which was used to gather and map reports of violence in Kenya after the
post-election violence in 2008 Okolloh [2009]. Since then, Ushahidi has been used in various other
contexts, including disaster response and environmental monitoring.
Crowdsourcing is closely linked to social media’s rise to prominence as a crucial news outlet
during disasters. A mountain of literature has been published on the promises of social media data
in augmenting the inference task in a range of scenarios. Social media websites provide a platform
for individuals to share real-time information on developing events, including their impacts and
the needs of affected communities Palen et al. [2007]. The information circulated on social media
tends to dissipate quicker and be more specific than official news outlets, as anyone and everyone
has the ability to share and post Palen [2008]. This information has been used by disaster response
organizationstobetterunderstandthesituationonthegroundandcoordinatetheirresponseefforts.
Several studies have explored the use of social media data in disaster response. For instance,
[Sakaki et al., 2010] developed a system that uses Twitter data to detect earthquakes in real-time.
Similarly, [Ashktorab et al., 2014] developed a system that uses Twitter data to extract actionable
information during disasters, such as requests for help or reports of infrastructure damage. [Guan
andChen,2014]developedametrictoquantifytheevolutionofdisastersbasedonTwitteractivities,
demonstrating its use for damage detection during Hurricane Sandy, affecting much of the eastern
United States and various Caribbean nations. More recently, social media data has been combined
with other data sources for disaster response. For example, [Jongman et al., 2015] proposed a
method for fusing social media data and satellite imagery to detect floods. This approach leverages
the strengths of both data sources, using social media data to provide real-time information about
the flood and satellite imagery to provide a macro view of the flood’s impacts. We refer the reader
to [Said et al., 2019] for a broader review of these approaches.
Despite the significant potential of crowdsourcing and social media data for event detection and
response, there are notable limitations that must be acknowledged. The quality and reliability of
crowdsourced data can vary significantly. Misinformation or inaccurate reports can be dissemi-
nated, either unintentionally due to confusion or panic or intentionally as a form of manipulation
or cyberattack Allcott et al. [2019]. This can lead to false positives in event detection or mis-
directed response efforts. Additionally, crowdsourcing is inherently dependent on the availability
and willingness of individuals to contribute information. In certain scenarios, such as in remote
wilderness areas or war-torn regions, the number of individuals able to contribute data may be
limited. Similarly, during small-scale or rapidly unfolding events, there may not be sufficient time
for crowdsourced information to be gathered and analyzed. These limitations highlight the need
for complementary approaches to event detection and response. Our proposed method addresses
these limitations by providing a reliable, real-time source of information that is not dependent on
individual contributions or vulnerable to the same misinformation risks.
Data Fusion for Event Inference. While there is a substantial body of research on the use of
mobile data and satellite imagery independently, there is a noticeable gap in the literature when
it comes to their combined use for real-time event identification and response. This gap represents
a significant opportunity for new research that can contribute to both academic knowledge and
practical applications in disaster management, conflict monitoring, as well as search and rescue
operations.
The fusion of satellite imagery and GPS traces for event inference is a relatively new area of
research and is uniquely poised to overcome the limitations placed on only analyzing each data
source individually. Though GPS traces have emerged as a prominent data source, it should be6EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
noted that such datasets tend to exclude certain populations, such as the extreme poor Pokhriyal
et al. [2020]. In developing countries, this population may represent a significant share of the
population. Thus, in the event of an emergency, mobile data cannot be the sole indicator of
irregular movement patterns. Satellite imagery itself may also be inadequate in event inference due
to the lack of specific mobility information. However, when combined, these two data sources can
supplement each other and leverage the additional information to better inform the inference task.
Though previous studies have explored the intersection of these two data sources, the direction
of application we intend to use our tool differs from previous works. For instance, [Yin et al., 2021]
proposed a method for fusing satellite imagery and GPS traces to infer and fill in road attributes
such as speed limits and lane widths, with the goal of developing a more comprehensive view of
road networks globally. [Pokhriyal et al., 2020] fused satellite images with mobile data to estimate
povertylevelsinHaiti,whereanationwidecensushadnotbeenconductedsince2012. Indeveloping
countries where there may not be the economic resources necessary to complete annual censuses,
using a combination of data sources to estimate various baselines may emerge as a crucial tool
for financial aid allocation and future urban planning. A combination of mobile data and satellite
imageryhasalsobeenusedtostudyforestsandobtainbiomassmeasurementsMolinieretal.[2016].
This study combined citizen science-powered mobile data collection and satellite imagery to garner
forest information and produce biomass maps in a cost effective manner.
Notably, both the work of Yin et al. and Pokhriyal et al. provide information that can be
used for future planning. However, we hope to use GPS traces and satellite imagery in real time
for instantaneous data analysis and event identification. Additionally, unlike in Molinier et al.,
where mobile data is actively collected through an app that must be user-operated, we obtain GPS
traces passively through users’ interactions with various apps (not a specific one). Thus, our event
detection and inference capabilities are completely powered by remote data, and without the need
for active, real-time human participation.
Dataset and Software
For mobile data, we employ privacy-protected, passively generated GPS data from an American
data solution provider specializing in geospatial analytics. The dataset contains discrete GPS
points of 2,000 anonymous, opted-in individuals in the Tulsa metropolitan area between December
2019 and July 2020. The locational data recorded includes timestamps, unique device identifiers,
latitudes and longitudes, and a measure of data precision (i.e., a spatial radius for which the
provider has 95% confidence in the reported coordinates). In addition to anonymizing the data,
the data provider obfuscates home locations to the census-block group level, and removes sensitive
points of interest from the dataset, in order to preserve privacy. It’s also crucial to note that the
temporal granularity of this data is determined by user activity, meaning data points are generated
irregularly and not at fixed intervals. This non-uniformity of temporal data represents the actual,
inconsistent frequency of device usage among the sampled population.
Forsatelliteimagery,wepulldatafromPlanetLabs,aprivateAmericancompanythatspecializes
in Earth imaging. Planet operates a large constellation of miniature satellites, known as Doves,
whichcontinuallycaptureandtransmitimagesofEarth. The3-bandimagesweusehaveundergone
orthorectification, a process that corrects the geometric distortions in an image to represent a flat
surface, thereby ensuring that the scale is uniform throughout. This makes the images reliable for
distancemeasurementsandforoverlayingwithothergeospatialdata. Additionally,theimageshave
beencolor-correctedtoensurethatthecolorsrepresentedareascloseaspossibletowhatthehuman
eye would perceive if viewing the scene directly. This enhances the clarity and interpretability of
the images, making them a valuable resource for our research.
We implemented our methodology in the Python programming language van Rossum [1995].
We used pandas Wes McKinney [2010] to read and wrangle mobile data and Rasterio Gillies
et al. [2013–] to manipulate satellite images. We also leveraged NumPy Harris et al. [2020] for aEVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES7
variety of array operations, GeoPandas Jordahl et al. [2019] for operations involving coordinates,
and scikit-mobility Pappalardo et al. [2019] to conduct mobile data cleaning and preprocessing.
Last but not least, we used matplotlib Hunter [2007] to produce any visualizations of our results.
Any other chunk of code we developed can be found on our GitHub repository: https://github.
com/ekinugurel/SatMobFusion.
Methodology
Ourmethodologyhastwomodules—onethatdealswiththeanalysisofmobiledata, andanother
with that of satellite imagery. In both modules, we discuss relevant preprocessing methods as well
as analysis steps to aid in the inference task. Figure 2 shows the high-level steps in preprocessing
and analysis of both datasets while also outlining key geospatial analysis processes for the three
use cases discussed in the Introduction.
Figure 2. Methodological flowchart; the top bins describe the order of processes
employed in this paper, while the bottom outlines key geospatial analysis metrics
to carry out the inference task
Mobile Data. For mobile data, the general preprocessing workflow is as follows:
(1) Spatial Partitioning8EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
(2) Coordinate Reference System (CRS) Projection
(3) Data Filtering
To avoid wastefulness in computation, we begin by partitioning the mobile data spatially, which
we do by drawing a bounding box using four sets of coordinates. In practice, there are several ways
to achieve this at scale: Leveraging a geocoding application protocol interface (API) to obtain the
coordinates based on an existing point of interest, partitioning by federal and/or state designations
such as census tracts, ZIP codes, or county borders, manually typing in a bounding box (i.e., by
defining the geographic coordinates of the corners of the box), or obtaining a KMZ file from the
National Oceanic and Atmospheric Administration’s Damage Assessment Toolkit. For this effort,
we used the last option to derive the centroid coordinates of the affected area around which we
drew a 1 km2 bounding square.
Once the data is spatially partitioned, we project coordinates to the appropriate CRS. Different
CRSs are designed to accurately represent different aspects of the Earth’s surface. Some are
designedtopreservearea,whileotherspreserveshape,distance,ordirection. Inthecontextofevent
inference, the optimal choice of CRS should minimize bias in the derived mobility metrics, which
may exist due to distortions of distances and areas. Therefore, we use an equal-area projection
around UTM Zone 15, which covers the area around our case study.
We then filter out any erroneous data points based on a threshold of segment velocity. Since
this is done ”as the crow flies” and not with respect to the underlying transportation network, this
threshold should be set conservatively. Velocity filtering discards infeasible jumps and oscillations
in trajectories, which may occur as a result of tall buildings blocking a satellite’s line of sight to the
mobile device (termed ”urban canyon effect”, Ben-Moshe et al. [2011]). These oscillations may also
occur due to low data precision as a result of the ”cold-start problem”—when a signal dropped by
WiFi is not immediately picked up by a satellite, requiring some time before being able to acquire
navigation data and calculate a position Lehtinen et al. [2008].
Once preprocessing is finished, we conduct inference-related analyses using the following steps:
(1) Experimental Design Partitioning
(2) Exploratory Data Analysis (EDA)
(3) Statistical Testing
Specifically, we first define pre-, during-, and post-event periods that temporally segment the
data. Thepurposeofthispartitioningistoderivekeymetricsforeachperiod, whichwouldassistin
detectinganomaliesandenablemoreformalstatisticaltests. Thedurationoftheseperiodsdepends
onthenatureoftheanalysis—fornaturaldisastersliketornadoesorhurricanes,the”during”period
may be a few hours, while for applications in search & rescue or in conflict areas, the same period
may only last a few minutes.
In conducting EDA on time-series mobile data, the objectives are to understand the structure of
the data (i.e., identifying immediate trends, patterns, or outliers), detect seasonality (i.e., periodic
fluctuations), and prepare the data for more formal anomaly detection techniques and statistical
tests. The EDA process can also assist in formulating hypotheses about possible causes for anom-
alies by exploring relationships between the target variable and other variables. In the context of
mobile data within constrained geography, the metrics we analyze include the radius of gyration
r (the characteristic distance traveled by an individual in a given period, Equation 1) Song et al.
g
[2010], the number of extended stays at a particular location c (Equation 3), and the number of
visits per time unit v.
(cid:118)
(cid:117) n
(cid:117)1 (cid:88)
(1) r g = (cid:116) (r i−r cm)2
n
i=1EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES9
where r represents the i = 1,...,n locations recorded for the individual and r = 1 (cid:80)n r is
i cm n i=1 i
the center of mass of the period’s trajectory.
n
(cid:88)
(2) c = c ,
i
i=1
(cid:40)
1 if t = 1,l = 1
i i
(3) c =
i
0 otherwise
where t is an indicator variable denoting whether a device is observed more than once within
i
a 15-minute period and l is an indicator variable denoting whether multiple observations of the
i
device are within a 100-meter radius (only considered if t = 1). We note that these thresholds are
i
robust and suggest adjusting them to suit the underlying domain.
m
(cid:88)
(4) v = v
j
j=1
wherej = 1,...,mindexesthesubsectionsoftheinspectedgeographicalareaandv isanindicator
j
variable denoting whether the individual was located in that subsection in the given period.
Finally, we conduct statistical tests to confirm the presence of anomalies. In this paper, we
employ the Z-score method (Equation 5), in which the principle is to assume the data follows a
normal distribution and then to identify data points that are too far from the mean.
x−µ
(5) Z =
σ
where x is a data point, µ is the mean of the dataset, and σ is the standard deviation. We consider
Z-scores above 3 (or below -3) an anomaly.
Satellite Imagery. The general workflow for processing and analyzing satellite images is as fol-
lows:
(1) Specify tradeoff between region-of-interest (ROI) coverage and time gap to the event of
interest
(2) Pull imagery and project to CRS
(3) Image Analysis: RGB, greyscale, and NDVI differences
Providers like Planet Labs have multiple orbital satellites whose coverage area may intersect—
the goal of each satellite is to pass over a particular geography at least once per day; however,
various factors can influence the availability of imagery and cause irregular gaps in observation,
including cloud cover, technical issues with onboard cameras or the image transmission process,
and regulatory restrictions imposed by nation-states. For these reasons, we derive a utility metric
(Equation 6) to determine the best available before and after image for an event of interest. This
metric weighs the image’s area of coverage against its time gap with the event using a tradeoff
coefficient—the idea is to maximize the spatial overlap between the image and the ROI while
minimizing the number of days between the images.
A |t −t |
img img evt
(6) u = −
A ϕ
evt
where the first term denotes the percent of ROI covered by the image (i.e., A is the area of the
img
image and A is the area affected by the event), the numerator of the second term denotes the
evt
number of days between the images, and ϕ is the coverage tradeoff coefficient. In this work, we use
ϕ = 0.25, meaning that 25% (percentage points) more coverage of the AOI is defined to be worth
as much as the image being taken 1 day before or after the event.E10VENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
As an additional filter to the above utility metric, we require all images to have less than 50%
cloud coverage. Once we have the satellite images, we project them to the same CRS we used for
the mobile data to avoid misalignment.
We analyze the images to identify any physical changes to the built and natural environment.
This analysis involves looking at the regular visible spectrum (RGB), a grayscale version (i.e.,
luminosity, Equation 7), and the Normalized Difference Vegetation Index (NDVI, Equation 8),
which measures the greenness and the density of the vegetation captured in a satellite image.
NIR−R
(7) NDVI =
NIR+R
(8) GS = 0.299R+0.587G+0.114B
where NIR, R, G, and B are near-infrared, red, green, and blue reflectances, respectively. NDVI
is always between -1 and 1, where negative values signify the presence of clouds, water, or snow,
values close to zero signify earthy rocks and bare soil, and positive values signify the existence of
some vegetation (with more positive meaning more green).
Figure 3 shows a decision tree outlining when the proposed method should be employed based
on a series of conditions, organized by the cognitive load required to succeed in the inference task.
Intuitively, crowdsourcing may be the preferred option for most organizations and individuals but
can be unreliable due to the threat of misinformation or cybersecurity breaches. Similarly, while
cameras and other in-situ sensors could provide longer visual feeds that are also easier to interpret,
their availability in certain settings tends to be sparse. If the above two conditions are true,
and cloud-free satellite imagery is available, then employing our method may be of interest to
organizations and individuals alike.
Figure 3. Usage decision tree for the proposed method
Relating to the above figure, we emphasize three points about the proposed methodology:EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACE1S1
(a) Radius of Gyration (b) Number of Stays per day
Figure 4. EDA of mobility metrics in the before, during, and after periods
(1) The process of event detection starts with mobile data, not satellite imagery, due to the
feasibilityofpassivelymonitoringgeographybasedonmobilitymetrics. However,thefusion
of the two sources is what enables us to make an inference.
(2) The proposed methodology is designed to be flexible, allowing the user to define an event
of interest using a configuration file.
(3) Thisapproachcanbeusedwithbothreal-timeandhistoricaldata,dependingonthecontext
of the application, making it a potentially powerful tool for improving emergency response
times and information percolation speeds.
Case Study
To validate our proposed methodology, we conducted a case study on the EF-1 tornado that
hit near Muskogee, Oklahoma on May 15, 2020. This event provided an opportunity to test our
approach in a real-world scenario involving a small-scale disaster in a rural region.
After spatially partitioning the GPS traces to include the subset within the bounding box of
the tornado, we projected all data to UTM Zone 15 and filtered the data by the logic described
in Section . Then, we defined the two weeks before the day of the event (May 2 - May 15) as the
before, the day of the event (May 15) as the during, and the week after the event (May 15 - May
22) as the after periods and began exploring the data. Figure 4 visualizes the time series of two
metrics, highlighting the periods by color; there are no noticeable changes in the radius of gyration,
while the number of extended stays at a given location within the ROI increases sharply the day
after the event. However, Z-score tests on both metrics do not detect any anomalies.
However, when we look at the third metric (visits per hour to the ROI, Figure 5), we see an
unmistakable outlier; on the day of the tornado, visits to the area increased sharply at 2 pm and
again at 6 pm, substantially beyond the usual fluctuations captured by the 95% confidence interval
(lightblueshade)inthebeforeandafterperiods. Furthermore, Z-scoretestsonthismetricconfirm
the hypothesis: Two anomalies exist in the data and they are at 2 pm (Z = 3.47) and at 6 pm
(Z = 4.87) on May 15th.
Followingtheanomalydetection,wepullinsatelliteimageryasdescribedintheprevioussection.
We use the utility metric in Equation 6 to land on two images, one from May 9 and another from
May 18. These two images are free of clouds and strike a balance between the percent of ROI
covered and the number of days separating them from the event.
We analyze the images based on visual inspection, the greyscale difference, and the NDVI dif-
ference (Figure 6). We highlight two spots on the regular color band images in which changes
to the soil and a corner building are apparent to the naked eye. Furthermore, while noisy, theE12VENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
Figure 5. VisitsperhourtotheROIinthebefore,during,andafterperiodssorted
by hour of day
greyscale difference image shows changes to luminosity and the NDVI difference image shows loss
of vegetation throughout the captured area (note that 0.0 is shown in light green).
The images show clear evidence of physical changes to the ROI. When combined with insights
from GPS traces, and even without hindsight bias, we would infer that a mildly-destructive natural
disaster occurred, piquing passerby’s interest as well as landowners’ concern on the day of the event
(resulting in greater visits to the ROI).
Use Cases
The proposed methodology is expected to outperform existing methods for data collection and
information percolation for a range of use cases. We especially anticipate broad applicability in the
following settings:
• Intelligent transportation systems: The likelihood of finding parking approximate to
a desired location and in a timely manner has been shown to be a determinant of travelers’
mode choice Assemi et al. [2020]. Therefore, providing accurate parking-related informa-
tion can augment an individual’s decision-making process. Public and private entities can
leverage the proposed method to provide real-time information on parking availability. The
temporal sparsity of satellite imagery can be augmented with GPS traces to provide an
online learning framework for the likelihood of finding parking.
• Events in rural areas: In rural areas where traditional data collection methods may
be sparse or non-existent, our methodology could provide valuable insights into events as
they unfold. The combination of satellite imagery and mobile data could help identify and
respond to emergencies such as wildfires, floods, or lost hikers.
• Extreme-weather events: During extreme-weather events like hurricanes, tornadoes, or
blizzards, our methodology could provide real-time information about the event’s impactEVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACE1S3
(a) Before the Muskogee tornado on May 9, 2020 (b) After the Muskogee tornado on May 18, 2020
(c) Greyscale difference between the two images (d) NDVI difference between the two images
Figure 6. Satellite imagery with 10m resolution documenting changes to the built
and natural environment after the Muskogee tornado
andaidincoordinatingresponseefforts. Theabilitytoquicklyidentifyareasofhighimpact
could help prioritize resource allocation and rescue operations.
• War-torn states: In regions affected by conflict, obtaining reliable on-the-ground infor-
mationcanbechallenging. Satelliteimagerycombinedwithmobiledatacouldhelpidentify
areas of active conflict, population displacement, or infrastructure damage.
• Areas without network connectivity: Inareaswherenetworkconnectivityislimitedor
non-existent,suchasremotewildernessareasorduringlarge-scalenetworkoutages,satellite
imagery can still provide valuable data. When combined with historical or intermittent
mobile data, this could help identify and respond to events such as lost hikers or the spread
of wildfires.
• National security matters: Our methodology could also be used in the context of na-
tional security, helping to identify potential threats or unusual activities. The fusion of
satellite imagery with mobile data could provide a more comprehensive picture of activities
across a wide geographical area.
In each of these use cases, our methodology aims to provide a more nuanced and timely under-
standing of events as they unfold, potentially improving response times and outcomes.
Conclusion
WehavepresentedanoveldatafusionmethodologycombiningsatelliteimagerywithGPStraces
generated from mobile devices. Our approach leverages the strengths of both data types: mobileE14VENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
data provides an approximation of human mobility, proximity to one another, and the built envi-
ronment, while satellite imagery offers visual insights into physical changes to the built and natural
environment. Furthermore, we have demonstrated the case study of a small-scale tornado, show-
ing the promise of our method in identifying anomalies in movement patterns using mobile data,
changes to the built environment using satellite imagery, and inferring the cause of both using our
fusion methodology.
Our methodology is viable due to the increasing accessibility of commercial data providers spe-
cializinginremotesensingandmobiledevices. Thistrendisonlyexpectedtocontinue—thenumber
of active orbital satellites has grown exponentially since 2017 orb [2022], while the percentage of
Americans that own a smartphone has risen to 97% mob [2021]. The continued commercialization
of such products will enable researchers and practitioners to monitor, categorize, and understand
the natural and built environments in ways unimaginable just 50 years ago. We hope our method
is a step in this direction, enabling others to pursue endeavors made possible by the fusion of these
data sources.
Data Access Statement
The authors note that only Ekin Ugurel had access to the privacy-protected GPS dataset. Data
supportingthisstudycannot be madeavailableduetoprivacy-preservingresearch agreementswith
the data provider.
Author Contributions
The authors confirm contribution to the paper as follows: study conception and design: E.
Ugurel, S. Coenen; data collection: E. Ugurel, S. Coenen; analysis and interpretation of results: E.
Ugurel, S. Coenen; draft manuscript preparation: E. Ugurel, M. Chen, S. Coenen, C. Chen. All
authors reviewed the results and approved the final version of the manuscript.EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACE1S5
References
Mobilefactsheet.Technicalreport,PewReseearchCenter,2021.URLhttps://www.pewresearch.
org/internet/fact-sheet/mobile/.
Online index of objects launched into outer space. Technical report, United Nations - Office of
Outer Space Affairs, 2022.
A.Albert,J.Kaur,andM.Gonzalez. Usingconvolutionalnetworksandsatelliteimagerytoidentify
patternsinurbanenvironmentsatalargescale. pages1357–1366,082017. doi: 10.1145/3097983.
3098070.
L. Alessandretti. What human mobility data tell us about COVID-19 spread. Nature Reviews
Physics, 4(1):12–13, Jan. 2022. ISSN 2522-5820. doi: 10.1038/s42254-021-00407-1. URL https:
//www.nature.com/articles/s42254-021-00407-1. Number: 1 Publisher: Nature Publishing
Group.
H. Allcott, M. Gentzkow, and C. Yu. Trends in the diffusion of misinformation on social media.
Research & Politics, 6(2):2053168019848554, 2019.
Z. Ashktorab, C. Brown, M. Nandi, and A. Culotta. Tweedr: Mining twitter to inform disaster
response. In International Conference on Information Systems for Crisis Response and Manage-
ment, 2014.
B. Assemi, D. Baker, and A. Paz. Searching for on-street parking: An empirical investigation of
the factors influencing cruise time. Transport Policy, 97:186–196, 2020.
B. Ben-Moshe, E. Elkin, H. Levi, and A. Weissman. Improving Accuracy of GNSS Devices in
Urban Canyons. page 6, 2011.
L. Bengtsson, X. Lu, A. Thorson, R. Garfieldarfier, and J. Schreeb. Improved response to disasters
and outbreaks by tracking population movements with mobile phone network data: A post-
earthquake geospatial study in haiti. PLoS medicine, 8:e1001083, 08 2011. doi: 10.1371/journal.
pmed.1001083.
R. Bewley. Aerial survey for archaeology. The Photogrammetric Record, 18:273 – 292, 12 2003. doi:
10.1046/j.0031-868X.2003.00023.x.
F. Calabrese, M. Colonna, P. Lovisolo, D. Parata, and C. Ratti. Real-time urban monitoring using
cell phones: A case study in rome. IEEE transactions on intelligent transportation systems, 12
(1):141–151, 2010.
P. Castro, D. Zhang, C. Chen, S. Li, and G. Pan. From taxi gps traces to social and community
dynamics: A survey. ACM Computing Surveys, 46, 01 2014. doi: 10.1145/2543581.2543584.
C. Chen, L. Bian, and J. Ma. From traces to trajectories: How well can we guess activity locations
from mobile phone traces? Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 46:326–337,
2014.
E. Estell´es-Arolas and F. G. L. Guevara. Towards an integrated crowdsourcing definition. Journal
of Information Science, 38, 04 2012. doi: 10.1177/0165551512437638.
S. Gillies et al. Rasterio: geospatial raster i/o for Python programmers, 2013–. URL https:
//github.com/rasterio/rasterio.
M. F. Goodchild. Citizens as sensors: the world of volunteered geography. GeoJournal, 69:211–221,
2007.
X.GuanandC.Chen. Usingsocialmediadatatounderstandandassessdisasters. Natural hazards,
74:837–850, 2014.
N. Haddad. From ground surveying to 3d laser scanner: A review of techniques used for spatial
documentation of historic sites. Journal of King Saud University - Engineering Sciences, 23:
109–118, 06 2011. doi: 10.1016/j.jksues.2011.03.001.
C. R. Harris, K. J. Millman, S. J. van der Walt, R. Gommers, P. Virtanen, D. Cournapeau,
E. Wieser, J. Taylor, S. Berg, N. J. Smith, R. Kern, M. Picus, S. Hoyer, M. H. van Kerkwijk,
M. Brett, A. Haldane, J. F. del R´ıo, M. Wiebe, P. Peterson, P. G´erard-Marchant, K. Sheppard,E16VENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACES
T. Reddy, W. Weckesser, H. Abbasi, C. Gohlke, and T. E. Oliphant. Array programming with
NumPy. Nature, 585(7825):357–362, Sept. 2020. doi: 10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2. URL https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41586-020-2649-2.
J. C. Herrera, D. B. Work, R. Herring, X. J. Ban, Q. Jacobson, and A. M. Bayen. Evaluation
of traffic data obtained via gps-enabled mobile phones: The mobile century field experiment.
Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 18(4):568–583, 2010.
S.-J.Hong, J.Thong, J.Y.Moon, andK.Tam. Understandingthebehaviorofmobiledataservices
consumers.InformationSystemsFrontiers,10:431–445,092008.doi: 10.1007/s10796-008-9096-1.
J. D. Hunter. Matplotlib: A 2d graphics environment. Computing in Science & Engineering, 9(3):
90–95, 2007. doi: 10.1109/MCSE.2007.55.
M. Ji, L. Liu, and M. Buchroithner. Identifying collapsed buildings using post-earthquake satellite
imagery and convolutional neural networks: A case study of the 2010 haiti earthquake. Remote
Sensing, 10(11):1689, 2018.
B. Jongman, J. Wagemaker, B. Revilla Romero, and E. Coughlan de Perez. Early flood detection
for rapid humanitarian response: harnessing near real-time satellite and twitter signals. ISPRS
International Journal of Geo-Information, 4(4):2246–2266, 2015.
K. Jordahl, J. V. den Bossche, J. Wasserman, J. McBride, J. Gerard, M. Fleischmann, J. Tratner,
M. Perry, C. Farmer, G. A. Hjelle, S. Gillies, M. Cochran, M. Bartos, L. Culbertson, N. Eu-
bank, maxalbert, S. Rey, A. Bilogur, D. Arribas-Bel, C. Ren, J. Wilson, M. Journois, L. J.
Wolf, L. Wasser, O¨mer O¨zak, YuichiNotoya, F. Leblanc, Filipe, C. Holdgraf, and A. Greenhall.
geopandas/geopandas: v0.6.1, Oct. 2019. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.3483425.
M.Karunanithi, S.Kumar, andP.Ponnusamy. Useofhighresolutiongoogleearthsatelliteimagery
in landuse map preparation for urban related applications. Procedia Technology, 24:1835–1842,
12 2016. doi: 10.1016/j.protcy.2016.05.231.
A. Kirillov, E. Mintun, N. Ravi, H. Mao, C. Rolland, L. Gustafson, T. Xiao, S. Whitehead, A. C.
Berg, W.-Y. Lo, P. Doll´ar, and R. Girshick. Segment anything. arXiv:2304.02643, 2023.
M. Lehtinen, A. Happonen, and J. Ikonen. Accuracy and time to first fix using consumer-grade gps
receivers. In2008 16th International Conference on Software, Telecommunications and Computer
Networks, pages 334–340, 2008. doi: 10.1109/SOFTCOM.2008.4669506.
L. Liao, D. Fox, and H. Kautz. Extracting places and activities from gps traces using hierarchical
conditional random fields. The International Journal of Robotics Research, 26(1):119–134, 2007.
M. Molinier, C. L´opez-S´anchez, T. Toivanen, I. Korpela, J. J. Corral-Rivas, R. Tergujeff, and
T. H¨ame. Relasphone—mobile and participative in situ forest biomass measurements supporting
satellite image mapping. Remote Sensing, 8:869–891, 10 2016. doi: 10.3390/rs8100869.
O. Okolloh. Ushahidi, or ‘testimony’: Web 2.0 tools for crowdsourcing crisis information. Partici-
patory learning and action, 59(1):65–70, 2009.
L. Palen. Online social media in crisis events. Educause Quarterly, 31:76–78, 01 2008.
L. Palen, S. Vieweg, J. Sutton, S. B. Liu, and A. Hughes. Crisis informatics: Studying crisis in
a networked world. In Proceedings of the Third International Conference on E-Social Science,
pages 7–9, 2007.
G. Pan, G. Qi, Z. Wu, D. Zhang, and S. Li. Land-use classification using taxi gps traces. Intelligent
Transportation Systems, IEEE Transactions on, 14:113–123, 03 2013. doi: 10.1109/TITS.2012.
2209201.
L. Pappalardo, F. Simini, G. Barlacchi, and R. Pellungrini. scikit-mobility: A python library for
the analysis, generation and risk assessment of mobility data. arXiv preprint arXiv:1907.07062,
2019.
N. Pokhriyal, O. Zambrano, J. Linares, and H. Hern´andez. Estimating and Forecasting Income
Poverty and Inequality in Haiti Using Satellite Imagery and Mobile Phone Data. 06 2020. doi:
10.18235/0002466.EVENT DETECTION FROM NOVEL DATA SOURCES: LEVERAGING SATELLITE IMAGERY ALONGSIDE GPS TRACE1S7
N.Said,K.Ahmad,M.Riegler,K.Pogorelov,L.Hassan,N.Ahmad,andN.Conci.Naturaldisasters
detection in social media and satellite imagery: a survey. Multimedia Tools and Applications, 78:
31267–31302, 2019.
T. Sakaki, M. Okazaki, and Y. Matsuo. Earthquake shakes twitter users: real-time event detection
by social sensors. In Proceedings of the 19th international conference on World wide web, pages
851–860, 2010.
C.Song,Z.Qu,N.Blumm,andA.-L.Barab´asi. Limitsofpredictabilityinhumanmobility. Science,
327(5968):1018–1021, 2010.
B. Stelter and N. Cohen. Citizen journalists provided glimpses of mumbai attacks. The New York
Times, 2008. URL https://www.nytimes.com/2008/11/30/world/asia/30twitter.html#:~:
text=From%20his%20terrace%20on%20Colaba,every%20move%20on%20the%20Internet.
P. Sulis, E. Manley, C. Zhong, and M. Batty. Using mobility data as proxy for measuring urban
vitality. Journal of Spatial Information Science, 2018(16):137–162, 2018.
L. Tian, T. Yao, Y. Gao, L. Thompson, E. Mosley-Thompson, S. Muhammad, J. Zong, C. Wang,
S. Jin, Z. Li, and et al. Two glaciers collapse in western tibet. Journal of Glaciology, 63(237):
194–197, 2017. doi: 10.1017/jog.2016.122.
G. van Rossum. Python tutorial. Technical Report CS-R9526, Centrum voor Wiskunde en Infor-
matica (CWI), Amsterdam, May 1995.
S. Voigt, T. Kemper, T. Riedlinger, R. Kiefl, K. Scholte, and H. Mehl. Satellite image analysis for
disaster and crisis-management support. IEEE transactions on geoscience and remote sensing,
45(6):1520–1528, 2007.
Wes McKinney. Data Structures for Statistical Computing in Python. In St´efan van der Walt and
Jarrod Millman, editors, Proceedings of the 9th Python in Science Conference, pages 56 – 61,
2010. doi: 10.25080/Majora-92bf1922-00a.
Q.WuandL.P.Osco. samgeo: APythonpackageforsegmentinggeospatialdatawiththeSegment
Anything Model (SAM), May 2023. URL https://doi.org/10.5281/zenodo.7966658.
H. Xu. Analysis of impervious surface and its impact on urban heat environment using the nor-
malized difference impervious surface index (ndisi). Photogrammetric Engineering & Remote
Sensing, 76(5):557–565, 2010.
Y. Yin, A. Tran, Y. Zhang, W. Hu, G. Wang, J. Varadarajan, R. Zimmermann, and S.-K. Ng.
Multimodal fusion of satellite images and crowdsourced gps traces for robust road attribute
detection. In Proceedings of the 29th International Conference on Advances in Geographic Infor-
mation Systems, pages 107–116, 2021.
L. Zhang, L. Zhang, and B. Du. Deep learning for remote sensing data: A technical tutorial on the
state of the art. IEEE Geoscience and remote sensing magazine, 4(2):22–40, 2016.
Y. Zheng, Q. Li, Y. Chen, X. Xie, and W.-Y. Ma. Understanding mobility based on gps data. In
Proceedings of the 10th international conference on Ubiquitous computing, pages 312–321, 2008.