Investigating Trading Mechanisms as a Driver for
User Experience in Racing Games
Georg Arbesser-Rastburg Thomas Olip Johanna Pirker
Graz University of Technology Graz University of Technology Ludwig-Maximilians-Universität München
Graz, Austria Graz, Austria Munich, Germany
georg.arbesser-rastburg@tugraz.at thomas.olip@gmail.com jpirker@iicm.edu
Abstract—The exchange of digital goods has become a signifi- beenresearchedinthepastyears,forinstance,therelationship
cantaspectoftheglobaleconomy,withdigitalproductsoffering between loot boxes and gambling [5].
inexpensive reproduction and distribution. In-game objects, a
However,despitetheextensiveresearchinthedigitalgoods
type of digital currency, have emerged as tradable commodities
industry, there has yet to be research on the effect of in-
withingamingecosystems.Despiteextensiveresearchonvarious
aspects of digital goods, little attention has been given to the game trading mechanisms on the user experience. Therefore,
impact of in-game trading mechanisms on user experience. This this paper aims to take a first step toward evaluating whether
paper presents a study aimed at evaluating the influence of integrating a trading system significantly influences the user
tradingsystemsonuserexperienceinaracinggamecontext.We
experience. To achieve this, we implemented a simple racing
developed a simple racing game featuring an in-game market
game that allows players to buy and sell car variants in
for buying and selling car variants and conducted an A/B study
comparinguserexperiencesbetweengroupsutilizingthetrading an in-game market. By analyzing the user feedback, we
system and those unlocking cars through race completion. Our aim to provide insights into the impact of in-game trading
findingssuggestthatwhilethetradingsystemdidnotsignificantly mechanisms on the user experience.
alter the overall user experience, further exploration of diverse
We describe the racing game in Section II. Using this
trading approaches may offer insights into their impact on user
game, we ran an A/B study where one group used the in-
engagement.
Index Terms—trading, racing game, user experience game market, whereas the other group unlocked new cars by
simply completing races. We describe the study in Section III
I. INTRODUCTION and discuss our findings, the study’s limitations, and potential
The exchange of digital goods has impacted the global future research in Section IV. More information about the
economy. Digital goods are traded between producers/sellers work can be found in [6].
andconsumersindigitalformats,makingtheminexpensiveto
reproduce and distribute [1].
II. RACINGGAMEIMPLEMENTATION
Onetypeofdigitalgoodsistradablein-gameobjects,which To determine how trading mechanisms affect user experi-
can be seen as digital currency [2]. These in-game objects enceinracinggames,weimplementedasimpleracinggamein
can be used to purchase goods and services within the game, Unity4. In addition, we used the Vehicle Physics Pro script5
and popular games like the Pokémon series1 or Massively as a basis for the vehicle physics implementation. The goal
Multiplayer Online Role-Playing Games (MMORPGs) like for the players is to reach speeds as high as possible on a
World of Warcraft2 have incorporated trading systems to German highway without crashing into other vehicles or the
facilitate this process. For instance, Forza Horizon 53 has an environment.
auction house where players can offer their vehicles for sale. Currently, the game contains one highly detailed sports car
The field of trading in digital games has been studied (calledTeronKanaani)thatisavailableforracing.Whileonly
in various aspects. Researchers have explored how markets a single vehicle is available, it comes in different colors that,
outsidetheactualgamescanemergeandaffectthegameitself for now, serve as a substitute for different cars.
[3]. Furthermore, in addition to trading virtual goods, current
games allow players to make in-game purchases using real A. Game Menus
money. Researchers have investigated various aspects of this When players start the game, they are taken to the main
phenomenon,includingitsimpactongamebalanceandplayer menu. From here, they can access several submenus:
behavior[4].Especiallytheeffectsoflootboxesingameshave
• Collection
1www.pokemon.com/us/pokemon-video-games • Garage
2worldofwarcraft.blizzard.com • Market
3www.forza.net/horizon • Profile
4www.unity.com
979-8-3503-5067-8/24/$31.00©2024IEEE 5evp.vehiclephysics.com
4202
luJ
8
]CH.sc[
1v47850.7042:viXraFig. 1. Screenshot depicting the in-game market. Players can sell their Fig. 2. Screenshot taken from a race on the highway with a HUD on the
vehiclesinthebottomhalfandbuynewonesinthetophalf. bottomandthetraveleddistanceontopofthescreen.
finishtherace.AscreenshotfromaracecanbeseeninFigure
• Events
2.
The collection displays the different available vehicle vari-
ants. The players can view unseen, encountered, and owned III. EVALUATION
vehicles, which are visualized differently to give them an We conducted an A/B study to assess how trading affects
overview of their progress. The garage shows the player’s user experience in racing games. Participants were asked to
currentlyselectedvehicleinasimpleislandenvironment.The complete a pre- and post-questionnaire, and in-game data was
market allows players to sell and buy cars. At the moment, collected.
playerscannotyettradewitheachotherandcanonlyselltheir
A. Methodology
carsforafixedpriceandbuyvehiclesfromarandomselection
in a simulated market (see Figure 1). The profile menu shows Two modes of obtaining new car variants were used in the
different player statistics, such as the number of owned cars, study:
total distance traveled, and the number of completed races. • ModeA:Playersreceivearandomvehicleaftercomplet-
It also displays various achievements, which come in three ing a race.
levels (bronze, silver, and gold) and reward the player in nine • Mode B: Players must use in-game currency to purchase
categories(e.g.,totaltraveleddistance,numberofsoldcars,or new car variants or trade in one of their existing ones.
numberofcollectedvehicles).Finally,theeventsmenuallows In Mode A, the in-game store is disabled, while in Mode
players to start new races. However, currently, only highway B, players are required to use it. In Mode B, players can only
races are available. own up to ten cars, so they must trade in an existing one to
obtain a new vehicle at some point. Additionally, players in
B. Highway Races
ModeAreceiveaninitialcar,whileplayersinModeBreceive
The highway is procedurally generated on runtime by an initial budget for purchasing cars.
concatenating blocks containing the road and decorations 1) Quest System: To guide users through the study, we
like concrete road barriers or sound barriers. The individual implementedasimplequestsystem.Thecurrentquestnumber
segments can be spawned in a predefined order to facilitate and the quest’s description were displayed in the top right
the transition between blocks with different numbers of lanes. corner of the user interface. Table I provides a complete list
Cars populate the highway as obstacles for the players. of all quests.
These cars are dynamically spawned on the road out of the 2) Procedure: A link to the game was distributed online
player’s sight to optimize performance. Players must overtake in Discord groups or directly provided to interested persons.
without colliding with them or the environment. One special Usingthelink,userscoulddownloadthegame,whichsupports
typeofcarispolicecarsthatalsodriveonthehighway.Ifthe Windows, macOS, and Linux. After starting the game, users
player collides with a police car, its blue emergency lights are had to complete the pre-questionnaire and were randomly
turned on, and roadblocks are created in front of the player to assigned to group A or B. Afterward, they had to complete
stoptheplayer’svehicle.However,anycollision,whetherwith their quests, and finally, the users were asked to fill out the
a regular car, a police car, or the environment, automatically post-questionnaire.
invalidatesthecurrentrace,andtheplayerwillnotreceiveany 3) In-GameDataCollection: Duringthegamesessions,we
rewards for the race. collectedin-gamedatatoevaluatethenumberofcarsobtained
To complete a race, the player has to leave the highway by the players and the number of interactions with different
and bring the car to a standstill. Therefore, the player has to elements in the game. The data was automatically sent to a
choose whether to keep driving and risk crashing while trying database for later evaluation. A complete list of the collected
to beat their current maximum speed or leave the highway to in-game data is provided in Table II.TABLEI B. Results
QUESTSDURINGTHESTUDYPERGROUP.
Out of the 39 participants, 30 filled out the questionnaires.
1) System Usability Scale: We excluded three participants
Quest Test QuestDescription from the SUS analysis due to inconsistent answers. The
Number Group SUS comprises alternating positively and negatively framed
1. A Selectyournewcarinthe’Collection’tab. questions. If participants choose the same answer for all
1. B Visitthe’Market’,buyacar,andselectitinthe questions, this could be due to either not understanding the
’Collection’tab. questions correctly or a lack of attention. Two participants
2. A/B Startaspeedruninthe’Garage’tab.Driveatleast1 answered all questions the same, while another chose almost
km.
the same responses for all questions.
3. A Changeyourcarinthe’Collection’tab. Table III shows the SUS results per group and the result of
3. B Visitthe’Market’andbuyanothercar. a two-sample t-test.While Group A has alower mean (69.29)
4. A/B Startaspeedrunanddriveatleast2km.Trynotto than Group B (80.54), the higher standard deviation in Group
crash! A (22.69) compared to Group B (7.73) leads to inconclusive
5. A Changeyourcaragaininthe’Collection’tab. results, which is confirmed by the t-test.
5. B Visitthe’Market’andbuyanothercar.
6. A/B Completeaspeedrun(nocollision,atleast1km).To TABLEIII
completetherun,stopyourcarintheparkinglane. SYSTEMUSABILITYSCORERESULTS,INCLUDINGTHEMEANAND
Skipthisquestifitistoohard. STANDARDDEVIATIONPERGROUP,ANDTHESTATISTICALSIGNIFICANCE
WITHα=0.05.
7. A/B Feelfreetoplaysomemoreraces.Whenyouare
done,press’Finish’.
GroupA GroupB t(26) p
M SD M SD
TABLEII SystemUsabilityScore 69.29 22.69 80.54 7.73 1.76 .090
LISTOFIN-GAMEDATACOLLECTEDDURINGTHESTUDY.
2) Game Experience Questionnaire: The 14 questions that
Name Description
the GEQ comprises can be grouped into seven different
PlayTime Totaltimespentintheprogram,measuredinseconds.
categories, which are shown together with their results in
Distance Combineddrivendistancewiththecars,measuredin Table IV. In general, negative affect received a low rating,
meters.
while positive affect, challenge, and competence were rated
Races Totaldrivenraces,includingabortedraces.
relatively high. All other categories are in the midfield. Due
FinishedRuns Totalfinishedraceswithoutcrashesordisqualification. to the large standard deviations and similar mean values, the
CarsCollected Totalcarsobtainedthroughwinningortrading. results are inconclusive, however, and no differences between
MarketVisits Clicksonthemarkettabintheuserinterface. the groups can be observed.
CollectionVisits Clicksonthecollectiontabintheuserinterface.
GarageVisits Clicksonthegaragetabintheuserinterface. TABLEIV
GAMEEXPERIENCEQUESTIONNAIRERESULTS,INCLUDINGTHEMEAN
EventVisits Clicksontheeventstabintheuserinterface. ANDSTANDARDDEVIATIONPERGROUP,ANDTHESTATISTICAL
ProfileVisits Clicksontheprofiletabintheuserinterface. SIGNIFICANCEWITHα=0.05.
FinishedQuests Numberofqueststheusercompleted.
GroupA GroupB t(29) p
M SD M SD
Competence 2.46 0.93 2.59 1.00 -0.35 .726
4) Questionnaires: In addition to the in-game data col-
SensoryandImaginative 1.96 0.84 2.09 1.15 -0.33 .740
lected, we asked the study participants to fill out a pre-
Immersion
and a post-questionnaire. Both were integrated directly into
Flow 2.04 1.03 2.18 1.29 -0.33 .742
the game. The pre-questionnaire only contained questions
Tension 1.54 0.91 1.85 1.30 -0.77 .446
regarding the players’ age and sex. The post-questionnaire
Challenge 2.82 0.67 2.38 1.07 1.34 .192
consisted of the System Usability Scale (SUS) [7] and the
GameExperienceQuestionnaire(GEQ)[8].Weusedtheshort- Negativeaffect 0.96 0.77 1.71 1.46 -1.71 .098
ened In-Game module of the GEQ to keep the questionnaire Positiveaffect 2.46 0.87 2.41 1.20 0.14 .892
brief.
5) Participants: 39 participants, eight female and 31 male, 3) In-Game Data: Finally, Table V shows the collected in-
took part in the study. The participants’ ages ranged from 14 game data. Both the number of market visits and cars sold is
to41,withanaverageof25.0andastandarddeviationof6.1. 0 for Group A, as this group had no access to the in-gamestore. Aside from the number of cars sold and the number of cars.Offeringdifferentcarswithvaryingstatsforacceleration
market visits, one statistically significant difference between or top speed could increase the motivation to trade. Addition-
thetwogroupscanbeobserved:thenumberofcollectedcars. ally, integrating car upgrades could make the trading process
more interesting and engaging for the players.
TABLEV Finally, the rarity of certain cars could play a role in
COLLECTEDIN-GAMEDATAINCLUDINGMEANANDSTANDARD incentivizingplayerstotrademorecommoncarsforrareones.
DEVIATIONPERGROUP,ANDTHESTATISTICALSIGNIFICANCEWITHα=
Beingabletocollectrarecarsmightbeanincentiveforplayers
0.05.
to trade more frequently and make the trading process more
exciting.Overall,theselimitationsneedtobeconsideredwhen
GroupA GroupB t(33) p interpretingthestudyresultsandshouldbeaddressedinfuture
M SD M SD research to provide a more comprehensive understanding of
MarketVisits 0.00 0.00 11.61 10.98 -4.36 <.001 trading behavior in racing games.
CollectionVisits 17.65 10.94 17.17 11.80 0.13 .901
B. Conclusion
GarageVisits 28.00 18.14 18.00 10.75 2.00 .054
In this study, we developed a racing game with a simple
EventVisits 5.94 8.30 2.61 3.97 1.53 .136
trading system to investigate whether trading affects user
ProfileVisits 2.88 3.66 1.11 1.23 1.94 .060
experience. In the game, players can buy new car variants in
Distance(km) 55.71 60.99 26.50 25.39 1.87 .070 an in-game store and race on a highway. During these races,
PlayTime(min) 43.21 40.22 23.81 13.42 1.93 .061 playerstrytobeattheirowntopspeedswithoutcollidingwith
Races 27.53 26.43 14.44 10.01 1.96 .058 other vehicles or the environment. To finish the race, players
FinishedRuns 2.24 2.02 1.50 1.42 1.25 .219 have to bring their cars to a standstill. We tested this system
in an A/B study where one group unlocked a new car variant
CarsCollected 11.53 6.35 4.94 3.42 3.85 .001
aftereachrace,andtheothergrouphadtouseanin-gamestore
CarsSold 0 0 1.61 3.09 -2.15 .039
to buy and sell cars. The results indicate a good overall user
experience, but no statistically significant difference between
thegroupscouldbeobserved.Thiscouldbeduetothefactthat
IV. DISCUSSION
players could only buy different variants of one car without
The general outcome of the study is positive, with both
any performance differences, and they could only trade with
SUSandGEQshowingpositiveoverallresults.SUSindicates
a simulated market. Based on our findings, we conclude that
average to above-average system usability [9]. Another inter-
a simple trading system like this does not have a significant
esting aspect is the time spent by the players. While the study
impact on user experience. Further research could explore the
itself could be completed in 10 to 15 minutes, many players
influence of different trading approaches on user experience.
spent much more time in the game and completed more races
than was required. This suggests that the game was engaging REFERENCES
and enjoyable for the players. Interestingly, the players did
[1] S. Bradley, C. Kim, J. Kim, and I. Lee, “Toward an evolution strategy
not exhaust the limited number of garage slots for Group B; forthedigitalgoodsbusiness,”ManagementDecision,vol.50,no.2,pp.
still, they sold more cars than required by the quests. This 234–252,32012.
[2] E. E. W. Adams and J. Dormans, Game mechanics : advanced game
indicates a high level of interest in the game’s mechanics and
design. NewRiders,2012.
a willingness to explore the game beyond the required tasks. [3] Y.GuoandS.Barnes,“Whypeoplebuyvirtualitemsinvirtualworlds
The study also revealed no statistically significant differ- withrealmoney,”ACMSIGMISDatabase:theDATABASEforAdvances
in Information Systems, vol. 38, no. 4, pp. 69–76, 10 2007. [Online].
ences in player experience or system usability between the
Available:https://dl.acm.org/doi/10.1145/1314234.1314247
two groups, except for the number of collected cars, which [4] A. Urschel, “Understanding Real Money Trading in MMORPGs,” New
was higher in Group A. This finding suggests that the game’s WorldOrder,Tech.Rep.,2011.
[5] W.Li,D.Mills,andL.Nower,“Therelationshipoflootboxpurchases
mechanicswereequallyenjoyableandusableforbothgroups.
to problem video gaming and problem gambling,” Addictive Behaviors,
vol.97,pp.27–34,102019.
A. Limitations & Future Work
[6] T.Olip,“ImplementationofTradingasaCollectingMechanicinaNovel
The study presented in this paper has certain limitations Racing Game,” Master’s thesis, Graz University of Technology, Graz,
2024.
that need to be acknowledged. First, the sample size of the
[7] J. Brooke, “SUS: A ’Quick and Dirty’ Usability Scale,” in Usability
study participants is relatively small, and a larger number of EvaluationInIndustry. CRCPress,61996,pp.207–212.
participantswouldincreasethestatisticalpoweroftheresults. [8] W.A.Ijsselsteijn,D.Kort,andY.A.W..Poels,“TheGameExperience
Questionnaire,”TechnischeUniversiteitEindhoven,Tech.Rep.,12013.
Second, the study participants could only trade with a sim-
[9] J. R. Lewis and J. Sauro, “Item Benchmarks for the System Usability
ulated market. Introducing a social element, such as allowing Scale,”JournalofUsabilityStudies,vol.13,pp.158–167,2018.
participants to trade with each other directly, might lead to
different outcomes and provide a more realistic representation
of trading behavior.
Third, players could only acquire the same car in different
colors, which may not have motivated them enough to trade