Resilient Fleet Management for Energy-Aware Intra-Factory Logistics
Mithun Goutham and Stephanie Stockar
Abstract—This paper presents a novel fleet management perturbation [6]. However, this approach typically leads to
strategy for battery-powered robot fleets tasked with intra- suboptimal solutions as it overlooks the possible assistance
factory logistics in an autonomous manufacturing facility. In
that other unaffected AMRs in the fleet could provide to
this environment, repetitive material handling operations are
enhance resilience [7]. In contrast, centralized fleet man-
subject to real-world uncertainties such as blocked passages,
andequipmentorrobotmalfunctions.Insuchcases,centralized agement (CFM) considers all the available AMRs for task
approaches enhance resilience by immediately adjusting the reassignment and rerouting, thereby harnessing the fleet’s
task allocation between the robots. To overcome the computa- collective resilience to achieve an optimal policy [7]. How-
tional expense, a two-step methodology is proposed where the
ever, using exact methods for CFM is intractable for real-
nominal problem is solved a priori using a Monte Carlo Tree
time execution due to the NP-hardness of the problem [8].
Search algorithm for task allocation, resulting in a nominal
search tree. When a disruption occurs, the nominal search For this reason, metaheuristic algorithms such as simulated
tree is rapidly updated a posteriori with costs to the new annealing, genetic algorithms, and tabu search are typically
problem while simultaneously generating feasible solutions. used to quickly improve multiple trial solutions [9], [10].
Computationalexperimentsprovethereal-timecapabilityofthe However, these methods do not provide algorithmic guaran-
proposed algorithm for various scenarios and compare it with
teesontheconvergenceoroptimalityoftheresultingsolution
thecasewherethesearchtreeisnotusedandthedecentralized
approach that does not attempt task reassignment. [11]. Another approach that enables real-time computation
uses supervised machine learning to map expert-identified
I. INTRODUCTION
problem perturbations to pre-computed solutions [12], [13].
Advancements in material handling have identified fleets However, its performance is adversely affected when the
ofautonomousmobilerobotsandautomatedguidedvehicles disruption differs significantly from the training data.
askeycomponentsofautonomousoperationswithinflexible A gap in the CFM literature in the context of repetitive
manufacturing systems (FMS) [1]. These battery-powered MHTs is the under-utilization of prior knowledge of the
robots handle the repetitive material handling tasks (MHT) nominal search space when recomputing the policy for a
integral to manufacturing a product [2]. In this context, an perturbed problem. This stems from the intractable memory
energy-aware fleet management policy aims to assign tasks requirements needed to store information about the task
androuterobotsinamannerthatminimizesenergyexpenses assignment and routing search space when using the typical
whileadheringtotheconstraintsimposedbybatterycharging approach of using a single decision variable to define both
policies[3].Furthermore,theoperationalrequirementsofan the task assignment and the robot routes [14]. Consequently,
FMS introduce additional constraints that ensure that routes an entirely new problem is solved each time a small change
visit pick up locations before the corresponding delivery to the nominal problem is realized, restricting real-time
locations, and also respect the robot’s payload limits. applicability to small problems [8].
This paper examines the scenario where a robot fleet, In this paper, the routing problem is solved using a
while actively executing a nominal MHT based on a pre- heuristic and the task assignment search space is explored
determined fleet policy, experiences disruptions due to real- using a Monte Carlo Tree Search (MCTS) algorithm. For
world uncertainties. These perturbations in the definition of task assignment problems, MCTS algorithms build a search
theMHTarisefromvariousfactorssuchasmachinefailures, tree that stores cost estimates of task assigning decisions
robot malfunctions, battery degradation, fluctuating charge while exploring the search space and producing solutions
power or blocked passageways due to fallen objects [4]. with low optimality gaps [15], [16]. The contribution of this
These disruptions can drastically affect the optimal solution paper lies in the re-utilization of the search tree topology
and the nominal policy may no longer be optimal or even and cost estimates as prior knowledge when the problem
feasible. Resilience in this context refers to the ability of is perturbed. This prior knowledge is used in a transfer
the fleet management system to immediately adapt the fleet learning framework to rapidly update cost estimates while
policy to guarantee uninterrupted operations [5]. also generating solutions, after which the MCTS algorithm
The NP-hard nature of the task assignment problem is re-initialized. Computational experiments are performed
has resulted in the development of numerous decentralized on a modified TSPLIB instance [17] to capture realistic
approaches for fleet management that focus on reassigning FMS operational constraints of charging policies, payload
tasks only to the affected robots to rapidly recover from a andbatteryconstraints,andpickup-deliveryrequirementsof
unique items. Results show that the solutions obtained using
MithunGouthamandStephanieStockararewiththeDepartmentofMe-
prior knowledge have a lower optimality gap than when the
chanicalandAerospaceEngineering,TheOhioStateUniversity,Columbus,
OH43210,USAgoutham.1@osu.edu perturbedproblemisapproachedasanentirelynewproblem.
4202
raM
61
]OR.sc[
1v43011.3042:viXraII. PROBLEMDEFINITION
Consider that n material handling tasks are to be com-
pleted, and the different commodities are represented by the
set H := {h ,h ,...,h }. The set of paired pickup and
1 2 n
delivery locations are defined by VP := {1,2,...,n} and
VD := {n + 1,n + 2,...,2n} respectively. Define V :=
VP ∪VD, and let each location i ∈ V be associated with
a cargo mass q ∈R,∀m∈H. A commodity picked up at
im
i∈VP is paired with a delivery location n+i∈VD, such
that q +q = 0. The start and end locations of each
im i+n,m
robot are at the depot defined by the nodes {0,2n+1}, and
alsoserveasthechargerlocation.DefineV :=V∪{0,2n+1}
Fleet Management System
so that the graph representation is given by G := (V,E),
where E := {(i,j) ∈ V ×V : i ̸= j} denotes the set of
edges. The set T := {1,2,...,t max} denotes the types of Fig.1. Illustrationofperturbationstotheproblemformulation
robotsavailableforperformingthedefinedmaterialhandling
Thegoalofminimizingthetotalenergytraveledbyallrobots
tasks. For each type of robot t ∈ T, the battery size is
in the fleet is captured in Eq. (1a) of the MHT problem
defined by Bt and its payload capacity is Qt. The set formulation. Here, Eat ∈ R+ accounts for charge events
Rt :={1,2,...,rt } represents robots of type t present in ij
max andistheenergyexpenseofarobot a ∈Rt betweenapair
t
the fleet. For each type t∈T, the energy to travel between ofnodes(i,j)∈E.Binaryvariablesxat areusedtoindicate
eachnodepair(i,j)∈V isdefinedasparameterδet ∈R+, ij
ij whether robot a of type t ∈ T uses edge (i,j) ∈ E. If a
normalized to be a fraction of the battery capacity Bt. The t
robot is assigned a task, it must start and end at the depot,
problem formulation is defined in Eq.1 below: as specified by Eq. (1c) and (1d) respectively. Additionally, 1
the robot is permitted to visit each location at most once,
(cid:88) (cid:88) (cid:88)
J =min Eatxat (1a) as enforced by Eq. (1e), and must leave the location after
xa ijt (ij)∈E t∈T at∈Rt ij ij completingthevisit,asdefinedinEq.(1f).Payloadvariables
s.t. x (cid:88)a ijt ∈ x{ a0 t, ≤1}
1
∀ ∀( ai,j ∈) R∈ tE ,, ta ∈t T∈Rt, t∈T ( (1 1b c)
)
y bi ea m it ngar ce aru ris ee dd bto
y
rd oe bfi on te at the ∈m Ra tss asof itc lo em avm esod nit oy dem
i
∈
∈
VH
.
0j t All robots start their tour with no payload at the depot, as
j∈Vp defined in Eq. (1g). The evolution of the commodity-wise
(cid:88)
xat ≤1 ∀a ∈Rt, t∈T (1d) payload is defined in Eq. (1h) as the robot visits locations
i,2n+1 t
i∈VD in its tour. Precedence constraints for each commodity are
(cid:88) xat ≤1 ∀a ∈Rt, t∈T (1e) defined in Eq. (1i), meaning that a robot can visit a delivery
ij t
locationifandonlyifthecorrespondingcommodityhasbeen
(ij)∈E
(cid:88) (cid:88) previouslypickedup.PayloadlimitationsarecapturedinEq.
xa ijt = xa jkt ∀j ∈V, a t ∈Rt, t∈T (1f) (1j). The state of charge (SOC) of robot a
t
as it arrives at
i∈V k∈V location j is given by zat and Eq. (1k) defines the charging
y 0a mt =0 ∀m∈H,a t ∈Rt, t∈T (1g) policythatrequiresarobj ottoheadtothedepotforarecharge
(cid:88)
yat =yat + q xat if required. As described in Eq. (1m), the energy expense
jm im i∈V jm ij (1h) E ia jt between locations i and j is dependent on whether a
∀m∈H,j ∈V, a ∈Rt, t∈T recharge event occurs between the two locations.
t
(cid:88) The uncertainties of real-world deployment cause disrup-
yatxat =−q
im ij jm tionsthatmanifestaschangesintheparametersofEq.(1).In
i∈V (1i) Fig.1,anillustrativeplantlayoutisshown,withgreenarrows
∀m∈H,j ∈VD,a t ∈Rt, t∈T marking 4 material handling tasks and blue dotted lines
(cid:88) yat ≤Qt ∀i∈V,a ∈Rt, t∈T (1j) indicating the centralized communication between the FMS
im t
andtherobots.Ablockedaisleorachangeinpickupposition
m∈H
(cid:40) results in a change in parameter δe in Eq. (1). Similarly, a
zat −δet if xat =1∧zat −δet >0 ij
zat = i ij ij i ij degraded robot battery capacity changes parameter Bt. The
j 1−δet if xat =1∧zat −δet ≤0
0j ij i ij FMS objective is to quickly reassign tasks and routes to the
∀(i,j)∈E, a ∈Rt, t∈T (1k) robots to adapt to the updated MHT definition.
t
zat =1; 0≤zat ≤1 ∀i∈V, a ∈Rt, t∈T (1l)
0 i t III. METHODOLOGY
(cid:40)
Btδet if xat =1∧zat −δet >0
Eat = ij ij i ij The fleet policy both assigns tasks to the robots and
ij Bt(δet +δet ) if xat =1∧zat −δet ≤0
i0 0j ij i ij also routes each robot, and is defined by the value of the
∀(i,j)∈E, a ∈Rt, t∈T (1m) binary variable x. Finding the optimal solution to Eq. (1)
tis computationally expensive because of the NP-hardness
1)Current node := child
of the problem and the nonlinear constraints. The proposed that minimizes LCB
Initialize
framework uses an offline MCTS algorithm to first compute
Is current No
anear-optimalsolutiontothenominalproblem.Thisutilizes node a leaf?
1) 1)
asufficientlyhighcomputationaltimebudgetsincetheMHT 1)Current node := root
Yes Has the node No
parametersareknownwellinadvance.Thisproducesarichly been visited
populated MCTS search tree with cost estimates for task before?
No
assignment decisions. When a perturbation is realized, an Is current node Yes
No Computation
online algorithm uses these cost estimates to rapidly obtain terminal?
limit reached? 1) 2) Add new child nodes for
feasible solutions to the updated problem. every action possible.
Yes
Current node := a child node
Yes
A. Solving the nominal problem offline
Output actions 4)Backpropagate costs 3)
The MCTS algorithm explores the task assignment search with lowest cost & number of visits Rollout
space, generating a search tree whose nodes represent de-
Fig.2. FlowdiagramoftheMonteCarloTreeSearchAlgorithm
cisions related to assigning a robot to a task. The root
node represents the start of the decision-making process
node, the costs of routing are computed for each robot and
where no tasks have been assigned. The terminal node of
the costs are backpropagated according to step 4).
the tree represents the final outcome of the task-assigning
2) Expansion: After selecting a node based on the LCB
process, signifying that all the tasks have been assigned to
policy, the tree is expanded by adding child nodes to the
the available robots. As the tree is traversed from the root
selected node to represent possible task assignments. Once
nodetoaterminalnode,tasksareassignedtorobotsbasedon
newchildnodeshavebeenadded,oneisselectedforrollout.
theirorderinthedefinedtasklist.Theparentofanodeisthe 1
3) Rollout: If the selected node is a leaf node, Monte
node that precedes it in the decision-making process, that is,
Carlosamplingrandomlyassignstheremainingtaskstofleet
therobotassignedtheprevioustaskinthetasklist.Similarly,
robots until the terminal node is reached. Here, a robot has
its child nodes are the nodes that immediately follow it, and
been assigned to each task and the total cost associated
represent the robots available for selection at the next task
with the assignment is obtained by solving the routing
inthetasklist.Eachchildnodeisconnectedtoitsparentby
problem for each robot. While numerous approaches exist
a branch that represents the decision of assigning the next
toobtaintheroutingcostforasinglerobot,inthispaperthe
tasktothatrobotwhilefixingthepreviousdecisionsfromthe
recursive B&B Alg. 1 derived from [18] is used to account
parent node to the root node. A leaf node does not have any
for the nonlinear constraints associated with precedence and
child nodes, and if non-terminal, indicates that some task-
charging policies. To limit computation time, the B&B of
assignment decisions have not yet been made. The MCTS
Alg. 1 is terminated after a 0.1 second time cap, since
algorithm is as enumerated in Fig. 2:
reasonably good routes are expected due to the best first
1) Selection: Starting from the root node, the algorithm
order of exploration in the recursive algorithm. The total
traverses the search tree by selecting child nodes based on
routing cost for the entire fleet then provides an estimate of
a selection policy. For the cost minimization objective, the
the cost of selecting that node in Step 1.
Lower Confidence Bound (LCB) selection policy is used:
4) Backpropagation: To update the tree based on the
(cid:115)
J(s′) lnN(s) outcome of the conducted rollouts, the algorithm traverses
LCB(s)= argmin −γ (2) the search tree from the selected leaf or terminal node s up
N(s′)J N(s′) l
s′∈childrenofs max
to the root node. For each parent node s whose selection by
whereN(s)isthenumberofcostexplorationsatnodes∈S Eq. (2) resulted in the evaluation at s l, the number of visits
and S is the set of nodes that constitute the search tree. is updated as N(s) ← N(s)+r, where r is the number of
J(s) is the sum of costs from all the previous visits to node rollouts conducted. The accumulated costs for these nodes
s. The constant γ balances the exploitation of promising are also updated as J(s) ← J(s) +
(cid:80)r
i=1J r(s l), where
nodes with the exploration of unfavorable nodes that are J r(s l) represents costs obtained from the rollout at s l.
visited less often. This ensures that the entire search space The four steps are repeated until the pre-defined and
issystematicallyexploredwhengivensufficientcomputation problem-specificcomputationalbudgetoftimeornumberof
time. During the conducted explorations, the maximum cost iterations is exhausted. Throughout the MCTS exploration,
found is denoted by J , and is used as a normalization the task assignment that resulted in the minimum cost
max
factor that is continually updated as the search proceeds. J is referred to as its incumbent solution. Like J ,
min max
The process of selecting child nodes by applying Eq. the incumbent solution is also continually updated as the
(2) starts from the root node and continues until a leaf or search progresses and is the output of the MCTS algorithm
terminalnodeisreached.Iftheselectednodeisapreviously when terminated. The resulting search tree topology and the
visited child node, an expansion of the tree is conducted averagecostJ(s)/N(s)ateachnodesaresavedastheprior
as defined in step 2) while if it was unvisited, a rollout is knowledge of the nominal problem which will be utilized
conducted per step 3). On the other hand, if it is a terminal when a perturbation occurs.Algorithm 1: Routing B&B evaluation,theMCTSalgorithm,asdescribedinSection
1: sequenceCost=B&B(robotState,taskList,location) III-A, is re-initialized on the updated perturbed tree.
2: Findfeasiblenextlocationsbasedonpayload,cargo,SOC This creates new nodes and utilizes the balance of
3: Sortlocationsbyoperationalcostofbranchingtothatlocation
exploitation and exploration to further reduce the cost
4: foriinfeasiblelocationsdo
5: branchCost=tourCost+operationalcost(i) for the duration of the remaining computation time.
6: ifbranchCost≥robotState.bestCostthen TheproposedmethodisillustratedinFig.3,demonstrating
7: continue{skiptonextlocationi+}
8: elseifbranchCost<robotState.bestCostthen how the topology of the nominal search tree is replicated,
9: State+=UpdaterobotState:SOC,position,remaininglocations and the costs associated with promising leaf nodes are re-
10: ifnumberofremaininglocations>0then evaluated with backpropagation. The figure also shows the
11: Cost=B&B(robotState+,taskList,location(i))
generation of new nodes within the perturbed tree once the
RecursiveAlg.1
12: else onlineMCTSalgorithmisinitializedinStep4).Aninherent
13: State.bestCost=Cost assumption in this approach is that the perturbation does
14: endif
15: endif not change the topology of the existing search tree, that
16: endfor is, the number of robots is not changed, since this would
17: ReturnrobotState not permit the topology of the nominal tree to be reused.
When perturbations are bounded, which is a reasonable
assumption for the controlled environment of an FMS, the
B. Solving the perturbed problem online onlineapproachisexpectedtoyieldsolutionswithareduced
Consider the case where the nominal Eq (1) has been optimality gap compared to not utilizing the nominal tree.
addressed using the offline MCTS algorithm, generating a
taskassignmentsearchtree,referredtoasthenominaltree.In
IV. COMPUTATIONALEXPERIMENTS
real-world operation, when perturbations affect the problem To test the effectiveness of the proposed algorithm across
definition, the proposed method makes use of the nominal a variety of perturbation types, the nominal MHT problem
tree topology and cost information as follows: was first defined using a TSPLIB benchmark instance [17]:
1) The leaf nodes s l of the nominal search tree are first Step 1: Load the TSPLIB eil51 point cloud to obtain a set
ordered in increasing average costs to the nominal of n points with defined Cartesian coordinates.
problem given by J(s l)/N(s l). Step 2: Find the centroid of the point cloud.
2) A search tree that replicates the topology of nodes and Step 3: Sort and assign indices 1,2,...,n to the points by
branches in the nominal tree is initialized. However, at order of increasing distance from the centroid.
each node of this perturbed search tree, the number of Step 4: Designate the point with index 1 as the depot.
visits N(s) and accumulated costs J(s) are set to zero. Step 5: Define precedence constraints between points with
3) For a predefined parameter k, select the kth percentile pairs of indices as (2≺n),(3≺n−1), and so on.
of ordered leaf nodes. Rollouts are then conducted for
The resulting point cloud defines a depot and 25 MHTs,
these nodes in a nominally cheapest-first order. During
each with paired pickup and delivery locations. In the nomi-
the rollout process, leaf node costs are re-evaluated
nalcasebeingstudied,theMHTsaretobecompletedbytwo
under the perturbed problem parameters. The updated
robots with payload capacities Q1 =Q2 =10 commodities.
costs and number of visits are then backpropagated
The energy expense associated with traveling a Euclidean
through the perturbed tree as defined in step 4) of
distance of d units is defined to be d kJ, and the battery
Section III-A. This simultaneously updates the search
capacity of each robot is nominally B1 =B2 =20 kJ.
tree while exploring promising leaf nodes. The incum-
Extensive computational experiments were conducted in
bent solution to the perturbed problem is continuously
a Matlab R2022a environment on an Intel Xeon E5-2680
updated and available for a policy update if necessary.
v4 CPU clocked at 2.4 GHz at the Ohio Super Computer
4) Once all the selected leaf nodes have undergone re-
[19]. Three fleet management strategies were compared for
perturbations associated with battery degradation, payload
Root node Unvisited nodes
capacity variations, and shifts in pickup and delivery loca-
Promising leaf nodes New nodes
tions. The optimal task assignment solution was first found
Nominal problem Perturbed problem
forthenominalproblemandeachperturbation,requiring370
hours of processing time each. This involved an exhaustive
Task 1 search that first listed the 225 possible task assignments, and
Task 2 then obtained the cost of each task assignment using Alg. 1,
after which the lowest-cost task assignment was found.
Task 3
Each experimentwas repeated25 timesto accountfor the
Task 4 stochasticnatureofMCTSalgorithms.Ineachrepetition,the
Nominal tree after Backpropagation on Reinitialized MCTS
MCTS exploration the replicated tree on the updated tree nominalproblemwasfirstsolvedusingtheofflinealgorithm
of Section III-A to populate a nominal search tree over a
Fig.3. Schematicoftheproposedalgorithm computationaltimebudgetof12hours.The25resultingtask
2
tsoc
egarevAassignment solutions varied slightly due to the stochasticity
50 Centralized - without using nominal tree
but were within 5% of the optimal solution. Centralized - using nominal tree
40
Forbenchmarking,adecentralizedapproachwasevaluated Decentralized heuristic-based
30
that continued to use one of the 25 nominal task assignment
solutions that were computed offline. The problem pertur- 20
bation was only addressed by rerouting the affected robots 10
by using Alg. 1, providing near-instantaneous recovery from 0
the perturbation. Another comparison was made with a
10-1 100 101 102 103 104
Time [s]
centralized approach which executed the offline algorithm
(a)Incumbentsolutionsobtainedbythealgorithms
of Section III-A ab initio when a perturbation is realized,
without utilizing nominal search tree information. This was
alsorepeated25timestoaccountforstochasticity.Finally,to
evaluate the proposed online CFM algorithm, each of the 25
nominal trees was used as prior knowledge, thus producing
25 updated search trees for each perturbation.
(b)1second (c)1minute (d)1hour
ForeveryMCTSalgorithmusedintheseexperiments,the
√ Fig.5. Batterycapacityofonerobotchangedfrom20to12kJ
parameter γ in Eq. (2) is set to 0.5, and the number of
rollouts r is set to 20. When the nominal tree is utilized, the using the nominal tree, especially when computation time is
parameter k of the online algorithm is set to 0.05, implying limited.Givensufficientcomputationtime,itisseenthatboth
that the 5th percentile of low-cost nominal leaf nodes is first the centralized algorithms converge to the optimum solution
explored to acquire updated costs for the new problem. in each of their 25 repetitions. Similar results are seen in
Fig. 5 for the case when B2 is changed to 12 kJ.
A. Variation in battery capacity
The battery capacity of one of the robots was perturbed B. Spatial variations of locations
from its original capacity of 20 kJ to 16 kJ, without altering
Theeil51pointcloudisshowninFig.6a,wheregreyline
the capacity of the other robot. Since the decentralized
segments show the precedence constraints. Let x and and y
method does not optimize the task assignment, the 25 task
denote the range of x and y coordinates respectively. The
assignmentsobtainedfromtherepeatedsolvingofthenomi-
box uncertainty parameter, denoted by ξ, causes deviations
nal problem produced 25 heuristic solutions, many of which
withintherangeof±ξxand±ξy inthexandy coordinates
overlap, as seen in Fig. 4a. These solutions are found near-
respectively,andresultsinachangeintheproblemparameter
instantaneously because only the time-capped heuristic Alg.
δe in Eq. (1). A box uncertainty of ξ = 4% affects every
ij
1 is used, but they are significantly outperformed within 10
location,asshowninFig.6b.Theperformancecomparisons
seconds by every repetition of the centralized methods. In
shown in Fig. 6c show that both centralized methods have
the case of these centralized algorithms, it is evident that
a lower optimality gap than the decentralized approach, and
when the perturbed problem is solved without utilizing the
the nominal tree provides an advantage to the CFM.
nominal tree, the incumbent solution costs at any instant
are typically higher than when the nominal tree is utilized.
Histograms of incumbent solutions at one second, minute,
and hour of computation time are shown in Fig. 4b, 4c,
and 4d respectively, indicating a significant advantage to
50 Centralized - without using nominal tree
Centralized - using nominal tree
40
Decentralized heuristic-based
30 Pickups Deliveries Depot Pickups Deliveries Depot
20
(a)Nominalproblem(ξ=0%) (b)Perturbedproblem:ξ=4%
10
0
10-1 100 101 102 103 104 50 Centralized - without using nominal tree
Centralized - using nominal tree
Time [s] 40
Decentralized heuristic-based
(a)Incumbentsolutionsobtainedbythealgorithms
30
20
10
0
10-1 100 101 102 103
Time [s]
(b)1second (c)1minute (d)1hour (c)Incumbentsolutionsobtainedforξ =4%
Fig.4. Batterycapacityofonerobotchangedfrom20to16kJ Fig.6. Spatialvariationsinpickupanddeliverylocations
]%[
pag
ytilamitpO
]%[
pag
ytilamitpO
]%[
pag
ytilamitpOwithout using the search tree and also the decentralized
50 Centralized - without using nominal tree
Centralized - using nominal tree approach that does not attempt task reassignment. Future 40
Decentralized heuristic-based work will seek to define the magnitude of perturbations that
30
can be handled by the developed algorithm, and also its
20
capability for larger fleets and other combinatorial problems
10 such as the vehicle routing problem with time windows.
0
10-1 100 101 102 103 104 REFERENCES
Time [s]
(a)Payloadcapacityofonerobotchangedto8 [1] Z. Ghelichi and S. Kilaru, “Analytical models for collaborative
autonomous mobile robot solutions in fulfillment centers,” Applied
50 Centralized - without using nominal tree MathematicalModelling,vol.91,pp.438–457,2021.
Centralized - using nominal tree [2] G.Fragapane,D.Ivanov,M.Peron,F.Sgarbossa,andJ.O.Strandha- 40
Decentralized heuristic-based gen,“Increasingflexibilityandproductivityinindustry4.0production
30 networks with autonomous mobile robots and smart intralogistics,”
Annalsofoperationsresearch,vol.308,no.1-2,pp.125–143,2022.
20
[3] S. Scholz, “Decentral decision-making for energy-aware charging of
10 intralogisticsequipment,”LogisticsResearch,vol.16,no.1,2023.
0 [4] M.Daub,F.Duddeck,andM.Zimmermann,“Optimizingcomponent
10-1 100 101 102 103 104 solutionspacesforsystemsdesign,”StructuralandMultidisciplinary
Time [s] Optimization,vol.61,pp.2097–2109,2020.
(b)Payloadcapacityofonerobotchangedto6 [5] H.-G.BeyerandB.Sendhoff,“Robustoptimization–acomprehensive
survey,” Computer methods in applied mechanics and engineering,
Fig.7. Performancecomparisonforpayloadcapacityvariations vol.196,no.33-34,pp.3190–3218,2007.
C. Variation in payload capacity [6] M. Sauer, A. Dachsberger, L. Giglhuber, and L. Zalewski, “De-
centralized deadlock prevention for self-organizing industrial mobile
Cases studied in Fig. 7 relate to changes in the payload robot fleets,” in 2022 IEEE International Conference on Omni-layer
capacity of one of the robots. It is seen that the centralized IntelligentSystems(COINS). IEEE,2022,pp.1–6.
[7] G. Fragapane, R. De Koster, F. Sgarbossa, and J. O. Strandhagen,
approach that uses the nominal tree is able to improve upon
“Planningandcontrolofautonomousmobilerobotsforintralogistics:
the decentralized solutions within 10 seconds, unlike the Literaturereviewandresearchagenda,”EuropeanJournalofOpera-
approach that does not use the nominal tree. tionalResearch,vol.294,no.2,pp.405–426,2021.
[8] M. De Ryck, M. Versteyhe, and F. Debrouwere, “Automated guided
D. Discussion vehicle systems, state-of-the-art control algorithms and techniques,”
JournalofManufacturingSystems,vol.54,pp.152–173,2020.
Nominal task assignment solutions that were obtained [9] B.H.O.Rios,E.C.Xavier,F.K.Miyazawa,P.Amorim,E.Curcio,
using the offline MCTS algorithm were within a 5% op- and M. J. Santos, “Recent dynamic vehicle routing problems: A
survey,” Computers & Industrial Engineering, vol. 160, p. 107604,
timality gap for the 25 repetitions. However, when the
2021.
decentralizedalgorithmusedthesenominalsolutionstoadapt [10] R. Elshaer and H. Awad, “A taxonomic review of metaheuristic
to a perturbation, there was significantly higher variation algorithms for solving the vehicle routing problem and its variants,”
ComputersandIndustrialEngineering,vol.140,22020.
in the solutions found. This was in addition to a higher
[11] B. Fahimnia, H. Davarzani, and A. Eshragh, “Planning of complex
optimality gap as compared to the centralized approaches supply chains: A performance comparison of three meta-heuristic
that fully utilize the other robots of the fleet. When the algorithms,”Computers&OperationsResearch,vol.89,pp.241–252,
2018.
payload capacity was changed, the proposed centralized
[12] A.Malus,D.Kozjeketal.,“Real-timeorderdispatchingforafleetof
method found significantly improved solutions as compared autonomousmobilerobotsusingmulti-agentreinforcementlearning,”
to when the nominal tree was not used. When a change CIRPannals,vol.69,no.1,pp.397–400,2020.
[13] A.Lodi,L.Mossina,andE.Rachelson,“Learningtohandleparameter
occurs in battery capacity or pickup-delivery locations, this
perturbationsincombinatorialoptimization:anapplicationtofacility
improvementisnotassignificant.Thisperformancevariation location,” EURO Journal on Transportation and Logistics, vol. 9,
is as expected because small changes to NP-hard problems no.4,p.100023,2020.
[14] R.F.FachiniandV.A.Armentano,“Logic-basedbendersdecomposi-
can result in drastic changes in the optimal solution. In
tionfortheheterogeneousfixedfleetvehicleroutingproblemwithtime
all cases and at any instance, solutions obtained from the windows,”Computers&IndustrialEngineering,vol.148,p.106641,
proposed method had a lower optimality gap than when the 2020.
[15] S. Edelkamp, M. Gath, C. Greulich, M. Humann, O. Herzog, and
nominal tree was not used.
M.Lawo,“Monte-CarloTreeSearchforLogistics,”inLectureNotes
inLogistics. SpringerCham,2015,pp.427–440.
V. CONCLUSIONS
[16] C.Barletta,W.Garn,C.Turner,andS.Fallah,“Hybridfleetcapaci-
Thispaperpresentedacentralizedfleetmanagementstrat- tatedvehicleroutingproblemwithflexibleMonte–CarloTreesearch,”
International Journal of Systems Science: Operations and Logistics,
egy that utilizes prior knowledge of the search space when
2022.
thereisachangeinthenominaltaskdefinition.Thenominal [17] G.Reinhelt,“{TSPLIB}:alibraryofsampleinstancesforthetsp(and
material handling problem is first solved offline using an related problems) from various sources and of various types,” URL:
http://comopt.ifi.uni-heidelberg.de/software/TSPLIB95/,2014.
MCTSalgorithmforthetaskassignmentproblem,andusing
[18] T. Baltussen, M. Goutham, M. Menon, S. Garrow, M. Santillo, and
aheuristicfortheroutingsub-problem.Whentheproblemis S.Stockar,“Aparallelmonte-carlotreesearch-basedmetaheuristicfor
perturbed, the proposed online method evaluates the lowest- optimalfleetcompositionconsideringvehicleroutingusingbranch&
bound,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.03156,2023.
costleafnodesofthesearchtreefirst,rapidlyproducingfea-
[19] O.S.Center,“Ohiosupercomputercenter,”1987.[Online].Available:
sible low-cost solutions. The approach is verified to be real- http://osc.edu/ark:/19495/f5s1ph73
time capable and is shown to perform better than computing
]%[
pag
ytilamitpO
]%[
pag
ytilamitpO