Dual-sided Peltier Elements for Rapid Thermal Feedback in Wearables
Seongjun Kang1, Gwangbin Kim1, Seokhyun Hwang1, Jeongju Park1, Ahmed Elsharkawy1, and SeungJun Kim1∗
Abstract—This paper introduces a motor-driven Peltier de-
vice designed to deliver immediate thermal sensations within
extended reality (XR) environments. The system incorporates
eightmotor-drivenPeltierelements,facilitatingswifttransitions
between warm and cool sensations by rotating preheated or
cooled elements to opposite sides. A multi-layer structure,
comprisingaluminumandsiliconelayers,ensuresusercomfort
andsafetywhilemaintainingoptimaltemperaturesforthermal
stimuli.Time-temperaturecharacteristicanalysisdemonstrates
the system’s ability to provide warm and cool sensations Fig.1. Hardwareconfigurationoftheourdevice.(Left)Frontviewshowing
efficiently, with a dual-sided lifetime of up to 206 seconds at a servomotors,temperaturesensors,andPeltierelements.(Right)Rearview
2Vinput.Oursystemdesignisadaptabletovariousbodyparts showingthebattery,motordriver,andmicrocontroller.
and can be synchronized with corresponding visual stimuli to
enhance the immersive sensation of virtual object interaction II. SYSTEMDESIGNANDIMPLEMENTATION
and information delivery.
We integrated eight motor-driven Peltier elements, each
capable of alternating warm and cold sensations by flipping
I. INTRODUCTION the preheated or cooled side of the element (Fig 1). The
Peltier, mounted on a servo motor capable of 270-degree ro-
InteractivetechnologieshaveenhancedtheXRexperience tation,deliversthedesiredtemperatureswiftly,synchronized
by incorporating multimodal sensations, including olfaction with the motor’s reaction time. Elastic bands and rotation
[1], [2], touch [3], [4], wind [5], and vibration [6], [7]. pivots were added to ensure consistent skin contact during
Among these, tactile feedback has received the most atten- direct Peltier and motor rotation. Each Peltier-motor pair is
tion, aiming to simulate the physical sensation of interacting independently controlled by a motor driver, managed by an
with virtual objects. Since the sense of touch arises from ArduinoNano33IOT,whichalsoregulatesthetemperature.
somatosensory integration, encompassing temperature and
pressure, comparable attention should be given to the design
of thermal feedback for a more immersive and realistic
XR experience. Particularly, the fluctuations in warmth or
coolness experienced during dynamic interactions with vir-
tual objects enhance immersion and presence, making them
valuable for interpersonal interactions.
Peltier elements are preferred for thermal feedback in
XR because of their capability to electrically modulate
temperature. While traditional Peltier systems, controlled by
current, effectively conveyed the overall temperature [8] or
atmosphere of a scene [9], they were less effective for swift
temperature transitions due to their slow thermal response
rate. To tackle this issue, we introduce motor-driven, pre-
heated Peltier elements designed to provide rapid alterations Fig.2. Detaileddesignofthedual-sidedPeltierelement.(a)Detaileddesign
utilizingelasticbandsandrotationpivots.(b)Multi-layercomposition.
between warm and cool sensations using both sides of
the elements. In this study, we present our multi-layered
To incorporate both heating and cooling sides into XR
structure, which enables the incorporation of both sides of
feedback while ensuring user comfort and safety, we de-
the Peltier elements to deliver warm and cool sensations in
signed a multi-layer structure comprising a 1mm thick alu-
XR, along with their time-temperature characteristics and
minum plate and a 3mm thick silicone layer (Fig 2). The
potential applications in XR scenarios.
aluminum layer, positioned on the warm side, minimizes
excessive heat transfer, while the silicone acts as a thermal
1Seongjun Kang, Gwangbin Kim, Seokhyun Hwang, Jeongju Park, barrier, protecting the skin from direct contact. This con-
Ahmed Elsharkawy and SeungJun Kim are with the School of Integrated
figuration maintains the device’s temperature, ensuring the
Technology,GwangjunInstituteofScienceandTechnology,Gwangju,South
Korea;*SeungJunKimisthecorrespondingauthor. safe delivery of thermal stimuli and preventing sudden tem-
4202
yaM
02
]CH.sc[
1v70811.5042:viXraperature drops upon skin contact. Additionally, each group Our system enables rapid transitions between warm, neutral,
includes one Peltier element attached with an NTC thin- and cold sensations, allowing for visually congruent thermal
film thermistor (MF5B 10K) on both sides for temperature responses. For instance, content could include simulating
control, specifically focused on maintaining warmth. showering with alternating warm and cold water (Fig 4 (a)).
III. TIME-TEMPERATURECHARACTERISTICSANALYSIS B. High-Resolution Thermal Information Display
We conducted a series of tests on TES1-4902 Peltier Our method’s compact design, in contrast to techniques
elements (20mm * 20mm, multi-layered), investigating their employing fluid in tubes [13] and chambers [14], enables
temperature changes over time with voltages ranging from scalability for matrix-wise information display, even in con-
1Vto5Vin0.5Vincrements.Ouraimwastoachieveawarm finedareassuchastheforearm(Fig4(b)).Sinceeachmotor
side temperature of 40°C in a room maintained at 25°C. can be controlled and addressed independently, they can
Each voltage level underwent three tests to assess crucial present information using both static and dynamic patterns.
time-voltage dynamics (refer to Fig 3 for the results). Thermal information inherently conveys a sense of atmo-
sphere or context even prior to being encoded into specific
data, thus offering potential as a channel for delivering
warning information, which requires instantaneous stimulus
delivery.
C. Enhancing Telepresence with Sharing Body Temperature
Telepresence applications utilize visual and auditory me-
dia to recreate physical presence and enable interactions
over distances. Incorporating tactile and thermal feedback
enhancesthesenseofpresenceandemotionalexchange[15].
In this context, our system can deliver the warmth of the
human body to remote users, fostering a heightened sense
of interconnectedness during telepresence (Fig 4 (c)).
Fig.3. ThermalParametertestformeasuringthetime-dependenttemper-
atureandlifetimeofthedual-sidedPeltier(inputrange1.5-3.0V)
Initially, the warm side heated up while the cold side
cooled down. However, heat transfer from warm to cold
eventuallycausedthecoldsidetoreturntoroomtemperature.
We defined the ”dual-sided Peltier element lifetime” as the
Fig.4. Demoapplicationswhereoursystemcanbeutilized:(a)aVRgame
duration until the cold side exceeded 25°C. At 1.5V, the withthermalfeedback,(b)diversethermalsignalsforthermalinformation
warm side did not reach 40°C within the element’s lifetime display,(c)atelepresencesystemenablingtoperceivetouchandwarmth.
(M = 259.2 s, SD = 2.27 s). Starting from 2.0V, the target
temperature was achieved before the end of the lifetime (M V. FUTUREWORKSANDCONCLUSIONS
= 206.3 s, SD = 3.21 s), with decreasing lifetimes at higher
We introduced motor-driven Peltier elements to deliver
voltages (2.5V: M = 163.4 s, SD = 1.25 s; 3.0V: M = 120.1
instantsensationsofwarmthandcoolnessinXR,overcoming
s, SD = 3.30 s). Therefore, we have set 2.0V as the optimal
the inherent slow response rate of Peltier elements. Our
input voltage for achieving the target temperature with a
analysisoftime-temperaturecharacteristicsdemonstratedthe
warm sensation and for sustaining the maximum duration
feasibility of our multi-layer approach, utilizing both sides
of a cool.
ofthePeltierelementstogeneratewarmandcoldsensations
efficiently.Theimmediatethermaltransitionsenabledbyour
IV. DEMOAPPLICATIONS
system can benefit VR games requiring dynamic thermal
A. Dynamic Thermal Feedback in VR Gaming
feedback, high-resolution thermal displays for information
Haptic feedback, including vibration and pressure, has delivery, and telepresence systems for natural and emotion-
been shown to enhance immersion and presence in VR ally engaging communication with remote users. Moreover,
game scenarios [10], [11], [12]. However, thermal stimuli in our system is adaptable to other body parts such as feet
responsetovirtualobjectinteractionhavebeenlessexplored and palms, enhancing interactions with virtual objects in
due to the slow response time of Peltier-based systems. XR. Given the heightened sensitivity of these body partscomparedtoforearms,futureresearchcouldexplorepotential [14] S.Cai,P.Ke,T.Narumi,andK.Zhu,“Thermairglove:Apneumatic
patterns a scaled-up version of our system could offer. Al- glove for thermal perception and material identification in virtual
reality,” in 2020 IEEE conference on virtual reality and 3D user
thoughourcurrentprototypeissomewhatbulkyforwearable
interfaces(VR). IEEE,2020,pp.248–257.
use, future developments could leverage soft actuators like [15] C. J. Cascio, D. Moore, and F. McGlone, “Social touch and human
SMA springs or electroactive polymers to achieve a lighter, development,”Developmentalcognitiveneuroscience,vol.35,pp.5–
11,2019.
wearable form.
VI. ACKNOWLEDGE
This work was supported by the GIST-MIT Research
Collaboration grant funded by the GIST in 2024.
REFERENCES
[1] J. Lee, S. Hwang, K. Kim, and S. Kim, “Auditory and olfactory
stimuli-based attractors to induce reorientation in virtual reality for-
ward redirected walking,” in CHI conference on human factors in
computingsystemsextendedabstracts,2022,pp.1–7.
[2] ——, “Evaluation of visual, auditory, and olfactory stimulus-based
attractors forintermittent reorientationin virtualreality locomotion,”
Virtual Real., vol. 28, no. 2, apr 2024. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1007/s10055-024-00997-y
[3] M. Melo, G. Gonc¸alves, P. Monteiro, H. Coelho, J. Vasconcelos-
Raposo, and M. Bessa, “Do multisensory stimuli benefit the virtual
realityexperience?asystematicreview,”IEEEtransactionsonvisual-
izationandcomputergraphics,vol.28,no.2,pp.1428–1442,2020.
[4] S. Kang, G. Kim, and S. Kim, “Giant finger: A novel visuo-
somatosensory approach to simulating lower body movements in
virtualreality,”in2023IEEEInternationalSymposiumonMixedand
AugmentedReality(ISMAR). IEEE,2023,pp.233–242.
[5] S. Kang, G. Kim, K.-T. Lee, and S. Kim, “Giant finger: Visuo-
proprioceptive congruent virtual legs for flying actions in virtual
reality,” in 2023 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User
Interfaces Abstracts and Workshops (VRW). IEEE, 2023, pp. 933–
934.
[6] S.Hwang,Y.Kim,Y.Seo,andS.Kim,“Enhancingseamlesswalking
in virtual reality: Application of bone-conduction vibration in redi-
rected walking,” in 2023 IEEE International Symposium on Mixed
andAugmentedReality(ISMAR). IEEE,2023,pp.1181–1190.
[7] S.Hwang,J.Lee,Y.Kim,Y.Seo,andS.Kim,“Electrical,vibrational,
andcoolingstimuli-basedredirectedwalking:Comparisonofvarious
vestibularstimulation-basedredirectedwalkingsystems,”inProceed-
ings of the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems,2023,pp.1–18.
[8] R. L. Peiris, W. Peng, Z. Chen, L. Chan, and K. Minamizawa,
“Thermovr: Exploring integrated thermal haptic feedback with head
mounted displays,” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI Conference on
HumanFactorsinComputingSystems,2017,pp.5452–5456.
[9] T. Maeda and T. Kurahashi, “Thermodule: Wearable and modular
thermalfeedbacksystembasedonawirelessplatform,”inProceedings
ofthe10thAugmentedHumanInternationalConference2019,2019,
pp.1–8.
[10] J. Kreimeier, S. Hammer, D. Friedmann, P. Karg, C. Bu¨hner,
L. Bankel, and T. Go¨tzelmann, “Evaluation of different types of
hapticfeedbackinfluencingthetask-basedpresenceandperformance
in virtual reality,” in Proceedings of the 12th acm international
conferenceonpervasivetechnologiesrelatedtoassistiveenvironments,
2019,pp.289–298.
[11] S. Hwang, J. Oh, S. Kang, M. Seong, A. I. A. M. Elsharkawy, and
S.Kim,“Ergopulse:Electrifyingyourlowerbodywithbiomechanical
simulation-basedelectricalmusclestimulationhapticsysteminvirtual
reality,”inProceedingsoftheCHIConferenceonHumanFactorsin
ComputingSystems,2024,pp.1–21.
[12] S.Hwang,J.Lee,Y.Kim,andS.Kim,“Reves:Redirectionenhance-
ment using four-pole vestibular electrode stimulation,” in CHI Con-
ferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystemsExtendedAbstracts,
2022,pp.1–7.
[13] S. Gu¨nther, F. Mu¨ller, D. Scho¨n, O. Elmoghazy, M. Mu¨hlha¨user,
andM.Schmitz,“Therminator:Understandingtheinterdependencyof
visualandon-bodythermalfeedbackinvirtualreality,”inProceedings
ofthe2020CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,
2020,pp.1–14.