arxiv,2024,pp.1–4
doi: N/A
arxivopenaccess
application
APPLICATION
TIAViz: A Browser-based Visualization Tool for
Computational Pathology Models
Mark Eastwood,1, John Pocock,3 Mostafa Jahanifar,1 Adam Shephard,1
∗
Skiros Habib,1 Ethar Alzaid,1 Abdullah Alsalemi,1 Jan Lukas Robertus,2
Nasir Rajpoot,1,3 Shan Raza1 and Fayyaz Minhas1
1TissueImageAnalyticsCenter,UniversityofWarwick,UK,2NationalHeartandLungInstitute,ImperialCollegeLondon,UKand
3Histofy,UK
∗Correspondingauthor.Mark.Eastwood@warwick.ac.uk
Abstract
Summary Digital pathology has gained significant traction in modern healthcare systems. This shift from optical
microscopes to digital imagery brings with it the potential for improved diagnosis, efficiency, and the integration of
AI tools into the pathologists workflow. A critical aspect of this is visualization. Throughout the development of a
machinelearning(ML)modelindigitalpathology,itiscrucialtohaveflexible,openlyavailabletoolstovisualizemodels,
fromtheiroutputsandpredictionstotheunderlyingannotationsandimagesusedtotrainortestamodel.Weintroduce
TIAViz,aPython-basedvisualizationtoolbuiltintoTIAToolboxwhichallowsflexible,interactive,fullyzoomableoverlay
of a wide variety of information onto whole slide images, including graphs, heatmaps, segmentations, annotations and
otherWSIs.TheUIisbrowser-based,allowinguseeitherlocally,onaremotemachine,oronaservertoprovidepublicly
available demos.
Availability and Implementation This tool is open source and is made available at: https://github.com/
TissueImageAnalytics/tiatoolbox and via pip installation (pip install tiatoolbox) and conda as part of TIAToolbox.
ContactForanyqueriespleasecontactMark.Eastwood@warwick.ac.uk,orraiseanissueintheassociatedgitrepository
above.
Supplementary information Further documentation can be found at: https://tia-toolbox.readthedocs.io/en/
latest/visualization.html.Somedemosthatusethedescribedtoolcanbefoundhere:tiademos.dcs.warwick.ac.uk.
Key words: Digital Pathology, Machine learning, Visualization, Open source
Introduction There are some excellent open source tools for digital
pathologyalreadyavailable. Theforemostoftheseisprobably
Inbioinformaticsanddigitalpathology, theneedforadvanced
QuPath [2], a fully featured, java-based platform for analysis
visualization tools is driven by the growing complexity and
of histological images. For many use-cases, we would highly
prevalenceofAImodelscapableofprovidingadditionalcontext
recommend QuPath, such as for creating and working with
andpredictionstopathologistswhenviewingslides.
annotations, interactive pixel-level analysis and modelling.
TIAVizisabrowser-basedvisualizationtooldesignedforthe
However, there are a few areas in which TIAViz can offer
analysisofdigitalpathologymodeloutputs.Developedaspart
functionalitythatisdifficultornotprovidedinQuPath.Firstly,
of the TIAToolbox [10] open-source digital pathology toolbox,
as a browser-based visualization tool, TIAViz can be launched
and utilizing the Bokeh [11] visualization library, it provides
on a remote machine and used to view slides/overlays from
a platform for viewing high-resolution pathology slides and
thatremotemachineinabrowserwindowonthelocalmachine.
overlaying model outputs or annotations in a fully zoomable
This can be very useful, especially in the research context as
and interactive viewer. This tool helps address the increasing
ML pipelines and model outputs are often run and stored on
demandindigitalpathologyforrobustandflexiblevisualization
remotecomputeresources.
optionscapableofhandlingcomplexmedicalimagingdataand
Additionally, it’s browser-based nature allows it to be used
modeloutputsinavarietyofdifferentforms,withaparticular
toprovideonlineserversshowcasingthecapabilitiesofmodels,
focusonusewithinaresearchcontext.Asallcodeiswrittenin
which can be extremely useful for collaboration and to allow
PythonitcanbeintegratedquicklyintoPython-basedmachine
learningworkflows.
©TheAuthor2024.PublishedbyOxfordUniversityPress.Allrightsreserved.Forpermissions,pleasee-mail:
journals.permissions@oup.com
1
4202
beF
51
]VI.ssee[
1v09990.2042:viXra2 Eastwood et al.
members of the DP (Digital Pathology) community to better files, and .dat file output from TIAtoolbox segmentation
understandandexploremodelscreatedbyothers. models,canalsobeloadedintheinterface.
TIAViz is written in Python, using TIAToolbox [10] and We provide a powerful selection of UI elements to
Bokeh [11]. As such, it can be easier to integrate into Python- interactively control how annotations are displayed, allowing
based ML workflows, in particular those that already use individual types to be toggled on/off independently, filtering
elements of TIAToolbox, and has a much simpler code-base of annotations according to mathematical expressions, and
allowingittopotentiallybeadaptedorcustomizedquiteeasily offeringawidevarietyofoptionstoallowcoloringannotations
toaspecificusecasewhenthedesiredvisualizationtaskcannot accordingtoanyvaluesintheirpropertiesdictionary.Detailed
beachievedwiththetool’sinbuiltcapabilities. annotation properties can be viewed by double-clicking on an
Another tool is cytomine https://cytomine.com/, which is annotation,asillustratedinsupplementaryFig2.
browser-based but is limited in what can be overlaid (for
example graphs are not supported). Similarly, HistomicsTK Heatmaps and Whole Slide Overlays
(https://github.com/DigitalSlideArchive/HistomicsTK) is an
TIAViz supports the overlay of multiple low-resolution
option with a powerful set of tools for annotation creation,
heatmaps, and/or additional WSI overlays each as separate
management, and image analysis, but again graphs are not
layers. Low-resimagesmustbeprovidedwiththesameaspect
supported and it is less well suited to quickly visualizing ML
ratio as the parent image, and will be upscaled accordingly.
modeloutput.
AnexampleofaUMAP[9]reductionofaswin-transformer[8]
featuremapinto3-D(RGB)spaceisshownin1PanelC.
Technical Details
Graph Overlays
TIAToolboxisasuiteofunit-testedimageanalysisandmachine
Graphs are becoming an increasingly popular way of
learning tools developed for the CPath community, making
representinglargesectionsoftissueinhistologyimages,paired
it possible for a variety of users to construct and reproduce
with graph neural network (GNN) models for prediction [1].
CPathanalyticalpipelineswithcutting-edgemethods.TIAViz
TIAVizallowsgraphstobeoverlaidontoWSIsintandemwith
builds on the capabilities of TIAToolbox, utilizing two core
otheroverlaytypes,andcancolornodesaccordingtoprovided
components of the package. Firstly, TIAToolbox provides the
featuresormodeloutput.Userscancontrolthedisplayofnodes
capability to read a wide variety of image formats, and a
andedgesindividually.ThetoolacceptsgraphdatainaJSON
flask-based tileserver serves image tiles on the fly to allow for
dictionary format. Examples of this can be seen in 1. Futher
responsivenavigationaroundlargeWSIs.
information about node features can be viewed when hovering
Secondly, TIAToolbox offers an SQLite-based database for
overanode,asillustratedinsupplementaryFig3.
storing annotations, as geometries paired with a properties
dictionary. Methods are provided to allow efficient and
powerful querying of the store, to select annotations by some Interactive AI Environment
combinationofspatiallocationorconditionsontheirproperty Models can be run interactively in the UI. HoVer-Net [7] is
values. the first model available this way and can be used to segment
We add significantly to the tileserver and annotation small regions of a slide interactively. GPT-vision has been
store, and introduce a variety of classes and functions to shown to have some ability to evaluate medical images [12].
facilitate rendering of annotation overlay tiles directly from TIAVizprovidestheabilitytohighlightaregionofaslideand
an annotation store, and for conversion of some common sendittoGPT-visionwithintheinterface.Drawnannotations
annotationtypestoanAnnotationStoredatabase. (for example circling a feature of interest) can be included
The interface itself is developed using the Bokeh in the sent image, and referenced in the prompt. Examples
visualization library, a powerful Python toolkit for creating can be seen in supplementary Fig 1. We believe this sort of
interactive plots and dashboards. This choice of technology functionality could be very powerful in the future with multi-
facilitates dynamic data visualization and interactivity, modal models fine-tuned formedicalimages, as it wouldallow
essential for handling the complex data typical in digital pathologiststointeractintuitivelyinnaturallanguagewithan
pathology. AI assistant. Code for this addition is available in a fork of
TIAVizathttps://github.com/measty/tiatoolbox.
Features and Capabilities
Other Features
TIAViz is capable of overlaying a wide variety of model
A powerful feature of this tool is the ability to display
outputs and other information onto a WSI. A straightforward
multipleoverlayssimultaneously.Anycombinationofonegraph
file structure is assumed, requiring all slides to be in a
overlay, one annotation-based overlay, and multiple image-
designated ‘slides’ folder, and all overlays - including graphs,
based overlays (either WSIs or low resolution non-pyramidal
segmentations,heatmaps,etc.-inan‘overlays’folder.Thetool
images)canbeshown.
automatically pairs overlays with slides based on if an overlay
It is also possible to display two slides (or two views of the
filenamestemcontainstheslidestem,streamliningtheprocess
sameslide)sidebyside,andaddoverlaystoeachindependently,
ofdatavisualization.
asshownin1,PanelE.Slidenavigationwillbelinkedbetween
thetwowindows.Thisisextremelyusefulforviewingregistered
Annotation and Segmentation Overlays
slides, comparingdifferentmodeloutputforthesameslide, or
Thetooliscapableofoverlayinggeometriesprovidedinvarious simplyshowingthebaseimagenexttoanoverlaidimage.
formats. TIAViz uses the TIAToolbox SQLiteStore to store AJSONconfigurationfilecanbeprovidedwhichcandefine
annotations and segmentations as Annotation objects, which a variety of defaults for a given project, such as default
consistofageometryandanyassociatedproperties.GeoJSON colors for specific types. More information can be found3
e
• Frontend built using
r
u Bokeh
t c • Backend built using flask
e and bokeh server
t • Leverages WSI reading
i
h and annotation storage
c
from TIAToolbox
r
A • Everything is in python
: allowing for rapid
A
iteration within python-
based workflows
s
h 𝑥1 Provide as a JSON
p 𝑥.2 file:
a r 𝑥. 𝑛 𝑥𝑥 .1 2 {
:G
B
𝑥𝑥𝑥 .
.
𝑛1 2 𝑥. 𝑛 c edoo gerd _i in na dt ee xs
:
:
[
[ 2n
x
x
e
2 ],],
𝑥1 feats: [n x m],
𝑥𝑥
.
.1
2
𝑥𝑥. . 𝑛2
}
feat_names: [m]
𝑥𝑛
s n o
i
N O S Jo
e G
te al dif
.
m o ts
u c
I o fm rr
o
.p mdo a r rtt a, f woro r
m
m c ou g dse t eoo
l
mJ oS
u
O c tr pN e ua tte
t
a
t
o SQLiteStore
n
n
A
:
C
Annotations
Control by type
y WSI overlays:
a
l .svs, .ndpi, .tiff, .mrxs,
r
e any other format
v supported by tiatoolbox
O
e
Low-res, non-pyramidal
g
a overlays:
m .jpg, .png, .tiff
:I - will be scaled to fit WSI • Multiple, individually
D - must match aspect adjustable layers
ratio of WSI
w
o
d
n
iW
l
a
u
D
:
E
Fig. 1. Overview of TIAViz architecture and capabilities. Panel A: High level architecture and data flow. B: Graph overlay features. C: Overlay of
annotationsandsegmentation.D:Image-basedoverlays.E:Duallinkedwindowcapabilities.4 Eastwood et al.
inthedocumentationhttps://tia-toolbox.readthedocs.io/en/ acommonchallengeindigitalpathology.Thetoolcanbeslow
latest/visualization.html. on initial loading in the case of large numbers of annotations,
though it is generally quite responsive after this initial delay.
We aim to improve this in the future. We also plan to widen
Example Applications
the variety of tools in TIAToolbox that can be run directly
TheTIAToolboxvisualizationtoolhasbeenutilizedinarange within the interface. Currently, HoVer-Net can be used within
of research works in digital pathology, some of which we will theinterface,butthereisscopetowidentheoptionsthere.
coverheretoillustrateitsflexibility. The possibility also exists to provide a visualization server
IGUANA: This is an interpretable graph neural network allowing users to upload a slide and overlay to visualize.
for screening normal endoscopic large bowel biopsies [6]. The We currently have a prototype server for this which may be
pipeline for this model involves the segmentation of glands developed into a visualization service for the digital pathology
and several different cell types, which are used to build a communityinthefuture.
gland graph with interpretable node features calculated from
gland and nearby cell segmentations. These features were
developedincollaborationwithpathologiststocaptureaspects
Acknowledgements
of glandular morphology and the surrounding lamina propria
that they consider when making their diagnosis. TIAViz is This project was partially funded by CRUK-STFC Early
highly suitable for visualizing such information, providing the DetectionInnovationAward.FMandMEacknowledgefunding
ability to simultaneously overlay gland and cell segmentations supportfromEPSRCGrantEP/W02909X/1andPathlake.
togetherwiththeglandgraph,andvisuallyhighlighttheglands
determined by the model to contribute most highly to an
abnormal diagnosis. An online demo illustrating the IGUANA
modelcanbefoundathttps://iguana.dcs.warwick.ac.uk/. References
SocialNetworkAnalysis(SNA):In[13],SNAisusedto
characterize patches of WSI based on the relative locations of 1. D. Ahmedt-Aristizabal, M. A. Armin, et al. A survey on
graph-based deep learning for computational histopathology.
cellsinthetissue.Thesefeaturesareusedtocreateanenhanced
ComputerizedMedicalImagingandGraphics,95:102027,2022.
IDaRS-based model [3] to predict molecular pathways and
2. P. Bankhead. Qupath: Open source software for digital
mutationsincolorectalcancer.ThetaskistreatedasaMultiple
pathology image analysis. Scientific reports vol. 7,1 16878.,
instance learning problem. TIAViz provides a convenient way
2017.
tovisualizethemostpositiveinstances(patches)onaWSI,as
3. M. Bilal, S. E. A. Raza, A. Azam, et al. Novel deep learning
canbeseeninhttps://tiademos.dcs.warwick.ac.uk/Bokeh_app?
algorithm predicts the status of molecular pathways and key
demo=sna.
mutations in colorectal cancer from routine histology images.
Gene group analysis:Workin[4]hasidentifiedgroupsof
medRxiv,2021.
genes with co-dependent expression and predicted their status 4. M. Dawood, M. Eastwood, M. Jahanifar, et al. Data-driven
from WSI images using a graph neural network. These gene modelling of gene expression states in breast cancer and their
groups allow to capture the gene expression state of a patient predictionfromroutinewholeslideimages. bioRxiv,2023.
with a small number of binary variables that are biologically 5. M. Eastwood, H. Sailem, S. T. Marc, et al. Mesograph:
meaningful. Further, the groups can be used to associate Automaticprofilingofmesotheliomasubtypesfromhistological
histological phenotypes (cellular composition, mitotic counts, images. Cell Reports Medicine,4(10):101226,2023.
grading, etc.) with underlying gene expression patterns. Our 6. S. Graham, F. Minhas, M. Bilal, et al. Screening of
visualization tool provides a convenient interface to explore normalendoscopiclargebowelbiopsieswithinterpretablegraph
thepredictedexpressionofthegenegroupsandvisualizetheir learning:aretrospectivestudy. Gut,May122023.
variation and correlation with visual features over a WSI, as 7. S. Graham, Q. D. Vu, S. E. A. Raza, et al. Hover-net:
illustrated at https://tiademos.dcs.warwick.ac.uk/Bokeh_app? Simultaneoussegmentationandclassificationofnucleiinmulti-
demo=HiGGsXplore. tissuehistologyimages. Medical Image Analysis,page101563,
2019.
MesoGraph: In [5], TIAViz is used to overlay subtype
8. Z. Liu, Y. Lin, Y. Cao, H. Hu, Y. Wei, Z. Zhang, S. Lin, and
predictions onto mesothelioma TMA cores as can be
B.Guo. Swintransformer:Hierarchicalvisiontransformerusing
seen at https://tiademos.dcs.warwick.ac.uk/Bokeh_app?demo=
shiftedwindows. InICCV 2021,October2021.
mesograph. The model illustrated here is a GNN on the cell
9. L. McInnes, J. Healy, N. Saul, and L. Großberger. Umap:
graphs of the TMAs, using both morphological and local deep
Uniform manifold approximation and projection. Journal of
featurestodescribeeachcell.
Open Source Software,3(29):861,2018.
10. J.Pocock,S.Graham,Q.Vu,etal.Tiatoolboxasanend-to-end
Discussion and Conclusions library for advanced tissue image analytics. Communications
Medicine,Sep2022.
TIAViz is a powerful and flexible tool for visualization and 11. T. B. D. Team. Bokeh: A python library for interactive
exploration of digital pathology models. It is most useful in a visualization. https://bokeh.org,2023.
research context where its browser-based nature allows use on 12. Z.Yang,L.Li,K.Lin,J.Wang,C.-C.Lin,Z.Liu,andL.Wang.
remotemachinesandtoprovideonlinedemosforcollaborative Thedawnoflmms:Preliminaryexplorationswithgpt-4v(ision).
purposes. As it is built in Python it also lends itself to quick ArXiv,abs/2309.17421,2023.
integration, iteration and adaptation within the Python-based 13. N. Zamanitajeddin, M. Jahanifar, M. Bilal, M. Eastwood,
and N. Rajpoot. Social network analysis of cell networks
machinelearningpipelinescommonlyusedindigitalpathology
improvesdeeplearningforpredictionofmolecularpathwaysand
research.
key mutations in colorectal cancer. Medical Image Analysis,
There are some areas for improvement. One of these is
93:103071,2024.
performance optimization when handling very large datasets,Supplementary Material
Figure1: ExampleofaGPT-visionpromptsentfromwithintheUIwithaddedhand-drawnannotation. Response
canbeseenbelow.
GPT-visionresponse:
This is an H&E (hematoxylin and eosin) stained histological image that appears to show a section of the
gastrointestinaltract,mostlikelythecolonorsmallintestineduetothepresenceofgobletcells,whicharemucus-
secreting cells. The epithelial layer is columnar with regular nuclei, which is typical for this part of the digestive
tract. Thegreenannotationcirclesaglandintheepithelium.
What’snoteworthyinthisregion:
1. Intheannotatedarea,thereisanintestinalgland(cryptofLieberku¨hn),whichlookstobelinedwithregularly
spaced columnar epithelial cells with basal, round to oval nuclei. The presence of goblet cells interspersed
betweentheabsorptivecellsistypicalfornormalintestinalmucosa.
2. Within the crypt, there is no evidence of dysplasia, which is characterized by variations in cell size (aniso-
cytosis), shape (pleomorphism), nuclear enlargement, hyperchromasia, and increased mitotic activity. The
cellsretainuniformityandthere’snoapparentcrowdingorstratificationofnuclei,whichisreassuring.
3. The surrounding stroma contains lamina propria, which shows a moderate number of inflammatory cells
which can be normal, but an increased number could indicate mild inflammation. However, there doesn’t
appeartobesignificantinfiltratetosuggestactiveinflammationoraninflammatoryboweldisease.
4. The crypt architecture is maintained and there doesn’t appear to be any evidence of cryptitis or crypt ab-
scesses,whichwouldsuggestmorespecificinflammatoryconditionssuchasulcerativecolitis.
Abnormalities: Noovertabnormalitiescanbedeterminedfromthissingleregionoftheimage,astheannotated
cryptseemstohaveretaineditsnormalhistologicalarchitecture. Pathologistsmust,however,assessmultiplefields
andlevelstoestablishadefinitediagnosisanddeterminetheabsenceofpathologyaccurately.
Foreducationalreview,alwayscorrelatemicroscopicfindingswithmacroscopicobservationsandclinicaldata
forcomprehensivepathologyassessment.
1
4202
beF
51
]VI.ssee[
1v09990.2042:viXraFigure 2: Double-clicking on an annotation will bring up a popup window giving a detailed table view of all
propertiesofthatannotation.
Figure3: Hoveringoveragraphnodewillbringupfurtherinformationaboutthatnode.
2