Heuristic evaluations of back support, shoulder support, hand grip strength support, and
sit-stand support exoskeletons using universal design principles.
Alejandra Martinez, Laura Tovar, Carla Irigoyen Amparan, Karen Gonzalez, Prajina Edayath,
Priyadarshini Pennathur, and Arunkumar Pennathur*
Physical, Information and Cognitive Human Factors Engineering Research Laboratory
Industrial, Manufacturing and Systems Engineering Department
University of Texas at El Paso, El Paso, Texas 79968-0521, USA
*Corresponding author; Email for corresponding author: apennathur@utep.edu
Conflict of Interest
The authors declare no conflicts of interest.
Acknowledgments:
The authors thank Dr. Panfeng Liang, a research statistician at the Data Analytics Lab, and Dr.
Abhijit Mandal, Director of the Data Analytics Lab at the Border Biomedical Research Center, for
their assistance in conducting the statistical analyses reported in this paper.
Funding:
This research was supported by a STAR grant from the State of Texas and funds from the
College of Engineering at the University of Texas, El Paso. The contents of this paper are
solely the responsibility of the authors and do not necessarily represent the official views of the
State of Texas or the University of Texas at El Paso.Heuristic evaluation of back support, shoulder support, hand grip strength support, and
sit-stand support exoskeletons using universal design principles.
Occupational Applications (≤150 words)
Our evaluation of four occupational exoskeletons using universal design principles revealed
opportunities for design improvement. Our results indicate that designing exoskeletons for
equitable use by all types of workers, including workers with disabilities, older workers, and
women, remains a challenge. Assembling exoskeletons for use, donning these wearable
devices, and doffing them pose challenges, particularly because of the strength, dexterity,
reach, and balance requirements of the user. Workers with diverse capabilities may not be able
to assemble or don these devices without additional support from another person. Exoskeleton
designs can be improved to provide feedback on user actions, error prevention, and error
recovery. For industry adoption, factors such as assembly and storage space demands, training
needs, additional personnel to assist users, and personalization costs could pose significant
barriers.
Technical Abstract (≤300 words)
Background (or Rationale): Occupational exoskeletons promise to reduce the incidence of
musculoskeletal injuries; however, we do not know if their designs allow universal use by all
workers. We also do not know how easy the tasks of assembling, donning, doffing, and
disassembling exoskeletons are.
Purpose: The purpose of our study was to heuristically evaluate a back support, a shoulder
support, a handgrip strength support, and a sit-stand exoskeleton for how well they are
designed for universal use when assembling, donning, doffing, and disassembling the
exoskeleton.Methods: Seven evaluators used universal design principles and associated criteria to
independently evaluate and rate four exoskeletons when assembling, donning, doffing, and
disassembling the devices. The rating scale was a Likert-type scale, where a rating of 1
represented not at all, and a rating of 5 represented an excellent design with respect to the
universal design criteria for the task.
Results: The results indicate that providing perceptible information to the user, making the
design equitable to use for a diverse set of users, making the design simple and intuitive to use
with adequate feedback, and designing to prevent user errors, and when errors are made,
allowing the user to recover quickly from the errors, were rated poorly. Assembling and donning
tasks presented the most challenges.
Conclusions: For the industry to widely implement exoskeletons and exoskeletons to acquire the
status of personal protective equipment (PPE), exoskeleton manufacturers must consider a
wider range of users, address critical safety concerns when assembling and donning these
devices, simplify designs to be a one-person operation, and consider industry barriers such as
training needs and customization of devices in their design process. The exoskeleton-human
factors research community should include diverse users in their evaluations and conduct
usability, accessibility, and safety evaluations of these devices to provide design feedback.
Keywords: exoskeletons; universal design; heuristic evaluation, design for all, assembly,
donning1. Introduction and background
The incidence and prevalence of non-fatal occupational musculoskeletal disorders in the
United States have recently increased in many industrial sectors. According to the most recent
survey of employer-reported non-fatal workplace injuries in the United States (Bureau of Labor
Statistics, 2022), the total number of reported injuries has increased by 6.3% from 2.1 million
cases in 2020 to 2.2 million in 2021. Occupational exoskeletons have emerged as a promising
solution to alleviate work-related musculoskeletal disorders in industrial workplaces and
maintain worker productivity and safety while performing industrial tasks (Elprama et al., 2020;
Howard et al., 2019, 2020; Kermavnar et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2018; Kuber et al., 2022, 2023;
McFarland & Fischer, 2019; Medrano et al., 2023; Nussbaum et al., 2018; Papp et al., 2020;
Reid et al., 2017). Originally developed for military applications and in rehabilitation settings,
exoskeletons are “wearable devices that augment, enable, assist, and enhance physical activity
through mechanical interaction with the body” ’(Lowe et al., 2019). Market analysts predict that
the exoskeleton market will reach $1.8 billion in value by 2025, indicating significant industry
interest and support for adopting and implementing exoskeletons in the work environment
(Financial Results for Publicly Held Exoskeleton Companies, 2016 – 2022, 2023). In the
European Union, some exoskeletons have already earned the European Union conformity (CE)
personal protective equipment (PPE) mark (Laevo FLEX 3.0 is the first-ever exoskeleton Issued
Personal Protective Equipment PPE CE Mark, 2022), and it is likely that the US will soon follow
suit.
Occupational exoskeletons hold remarkable promise for becoming an important ally to
industry and workers for alleviating workplace injuries. However, before exoskeletons can
become commonplace in industry as personal protective devices much like safety glasses or
hardhats, researchers agree (Baldassarre et al., 2022; Elprama et al., 2020, 2022; Ferraro et
al., 2020; Kermavnar et al., 2021; Kim et al., 2019; Tarbit et al., 2022) that we must first fully
understand, demonstrate, and document the benefits of using exoskeletons in industrial workenvironments, and overcome the challenges and constraints industries face in adopting and
implementing exoskeletons (Kermavnar et al., 2021; Looze et al., 2015, 2021). In particular,
because exoskeletons are wearable devices, their effectiveness in practice may be dictated not
only by how well their functional features support task performance but also by how comfortable
the exoskeleton is for the worker to wear for prolonged periods of time (Baldassarre et al., 2022;
Kim et al., 2019; Tarbit et al., 2022). In turn, worker comfort can be influenced by aspects such
as the degree of anthropometric fit (Looze et al., 2015; Pesenti et al., 2021).
To address the significant knowledge gaps that prevent successful full-scale industry
implementation of exoskeletons, researchers have been conducting studies evaluating
occupational exoskeletons in laboratory environments and, in a few cases, in field settings.
These lab-based studies have focused on how well specific types of exoskeletons support
occupational task performance through the evaluation of muscle activity and how usable and
comfortable they are through user feedback about task performance. Evidence from studies
assessing the degree of support these exoskeletons provide through the evaluation of muscle
activity, and biomechanical force and stress modeling indicates that in activities such as lifting,
walking and overhead work activities, both passive and active exoskeletons reduce muscle
activity by 20% to 80% (Baltrusch et al., 2018, 2019; Bock et al., 2022, 2023; Cha et al., 2019;
Gillette & Stephenson, 2019; Harant et al., 2023; Hwang et al., 2021; Jackson & Collins, 2015;
Kermavnar et al., 2021; Latella et al., 2022; Looze et al., 2015; Luger et al., 2021; Ogunseiju et
al., n.d.; Pinho & Forner-Cordero, 2022; Qu et al., 2021; Schmalz et al., 2019, 2022; Steele et
al., 2017; Walter et al., 2023). Reduced muscle activity has been observed in the lower and
upper back, erector spinae, and shoulder and knee muscles. Some studies have shown that
exoskeletons may decrease the metabolic costs of work (Baltrusch et al., 2019; Bock et al.,
2022; Hwang et al., 2021; Walter et al., 2023). A few studies have reported less favorable
muscle mechanics and even increases in muscle activation (Farris et al., 2014).Many studies that quantify joint kinematics and muscle activity have also reported on
participants’ comfort, fit, and movement restrictions, all of which model the wearability of the
exoskeleton and the overall helpfulness of the exoskeleton in assisting with the task (Chae et
al., 2021; Dijsseldonk et al., 2020; Kim et al., 2018, 2019; Luger et al., 2021; Meyer et al., 2019).
Participants reported increased discomfort when wearing the exoskeletons for tasks that
required extreme postures, with individual fit and preferences influencing discomfort ratings.
Furthermore, sex-related differences in how exoskeletons fit specific anthropometric profiles
seem to play a role in discomfort ratings (Kim et al., 2020). Other similar studies have reported
that participants experience discomfort around the knees and suggest thicker knee pads when
using a lower-extremity exoskeleton (Abdoli-E et al., 2006). Additionally, studies have reported
mixed discomfort scores for back support and trunk exoskeletons (typically compared with and
without an exoskeleton) of the lower back and trunk (Antwi-Afari et al., 2021; Cardoso et al.,
2020; Goršič et al., 2021; Kozinc et al., 2021; Madinei et al., 2020) and the forearms, upper
arms, and shoulders (Daratany & Taveira, 2020; De Bock et al., 2020; Ferreira et al., 2020; Kim
et al., 2018; Moyon et al., 2018; Van Engelhoven et al., 2018). Only recently have studies begun
to focus exclusively on evaluating usability, rather than combining usability or discomfort
evaluations as part of evaluating the functionality of exoskeletons. For example, in a recent
study evaluating the usability of harnesses supporting a sit-stand exoskeleton, researchers
assessed the usability in terms of wearability, stability, convenience, and overall wearing
satisfaction (Chae et al., 2021). Wearability was assessed based on how easy it was to
remember the steps to use, fasten, and adjust the harnesses. They assessed stability using
wearing pressure, strength, comfort, safety, and overall stability with Likert-type rating scales.
The convenience of the harnesses was assessed using thermal sensations, wetness
sensations, and cushioning, as well as what participants felt about overall convenience. The
authors concluded that stability and wearability significantly affected overall wearing satisfaction.
Assessing usability with scales such as the System Usability Scale (SUS), with higher scores onthe SUS indicating higher usability (Orekhov et al., 2021), also indicates a 45% increase in SUS
scores when exoskeletons have been designed using user-centered design approaches (Meyer
et al., 2019). While many of these studies have provided critical insights into the effectiveness
of exoskeletons and on their usability and comfort during use in simulated or actual occupational
tasks, we still do not know whether these exoskeletons are designed for universal use to
accommodate a wide range of worker characteristics.
There is a need for exoskeletons, wearable devices, and PPE to be universally available
and usable, based on the most recent labor force participation data (March 2024) published by
the Office of Disability Employment Policy of the BLS. These data indicate that the labor force
participation rate for persons with a disability aged 16–64 years is 40.3%. It is also well known
that the US workforce has been aging and has grown by 117% in the last 20 years. More recent
projections show that adults aged 65 and older will account for 9% of the labor force in 2032
and are expected to account for 60% of labor force growth from 2022 to 2032. Furthermore,
many older workers are employed full-time rather than part-time. Recent data from the Current
Population Survey and the BLS database indicate that nearly 45% of the labor force in 2032 is
expected to be aged 45 and above, with only 44% between 25 and 44 years of age (BLS,
2023). Women aged 25–54 years continue to constitute a large percentage of the labor force,
with 76.4% of women participating in the labor force in 2022. Women aged 55 years and older
constitute approximately 33.6% of the labor force in 2022, and this number is expected to
remain at 33% in the next 10 years (BLS, 2023).
The unique characteristics of the labor market and associated worker characteristics, and
the potential need for these workers to use exoskeletons effectively as personal protective
equipment in the future, necessitate an evaluation of whether and to what extent occupational
exoskeletons are designed for all. When exoskeletons are designed for inclusivity and
accessibility, all workers, including those with disabilities, can benefit from the potential for injury
reduction that exoskeletons can offer by removing barriers to full participation by disabledworkers without the need to significantly adapt these wearable devices to these workers.
Furthermore, older workers and women in the workforce have different capabilities and
limitations in anthropometry and fit, strength, and dexterity, which must be considered when
designing exoskeletons. To date, no studies have evaluated whether these exoskeletons are
designed for use by all.
Furthermore, most studies on usability and comfort have exclusively focused on evaluating
exoskeletons when performing simulated occupational tasks. This is undoubtedly useful
knowledge to acquire, but an exoskeleton as a wearable device, which is also modular in
product design architecture and consists of loose parts, needs to be first assembled and then
donned by the worker before the worker can use it for performing a task; after task performance
is completed, the worker must then doff, disassemble and sanitize the exoskeleton before next
use. An important rationale for considering these four tasks is how these basic tasks might
represent what would typically occur in practice if exoskeletons were implemented in industry.
This rationale dictates that exoskeletons be universally usable not only during task use, but also
during assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly. Currently, there is no knowledge on how
the design of exoskeletons supports universal use during the assembly, donning, doffing, and
disassembly stages; without assembly or donning, an exoskeleton cannot be used and
evaluating exoskeletons during assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly may reveal design
problems different from, and not indicated by, evaluations conducted during task and use
conditions. If these critical tasks are difficult to perform, industry adoption of exoskeletons could
become limited, given the productivity and cost concerns industry will have in quickly being able
to put these devices together, wear them, and remove them when needed.
To address these gaps, our aim is to understand the extent to which exoskeletons are
designed for universal use by all workers. To achieve this aim, as one of the critical first steps,
we conducted a heuristic evaluation of four exoskeletons using universal design principles as
heuristic guidelines. The four different exoskeletons used in the study included: (1) a sit-standexoskeleton used for alternating between sitting, standing and walking postures; (2) a hand grip
strength exoskeleton; (3) a back support exoskeleton used to support lumbar flexion; and (4) a
shoulder support exoskeleton used to support above shoulder work. Our evaluation also
focused on four tasks that one would expect all exoskeleton users to perform to some degree
when using the devices: assembling the exoskeleton, donning it, doffing it, and disassembling
and storing it. The main study questions were as follows.
1. How well are exoskeletons designed for universal use? To answer this question, we
evaluated four exoskeletons using universal design principles as heuristics: seven
evaluators rated each exoskeleton to determine which principles the exoskeletons
incorporated well into their designs, which universal design principles were violated, to
what extent, and whether there were commonalities in violations of the design principles
and design problems across exoskeletons.
2. Which tasks among assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly of exoskeletons are
easy to perform and which tasks are difficult to perform when evaluated against the
principles of universal design? To answer this question, each evaluator tracked the
violations of the universal design principles when performing these tasks with each
exoskeleton. Evaluator ratings were then used to compare these task phases to
determine specific design problems and heuristic violations in the assembly, donning,
doffing, and disassembly tasks.
2. Methods
2.1. Study Approach
Our overall study approach consisted of three broad phases: an initial study planning and
evaluator orientation phase, an evaluation and rating phase, and a rating discussion and
reconciliation phase. The process steps are illustrated in Figure 1. These three project phases
took approximately 4 months.Study Planning and Heuristic
Rating Discussion
Evaluator Evaluation and
and Reconciliation
Orientation Ratings
Review Universal Spreadsheet and
Compile all ratings
Design Criteria instructions sent to
from 7 evaluators
meeting 1 each evaluator
Prepare 7 evaluators Prepare master
spreadsheet for independently rate discussion
evaluation process 4 exoskeletons spreadsheet
Develop discussion Assembly, Donning, Apply discussion
threshold criteria Doffing, threshold criteria to
meeting 2 Disassembly spreadsheet
Familiarize with Document ratings
Discuss extreme
evaluation process and comments in ratings and
meeting 3 spreadsheet reconcile
Exoskeleton setup
Document
in lab with table
changes, finalize
and task chair
evaluation
Figure 1. Three stages of heuristic evaluations with the major steps to proceed from planning to
final evaluation documentation.
2.2. Exoskeletons Evaluated in the Study
In this study, we evaluated four commercially available exoskeletons. Each of these
exoskeletons targets a specific movement and set of muscles that cause injury in the workplace.
The exoskeletons evaluated include a lumbar flexion support device; a shoulder support device
that is intended to reduce fatigue when workers perform activities above shoulder height; an
exoskeleton for tasks that may alternate between sitting, standing, and walking postures, all
three of which are passive exoskeletons; and a hand grip strength exoskeleton, which is an
active exoskeleton powered by a battery pack.
2.3. Universal Design Principles and Evaluation Criteria Used
In our study, we used seven commonly known principles of universal design (Center for
Universal Design, 1997), and the guidelines provided under each principle. We converted each
guideline under each principle into a question format instead of leaving it in its prescriptiveformat so that evaluators could find it easier to anchor their evaluations. Table 1 lists the
universal design principles and the evaluation criteria used in this study. Our rating scale was a
Likert-type scale from 1 to 5, where a rating of 1 represented not at all, a rating of 3 represented
moderate, and a rating of 5 represented an excellent design with respect to the universal design
criteria for the task.
Table 1. Universal design principles and evaluation criteria used in the study. The numbers for
the evaluation criteria correspond to the numbers in Figure 4 for the evaluation criteria on the x-
axis.
Design principle Evaluation criteria (To what extent)
Equitable use 1. Does the design provide the same means
of use for everyone?
2. Does the design ensure that it is equally
safe, private and secure for all?
3. Is the design aesthetic and unobtrusive?
4. Does the design avoid stigmatizing users
5. Does the design minimize memory load?
Flexibility in use 1. Does the design provide adjustable
features for diverse users? Consider
male, female, old, young, different types
of workers, demographics, etc.
2. Does the design support efficiency by
providing flexibility during use?
3. Does the design consider portability of the
device?
4. Does the design ensure adaptability of the
product to the user’s pace?
5. Does the design facilitate users’ accuracy
and precision?
Simple and intuitive to use 1. Does the design support learnability and
intuitiveness?
2. Does the design eliminate unnecessary
complexity?
3. Does the design consider a wide range of
language and literacy skills?
4. Does the design ensure consistency of
functional features?
5. Does the design assure match between
system and world?
6. Does the design ensure that users are in
control?
7. Does the design make system state
visible?
8. Does the design provide clear closure in
task?
Perceptible information 1. Does the design consider different modes
of information?Design principle Evaluation criteria (To what extent)
2. Does the design users’ sensory
limitations?
3. Is the design minimalist?
4. Does the design use users’ language?
5. Does the design provide informative
feedback?
6. Does the design provide help when
needed?
7. Does the design provide good error
messages?
8. Does the design maximize legibility of
essential information?
Tolerance for error 1. Does the design prevent errors before it
occurs?
2. Does the design protect users from
unintended misuses?
3. Does the design support conscious
actions that require vigilance?
4. Does the design provide necessary
warnings?
5. Does the design arrange elements in a
way that minimizes hazards or errors?
6. Does the design ensure durability?
7. Does the design provide help and support
for recovering from problems?
8. Does the design ensure that actions are
reversible?
Low physical effort 1. Does the design maintain a neutral body
posture?
2. Does the design ensure that the operating
forces are reasonable?
3. Does the design minimize repetitive
actions?
4. Does the design minimize sustained
physical effort?
Size and space for approach and use 1. Does the design provide a clear line of
sight to important elements for any seated
or standing user?
2. Does the design make sure that all
components are comfortable to reach for
any seated or standing user?
3. Does the design provide adequate space
for use of assistive devices or personal
assistance?
4. Does the design accommodate variations
in hand and grip sizes?2.4. Tasks Evaluated in the Study
We evaluated four tasks: assembly of the exoskeleton, its donning, doffing, and its
disassembly. Each exoskeleton came from the manufacturer disassembled into its component
parts either in a manufacturer-supplied bag, a case, or a box.
For the purpose of the evaluation, we defined an assembly task as being able to
assemble all the parts from the exoskeleton storage bag/box into a complete exoskeleton that is
ready to be put on. The donning task consisted of successfully putting on the exoskeleton to the
point at which the exoskeleton was ready for use. Doffing was defined as the successful
removal of the exoskeleton from the body and its placement on a desk or work surface. The
disassembly task consisted of removing and separating all the parts of the exoskeleton so that it
would be ready for assembly the next time. For all four tasks, the evaluators could use the
instruction manuals that either came in the box or were available online and hand tools such as
the hex keys that came with the exoskeletons.
2.5. Evaluation process and procedure
The evaluation process is illustrated in Figure 1 and the universal design guidelines are
listed in Table 1. After planning and orientation, the evaluators agreed to independently evaluate
the four exoskeletons and complete a spreadsheet with detailed comments on the problems
encountered when assembling, donning, doffing, and disassembling each exoskeleton with
respect to each evaluation criterion (see Figure 2).Figure 2. Spreadsheet template used for completing the evaluations.
The evaluators were instructed to use a worktable (available in the laboratory) as the
main surface to place the exoskeletons for any assembly and disassembly so that we could
maintain uniformity with respect to the postures, heights, distances, and reaches encountered
during the evaluations. The evaluators were asked to perform any required sitting posture
during the evaluation using a standard task chair available in the laboratory.
The consolidated master spreadsheet template for combining all individual files from all
evaluators is shown in Figure 3. The master sheet contained columns for the task (assembly,
donning, doffing, and disassembly), design principles, evaluation questions, and rating columns
for each of the seven evaluators with their completed ratings and their comments justifying their
ratings.Figure 3. Screenshot of compiled master spreadsheet for one exoskeleton. Each exoskeleton
had its own worksheet in the workbook, which contained ratings and comments for all four
exoskeletons.
2.6. Rating Discussion and Reconciliation Process
The final phase of the evaluation process involved a discussion of the ratings assigned
by the evaluators and a reconciliation and adjustment of the ratings if the ratings diverged
extensively among the evaluators. To prepare for discussions to reconcile the ratings, the team
prepared a list of rules to decide whether a certain set of ratings for a criterion needed further
discussion and reconciliation. The most important rule was to examine the extreme ratings from
the evaluation and determine which criteria needed further discussion. A score of 1 on the rating
scale indicated a poor design and a score of 5 on the rating scale indicated an excellent design
with respect to the universal design criteria. The process for determining the need for discussion
is illustrated in Figure 4.No Discussion is needed,
identify rules and
criteria for discussion ≥2 rated
at 1 No
AND
≥2 rated
at 5
No
Discuss criteria and Yes
associated ratings and
comments
≥2 rated
Determine if ≥6 Yes at 1
discussion is rated at AND
needed 3, 4 or 5 ≥2 rated No discussion,
at 4 analyze ratings and
comments
Categorize criteria as No
No excellent design
≥2 rated
≥4 Yes at 2 AND
rated at ≥2 rated
1 or 2 at 5
Categorize criteria as No
problem
≥2 rated
at 2 AND
≥2 rated
at 4
No
Figure 4. Decision process for determining the need for discussion of ratings using threshold
criteria and rules.
Our logic for deciding the threshold rating levels for what needed discussion and what
did not was that even a little evidence may be enough to warrant discussion for a design
problem; hence, a threshold of two raters for discussing ratings that exhibited spread and that
we would demand more evidence (a greater number of raters) to agree that the design was
good to excellent with respect to universal design criteria; hence, the threshold of six raters or
all seven raters for ratings of 3, 4, or 5. During the discussion sessions, the team first heard
from the extreme raters regarding the rationale for their numerical rating for each task and for
each exoskeleton. Other team members then joined in the discussion. Based on this discussion,
team members either elected to stay with their numerical rating for a criterion or decided to
change their rating. In general, three reasons emerged for the disagreements in the ratings: (1)
some evaluators felt that the assembly and the donning tasks could not be clearly separated
during the evaluation because some assembly occurred after the evaluator had donned the
exoskeleton; (2) some evaluators felt that the device itself had to provide information such as
feedback to the user and not have the user refer to the manual (which in most cases had theinformation in printed form); and (3) some evaluators felt that if the user was able to complete a
task, such as assembly or donning, that they would also be able to complete the complimentary
task such as disassembly and doffing, and therefore provided a similar rating. Table 2 shows
the number of criteria that warranted discussion and were resolved after discussion.
Table 2. The number of criteria that were resolved after the discussion. We applied the same
threshold rater-rating rules used prior to the discussion to decide whether the discussions
resolved the disagreements in the ratings.
Type of Exoskeleton Number of criteria discussed Number of unresolved and
unreconciled criteria after
discussions
Back support exoskeleton 20 2
Shoulder support 31 3
exoskeleton
Grip strength support 6 0
exoskeleton
Sit-stand support exoskeleton 26 4
2.7. Statistical analyses
We generated descriptive statistics, including means, frequencies, and counts, as
follows.
a. The mean ratings for universal design principles that received a rating of 3 or below
were averaged over all the criteria for a principle and averaged over all seven raters
and all four tasks (assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly).
b. The number of times a universal design criterion received an average rating of three
or below when averaged over the four tasks and four exoskeletons.
c. a ranking of the top three criteria that evaluators rated at 1 and 2 sorted by the
number of raters assigning the ratings and categorized by the task and design
principle for each of the four exoskeletons.
d. categorization of the number of violations of universal design criteria across all four
exoskeletons, organized by task stage (assembly, donning, doffing, and
disassembly).All analyses were tabulated and/or appropriate visualizations were generated.
3. Results
Our research questions were twofold: How well do exoskeleton designs, in general,
adhere to the principles of universal design, and which tasks among assembly, donning, doffing,
and disassembly of exoskeletons are easy to perform, and which tasks are difficult with respect
to universal design principles?
The scores in Table 3 indicate that the universal design principles of providing
perceptible information to the user, making the design equitable to use, and making the design
simple and intuitive to use were design principles on which the evaluators rated the
exoskeletons poorly. Furthermore, these design principles received average ratings of less than
three for assembly and donning tasks; disassembly tasks were rated at an average of three or
above, indicating that disassembly did not significantly violate universal design principles. It is
also noteworthy that the hand grip strength exoskeleton did not receive any average ratings at
or below three for any of the design principles.
Table 3. Design principles that received an average rating of less than 3 when averaged over all
criteria for that principle over all raters for different tasks.
Exoskeleton Task Design Principle Average Score
Sit-stand Assembly Perceptible 2.77
information
Donning Equitable use 2.91
Back support Assembly Equitable use 2.71
Assembly Simple and intuitive 2.84
Assembly Perceptible 2.54
information
Shoulder support Donning Size and space 2.95
Assembly Equitable use 2.94
Assembly Simple and intuitive 2.85
Assembly Perceptible 2.96
information
Donning Equitable use 2.88The results indicate that the principles of providing perceptible information to the user,
making the design equitable for use by all, and designs incorporating tolerance for user errors
were the top three principles that were all poorly rated at 1 and 2 by a majority of raters (Table
4). The specific criteria varied from a lack of safety features in some exoskeletons, such as the
sit-stand and shoulder support exoskeletons, to a lack of informative feedback for the user from
some exoskeletons, such as handgrip strength and sit-stand exoskeletons (Table 4 and Figure
5). Assembly and donning tasks represented the majority of the violations of the criteria.
Table 4. The top 3 universal design evaluation criteria that obtained the most scores of 1 and 2
from the evaluators. The criteria are tagged by the task phase and the design principle violated
for each exoskeleton.
Exoskeleton Task Design Principle Universal Number of
Design Criteria evaluators rating
at 1 and 2
Sit-stand Donning Equitable use Equally safe, 7
private and
secure for all
Donning Tolerance for Supports 7
error conscious
actions that
require vigilance
Assembly Perceptible Provide 6
information informative
feedback
Handgrip Doffing Perceptible Provide 6
strength information informative
feedback
Donning Perceptible Provide 6
information informative
feedback
Assembly Tolerance for Provide 4
error necessary
warnings
Back support Assembly Perceptible Maximize 6
information legibility of
essential
information
Minimalist 6
design
Consider users’ 6
sensory
limitationsShoulder Assembly Simple and Consider a wide 5
support intuitive range of
language and
literacy skills
Ensure 5
consistency of
functional
features
Donning Equitable use Equally safe, 5
private and
secure for allFigure 5. Average rating for all 7 universal design principles for each evaluation criterion
(numbered in Table 1) for each exoskeleton included in the study by each task phase including
assembly donning, doffing, and disassembly and storage.Table 5 indicates that the design criterion that had the most violations with a rating of 3
or below was failing to consider user’s sensory limitations.
Table 5. Frequency of violations of universal design criteria that received an average rating of 3
or below for all tasks and exoskeletons.
Universal design criteria Frequency of violations
Consider users’ sensory limitations 13
Provide informative feedback 10
Provide same means of use for everyone 9
Provide adequate space for use of assistive 7
devices
Be aesthetic and unobtrusive 7
Prevent errors 7
Provide good error messages 6
Consider different modes of information 6
Comfortable to reach in seated or standing 6
postures
Provide necessary warnings 5
Not all universal design principles and criteria fared poorly. All seven evaluators rated
aspects such as not having to remember what actions to take; the design requiring only minimal
repetitive actions; users having the possibility of reversing their actions quickly; the designs of
the exoskeletons affording assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly tasks at the user’s
pace of work; and reasonable force and strength demands, among others, as positive features
(Table 6).
Table 6. Universal design criteria, corresponding principles and the tasks that were rated
between 3 and 5 by all 7 evaluators for each exoskeleton.
Exoskeleton Task Design Principle Universal design
criteria
Sit-stand Assembly Equitable use Minimize memory
load
Donning Low physical effort Minimize repetitive
actions
Doffing Simple and intuitive Support learnability
and intuitiveness
Hand grip Assembly Flexibility in use Ensure adaptability of
product to user’s
pace
Donning Tolerance for error Ensure actions are
reversibleEquitable use Be aesthetic and
unobtrusive
Back support Donning Low physical effort Ensure operating
forces are
reasonable
Minimize sustained
physical effort
Simple and intuitive Ensure users are in
control
Shoulder support Donning Flexibility in use Provide adjustable
features for diverse
users
Donning Simple and intuitive Ensure that users are
in control
Disassembly Simple and intuitive Provide clear closure
in task
Figure 6 illustrates the number of violations across all exoskeletons by task phase,
indicating that the assembly and donning of the exoskeletons violated more universal design
criteria than the doffing and disassembly tasks. This trend is also reflected in Tables 3 and 4,
where most of the violations of the design principles and criteria occur during the assembly and
donning phases.
Assembly
Donning
Doffing
Disassembly
0 10 20 30 40 50 60 70
Sum of Count of criteria violated with average rating at or below 3
Figure 6. The number of criteria violations of the universal design heuristics for assembly,
donning, doffing and disassembly tasks across all exoskeletons. Assembly and donning tasks
accounted for 76% of the 128 violations.
ksaT4. Discussion
Newer occupational exoskeletons are continually being evaluated by researchers for
their efficacy in directly supporting worker performance in tasks that may cause musculoskeletal
injuries. However, from a design standpoint, we do not know how well exoskeletons, in general,
are designed for universal use by all workers, which is particularly important given the diversity
in the industrial workforce, including workers with disabilities, workers with work-related injuries
or mobility challenges, older workers, and female workers. Furthermore, it is unclear how well
exoskeleton designs afford the tasks of assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly; if the
exoskeletons cannot be quickly assembled, donned, and doffed when needed, industry is
unlikely to embrace and adopt them given the productivity concerns industry is likely to raise. To
answer these two research questions, in our study, we heuristically evaluated four different
occupational exoskeletons using widely accepted universal design principles and criteria when
assembling, donning, doffing and disassembling the devices. We further discuss our findings on
how well the four exoskeletons fared when evaluated against the universal design principles.
4.1. Universal design principles that were rated poor in the exoskeletons
4.1.1. Design for equitable use
The design of the exoskeletons for equitable use, as a universal design principle,
received an average rating of less than 3 across three exoskeletons: the sit-stand, back support,
and shoulder support exoskeletons (Table 3). In particular, in the sit-stand and shoulder support
exoskeletons (Figure 5), all seven evaluators perceived that the exoskeletons were not equally
safe for all users during donning and rated them only in the range of 1 to 2 (Table 4). We
believe this is the case because the sit-stand exoskeleton requires the wearer to balance or to
have another person help them while donning the exoskeleton and when attempting to sit on the
seat pads to avoid the risk of falling. Bending actions are required to secure the exoskeleton to
the feet, introducing an additional risk of falling owing to the weight of the exoskeleton on thebody during bending. In addition, if users assemble the exoskeleton while donning it, there is an
even greater risk of falling. When donning the sit-stand exoskeleton, the user must hold the
device while securing it to the body because the device does not stand upright without support.
Similarly, with the shoulder support exoskeleton, multiple evaluators commented on the safety
risks of accidentally hitting themselves with the unanticipated bouncing back and ricochet of the
arm-cup assembly when donning the exoskeleton. These are significant safety concerns that
warrant these severity ratings.
Our findings indicate that potential safety concerns when donning exoskeletons have not
received sufficient attention in the design of these devices. We believe that one reason could be
the importance provided during design to use these exoskeletons for task performance,
compared to assembly or donning activities. Additionally, current evaluations of usability have
focused primarily on use conditions and task simulations. Our study identifies a significant
knowledge gap in the recognition of these safety concerns. Furthermore, these concerns were
identified only because we evaluated the assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly phases,
pointing to the need for a comprehensive evaluation of exoskeletons during the pre- and post-
use phases, and not only during use for task performance.
Together, the violations in the equitable design criteria suggest that the evaluated
exoskeletons do not adequately consider all the user populations and characteristics. Both
safety concerns can be exacerbated in people with balance problems or those with limited
mobility. These findings indicate that exoskeletons are currently not usable by workers with
diverse abilities, or users with canes, or other assistive devices. It is not clear what user
population was used as a baseline for designing exoskeletons. Recent data show that the labor
force participation of people with disabilities in the working age range of 16–64 years is nearly
40%. One could argue that these workers would benefit more from these exoskeletons.
Therefore, these worker characteristics must be considered when designing an exoskeleton.4.1.2. Perceptible information from the design
Perceptible information from the design for the user, as a principle, considering all its
criteria, received an average rating of less than 3 across three exoskeletons: the sit-stand, the
back support, and the shoulder support devices (Table 3). Two exoskeletons, the sit-stand
device and the handgrip strength device (Figure 5), received ratings of 1 to 2 from six evaluators
for not providing informative feedback across three different tasks: assembly, donning, and
doffing (Table 4). Additionally, informative feedback criteria were the second most frequent, with
average ratings of 3 or below across all exoskeletons and tasks (Table 3). There was
considerable discussion among raters regarding whether and how exoskeletons, as passive
devices, should provide feedback during assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly. The
evaluators agreed that the design itself should provide feedback when attaching and detaching
parts and that the device design did not provide sufficient feedback for users to move through a
sequence of steps to facilitate assembly. In the case of the active hand grip exoskeleton, the
evaluators felt that it was a missed opportunity to not provide feedback on the device itself
during donning and doffing, particularly when the user actions were incorrect.
Six evaluators provided scores in the range of 1 to 2 for three criteria related to
perceptible information (Table 4) for the back-support exoskeleton: (1) legibility of information,
(2) minimalist design, and (3) sensory limitations. First, the evaluators believed that the sizing
information was not legible on the exoskeleton. The sizing was color-coded, but it was a thin
part of the exoskeleton and not very apparent to the user. In addition, users with visual
impairments may have difficulty differentiating between these colors. Second, no information
was available on the sequence of assembly on the device itself. For example, there is no
information on how the vest holding the exoskeleton should be assembled together. Therefore,
the manual was consulted to identify the correct sizing and assembly steps. However,
consulting the manual did not help either - the information in the manual was too small and not
legible.The evaluators overwhelmingly felt that there were too many component parts in the
exoskeleton, which made the assembly task exceedingly difficult and tedious. Furthermore, the
assembly required special tools and a flat surface to hold multiple parts. Hence, evaluators felt
that the design was not minimalist. We believe that one reason the design is not minimalist is
the “toughness” in engineering the functions required of exoskeletons may have unfortunately
also permeated to the looks, number of parts, and steps required to assemble the exoskeletons.
This may make one feel that the assembly task is extremely complex. We believe that the
burden of assembly and donning is an important determinant of industry adoption and worker
compliance, emphasizing the need to evaluate these conditions during design and to make
assembly and donning as seamless as possible.
The evaluators felt that the potential user must primarily rely on sight and auditory and
tactile feedback from clicks to assemble the back-support exoskeleton. In particular, given the
large number of parts required for assembly and the need to rely on a manual, the exoskeleton
appears to rely on vision as the primary mode for the user to obtain information from the
exoskeleton. For example, the exoskeleton contains key information such as sizing only in the
visual mode using colors. Our analysis of the frequency of criteria violations also revealed that
the sensory limitation criteria received average ratings at or below 3 more often than the other
criteria across all exoskeletons and tasks (Table 5). Given these findings, those with sensory
limitations will be unable to assemble and have a proper fit in these exoskeletons without
assistance. Given that workers with disabilities have the potential to play an important role in
industry, future exoskeleton designs need to consider universal design principles for users with
diverse sensory abilities, especially if exoskeletons are to formally become personal protective
equipment (PPE) in industry.
Criteria violations in the perceptible information principle suggest that designers place
more emphasis on the functions that need to be supported by these exoskeletons compared to
the form and user-exoskeleton interactions. Exoskeletons are meant to provide functionalsupport to the relevant muscle groups that activate during work tasks (Baltrusch et al., 2018,
2019; Bock et al., 2022, 2023; Cha et al., 2019; Gillette & Stephenson, 2019; Harant et al.,
2023; Hwang et al., 2021; Jackson & Collins, 2015; Kermavnar et al., 2021; Latella et al., 2022;
Looze et al., 2015; Luger et al., 2021; Ogunseiju et al., n.d.; Pinho & Forner-Cordero, 2022).
While providing superior functional support is an important consideration and the primary reason
for wearing an exoskeleton, we believe that user-exoskeleton interaction elements need more
attention, especially during the assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly of exoskeletons. If
ease of assembly and donning is a trade-off for superior functions, long-term user compliance
may suffer.
We also believe that many criteria under the perceptible design principle were violated,
perhaps because of the relationships between the size, shape, and surface area of the
exoskeletons and how best information and instructions can be presented on the device itself
for assembly and donning. In general, exoskeletons do not have a large surface area for
displaying information crucial for assembly, donning, doffing, and disassembly. Many parts of an
exoskeleton are thin, tubular, curved, with little surface area, and have hidden slots to fit the
curvature of the body, thereby limiting opportunities to display external help or instructions on
the device itself.
Three of the four exoskeletons that were evaluated must be worn on a person’s back.
This presents additional design challenges for making the information legible and perceptible,
particularly when donning the device. In some exoskeletons, we found that assembly and
donning overlap, making visual feedback difficult for the user. Additionally, the fit is determined
by a visual check once the exoskeleton is donned and then by making finer adjustments. The
user does not have any direct visual feedback when donning the exoskeleton; therefore,
adjustments are made through trial and error. Given the lack of visual access and feedback, a
second person may be required to assist with the donning of exoskeletons for a proper fit.
Future designs should consider how best to present information about assembly, donning,doffing, and disassembly to users to reduce user burden and improve the usability and
accessibility of user-exoskeleton interaction points.
4.1.3. Tolerance for error
Preventing errors received an average rating of 3 or fewer, seven times across all
exoskeletons and tasks (Table 5). The active hand grip exoskeleton received ratings of 1-2 from
four evaluators (Table 4) owing to the lack of visual, auditory, or other modes of warning on the
device itself. The hand-grip exoskeleton has sensors that are activated when connected to a
battery. The sensors can be damaged if the hand-grip glove is not assembled and connected
properly to the battery. The manual warns about these aspects, but the user must consult it to
learn them. Given that this exoskeleton was active, the evaluators felt that the device itself could
incorporate and provide visual or auditory warnings to the user.
All evaluators provided ratings of 1–2 for the vigilance criteria for the sit-stand
exoskeleton (Table 4). The evaluators had considerable discussion on this criterion; they felt
that the sit-stand exoskeleton required too much vigilance to don carefully without losing
balance or falling. Although the criteria evaluated conscious actions that require vigilance as a
positive characteristic, the evaluators felt that because of safety concerns, requiring constant
vigilance from the user was a negative design characteristic, forcing us to rate the criteria lower
to emphasize fall risk as an important safety concern.
The violation of these criteria under the tolerance-for-error design principle emphasizes
the safety hazards from the sit-stand exoskeleton and concerns related to the maintenance and
durability of the exoskeleton. The tolerance for error principle ensures that hazards are
minimized for all people. For example, if a user with visual impairments or a user with mobility
and balance issues were to use the sit-stand exoskeleton, it is not clear how they would perform
the conscious and mostly visual actions with vigilance, without the support of another person, to
ensure they do not fall and that they wear the exoskeleton correctly. We believe that differentuse cases and user populations need to be adequately considered during design so that
tolerance for errors can be built into the design.
4.2. Universal design principles and criteria that were rated high in exoskeletons
The evaluators also provided scores in the range of 4 to 5 for some criteria and tasks
across the different exoskeletons. Across the three different criteria under the low physical effort
design principle and across the two exoskeletons (Figure 5), evaluators provided scores ranging
from 4 to 5 (Table 6). It is worth noting that these 4 to 5 scores for low physical effort are during
donning. The evaluators felt that, once assembled, some of these exoskeletons did not require
significant physical effort to wear it. These findings indicate that across exoskeletons, the
physical effort required when donning the exoskeleton is minimal. The evaluators also felt that
the design of the sit-stand exoskeleton minimized repetitive actions while donning the
exoskeleton. In addition, the operating forces required to don the back-support exoskeleton
were considered reasonable. This is beneficial for users with limited mobility or diverse abilities
to don the exoskeleton without significant challenges.
The evaluators rated two criteria under the equitable design principle with an average
rating of 4 to 5 across two different exoskeletons and tasks (Figure 5; Table 6). They felt that the
sit-stand exoskeleton did not require memorization of the steps during assembly. Given that the
evaluators followed the assembly steps from the manual and because the parts in the
exoskeleton resembled the shape of the body parts, memorization was not required.
Additionally, the hand-grip exoskeleton was rated as aesthetic and unobtrusive. We believe that
this is because the hand-grip exoskeleton has the least number of parts and looks the most
intuitive in form resembling a regular glove, making it more aesthetically pleasing and simpler to
don. The evaluators felt that the exoskeleton would be enhanced if the glove could be worn
cordlessly. The hand grip exoskeleton also received a score of 4 to 5 for the tolerance for errordesign principle (Table 6) because evaluators felt that the actions were easily reversible if the
users made any errors and had to retrace their steps.
The evaluators felt that three different criteria under the simple and intuitive design
principle across three different exoskeletons and tasks deserved scores of 4 to 5 (Table 6). The
evaluators felt that doffing the sit-stand exoskeleton was simpler and intuitive once the user
knew how to put it on. They also felt that the design of the exoskeletons allowed users to be in
control. For the back-support exoskeleton, users have full control when donning the
exoskeleton. For the shoulder support exoskeleton, although evaluators felt that they were in
control when donning, the rebound of the arm posed control issues for the user. However, the
evaluators thought that it was easy to disassemble the shoulder support exoskeleton, given that
it could be taken apart in any sequence, providing clear closure during the task.
Two exoskeletons across two different tasks received scores in the range of 4 to 5 for
the flexible design principle (Figure 5, Table 6) because of the adaptability and provision of
adjustable features for diverse users. For example, for the hand-grip exoskeleton, evaluators
thought that one could assemble the exoskeleton at their own pace, and there were no
constraints dictating the user’s pace. The shoulder support exoskeleton provides adjustable
parts, making the entire design adjustable to different users. However, the evaluators
recommended that the chest straps be redesigned with female users in mind.
4.3. Tasks that presented the most problems for evaluators
Our findings revealed that the assembly and donning stages presented the most
problems for evaluators and consequently received the greatest number of average ratings at or
below 3 (Figure 6). Some exoskeletons require time and effort for the user to develop a visual
map of the many parts provided and to refer to the manual constantly to understand the
sequence of steps required for assembly. Assembly also requires actions that demand force,
strength, mobility, and balance to correctly assemble parts. Additionally, evaluators felt thatsome exoskeletons, such as the sit-stand device, contained significant overlaps between the
assembly and donning tasks for the user to complete an effective sequence, but the instructions
provided in the manual did not clarify this. These overlap points also posed safety risks;
however, the design did not include any constraints to prevent the user from working around the
instructions.
Our finding that approximately 75% of the violations were in the assembly or donning
stages (Figure 6) is concerning given that one must progress through these stages to use the
exoskeleton. This finding adds new knowledge about exoskeletons’ use when assembling,
donning, doffing, and disassembling them, and provides an impetus for designers and
manufacturers to emphasize these stages in design so that users can successfully and easily
complete these critical pre-use and post-use tasks. Future research should examine how factors
related to industry adoption and worker compliance are affected by assembly, donning, doffing,
and disassembly.
Although the doffing and disassembly stages did not pose as much concern as the
assembly and donning stages, they posed some safety challenges. Similarly, some doffing
actions require vigilance to prevent safety hazards. For example, removing the sit-stand
exoskeleton requires bending to detach the feet that are connected to the entire exoskeleton still
on the person. Similarly, detaching arm cuffs from the shoulder support exoskeleton sometimes
results in the bounce-back and ricochet of a heavy metal arm, introducing a safety hazard. The
disassembly task, like the assembly task, required strength to detach parts in some
exoskeletons – sometimes they required using both hands to press down on levers to release
the parts, not only requiring force, but also introducing pinch hazards. In most cases, doffing
and disassembly required steps in the reverse order of assembly and donning, which explains
the fewer violations of criteria in these two stages compared with assembly and donning.
Our overall findings across all exoskeletons suggest that current exoskeletons do not
adequately consider all users and conditions in their design. Although some features andfunctions adhere to universal design principles, many actions required for assembly and
donning do not account for all users. We recommend that future exoskeleton designs consider
universal design principles such that all workers, regardless of their age, ability, functional
status, and other characteristics, can access, use, and benefit from these exoskeletons. This is
even more important if these exoskeletons are to be used as personal protective equipment in
the future.
4.4. Design Implications
In general, our heuristic evaluation indicated six major implications for design: (1)
evaluation of pre- and post-use tasks (assembly, don, doff, disassembly) during design; (2)
consideration of user-exoskeleton interaction points; (3) consideration of a wider range of user
population and characteristics when designing occupational exoskeletons; (4) address safety
concerns; (5) highlight two-person operation or actions requiring assistance; and (6) consider
work in situ factors.
First, exoskeleton designs should consider all tasks and actions necessary to use the
exoskeleton, not just the use conditions or the functional performance support it provides to
reduce injuries. We argue that it is important to consider the assembly, donning, doffing and
disassembly of exoskeletons; without successfully completing these tasks, an exoskeleton
cannot be used effectively. Exoskeletons are typically not a single device; they are composed of
individual parts, which necessitate the user to either assemble them before use or have space
and other resources to keep them assembled. In addition, if every worker does not receive an
individual exoskeleton, the size must be adjusted, necessitating assembly. Although we believe
that users will learn to assemble these devices over time, we suspect that the time and effort
required to assemble them will not change significantly given the many parts these
exoskeletons contain that must all be assembled. Most importantly, workers with diverse
abilities may not be able to assemble or don these exoskeletons without additional support. Thedesign and testing of exoskeletons need to evaluate how best to reduce the assembly burden of
users, either by producing a partially assembled piece that is ready to wear or by changing the
designs and constraints to make the assembly effortless and time-efficient for the user.
Additionally, the conditions required for each of these tasks should be considered during the
design. For example, if assembly is required every time, a flat surface may also be required.
While the design itself should consider these pre- and post-use conditions and tasks, the
assistance and documentation to facilitate these tasks should also be considered in conjunction
with the exoskeleton design. We consider these as important determinants of industry adoption.
In particular, the design and testing phases should consider the user-exoskeleton
interaction points during all the pre-use, use, and post-use conditions. These user-exoskeleton
interaction points are key leveraging opportunities for making a user’s experience with
exoskeletons seamless and making the overall design more accessible and usable. For
example, if the user needs to attach a back support frame to an articulating lever, the user–
exoskeleton interaction point can use a locking mechanism that readily clicks into place,
preventing the user from exerting a large force to attach the parts. When designing these user-
exoskeleton interaction points, design constraints must also be considered so that the user does
not have a chance to commit an error. Furthermore, during design, steps with potential overlaps
between assembly and donning tasks that may impact the user-exoskeleton interaction points
should be considered. It can be difficult for users to interact with an exoskeleton to attach, lock,
or adjust parts given that many important exoskeletons are worn on the back or shoulders and
do not provide sufficient visual or physical reach. These user-exoskeleton interaction points
need to be evaluated not only during pre-use, use, and post-use conditions, but also with
different user populations and characteristics in mind.
The design of exoskeletons should consider a wider range of user characteristics.
Recent data show that workers with disabilities participate in large numbers in the workforce, so
ensuring that they can also assemble, don, use, doff, and disassemble these exoskeletons isimportant. Furthermore, workers who may have already experienced injuries or who have
medical conditions would benefit significantly from using exoskeletons for support during their
work tasks. However, for this benefit to materialize, exoskeletons need to be designed to enable
these workers to assemble, don, use, doff, and disassemble without exerting or injuring
themselves further. Exoskeletons are extensively used in rehabilitation. Therefore, evidence
from research in rehabilitation science may be useful for informing the design of occupational
exoskeletons for all workers. Exoskeletons are also likely to be used by workers with diverse
characteristics; therefore, design should consider users’ literacy skills and educational
backgrounds, particularly when designing help and documentation. To ensure that exoskeletons
are designed for all, universal design principles can be used as guidelines for design and
testing, in addition to usability evaluations and user testing to eliminate problems due to poor
design.
Potential safety concerns that arise during pre- and post-use conditions need to be
addressed in the design. These safety concerns can pose a significant risk to any user,
particularly those with mobility or balance problems. We believe that some of these safety
concerns can be addressed through design, whereas others can be addressed by providing a
clear sequence of steps to eliminate these safety risks. Using the hierarchy of controls (NIOSH,
2024), design features that can be added or eliminated to improve safety should be given
priority, followed by any sequence changes. Furthermore, instructions and warnings can be
enhanced so that users can clearly understand the potential risks and use appropriate caution.
For instance, instructions for using the exoskeleton should clearly specify whether any of
the pre-use or post-use conditions require two-person operation or assistance from others. This
is particularly true if a two-person operation is required to prevent safety risks for users with
balance, mobility, or other problems, particularly when donning and doffing exoskeletons. If
possible, the need for a two-person operation should be eliminated or reduced through designfeatures. Otherwise, clear instructions specific to the steps requiring assistance should be
provided.
Finally, the design of an exoskeleton should consider factors that are important for in situ
use. Factors such as assembly and storage space, training needs, the need for additional
assistance to wear and remove the exoskeleton, and the increasing diversity of the worker
population that the exoskeletons serve could all be important determinants of future adoption by
workplaces. If design features and tasks during pre-use, use, and post-use are amenable to
these factors, adoption and implementation can become seamless.
5. Conclusions and Future Work
We recommend the following important future directions for research: (1) evaluation of
exoskeletons should include safety and accessibility evaluations in addition to usability
evaluations; (2) evaluation of exoskeletons with potential as future PPE should be considered;
(3) the use of exoskeletons in conjunction with assistive devices should be investigated; and (4)
evaluation of exoskeletons with a diverse set of workers, including workers with disabilities,
older workers, and workers with temporary mobility impairments should be conducted.
We believe that for exoskeletons to be beneficial, both accessibility and usability
evaluations must be conducted to provide design feedback to ensure that all users can benefit
from exoskeletons. Furthermore, we urge researchers to conduct safety evaluations of
exoskeletons under both use and non-use conditions to address any concerns prior to large-
scale implementation in the industry. Future research should also consider the design and
process factors that deem a device to be personal protective equipment and understand how
these factors are currently considered in exoskeleton design. An important future need is to
understand how exoskeletons can be used in conjunction with other assistive devices, such as
canes, wheelchairs, or screen readers, so that all users can use exoskeletons. Additionally,
assistive devices may need to be evaluated to determine how well they support exoskeletoninteractions, potentially leading to the need for new assistive devices. Future studies should also
consider a wide range of user populations in user testing studies, including people with
disabilities, so that we can understand the design needs and provide scientific evidence for
more equitable exoskeleton designs. Currently, there is a dearth of detailed statistics on the
types of work and employment performed by persons with disabilities in various industries. The
collection and reporting of such data would be beneficial for informing the design of
exoskeletons to target specific user groups. We believe that exoskeletons hold plenty of
promise for reducing injuries in the workplace and could transform the workplace of today, if it is
designed for all.
References
Abdoli-E, M., Agnew, M. J., & Stevenson, J. M. (2006). An on-body personal lift augmentation
device (PLAD) reduces EMG amplitude of erector spinae during lifting tasks. Clinical
Biomechanics, 21(5), 456–465.
Antwi-Afari, M. F., Li, H., Anwer, S., Li, D., Yu, Y., Mi, H.-Y., & Wuni, I. Y. (2021). Assessment of
a passive exoskeleton system on spinal biomechanics and subjective responses during
manual repetitive handling tasks among construction workers. Safety Science, 142,
105382.
Baldassarre, A., Lulli, L. G., Crea, F., Fiorini, L., Mariniello, A., Mucci, N., & Arcangeli, G. (2022).
Industrial Exoskeletons From Bench to Field: Human-Machine Interface and User
Experience in Occupational Settings and Tasks. Frontiers in Public Health.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpubh.2022.1039680
Baltrusch, S., Dieën, J. H. v., Bruijn, S. M., Koopman, A. S., Bennekom, C. v., & Houdijk, H.
(2019). The Effect of a Passive Trunk Exoskeleton on Metabolic Costs During Lifting and
Walking. Ergonomics. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2019.1602288Baltrusch, S., Dieen, J. H. van, Bennekom, C. A. M. van, & Houdijk, H. (2018). The effect of a
passive trunk exoskeleton on functional performance in healthy individuals. Applied
Ergonomics. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APERGO.2018.04.007
BLS. (n.d.-a). Civilian labor force participation rate by age, sex, race and ethnicity. Retrieved
May 24, 2024, from https://www.bls.gov/emp/tables/civilian-labor-force-participation-
rate.htm
BLS. (n.d.-b). Labor Force Share by Age Group. https://www.bls.gov/emp/images/lf_aging.png
Bock, S. D., Ampe, T., Rossini, M., Tassignon, B., Lefeber, D., Rodriguez–Guerrero, C.,
Roelands, B., Geeroms, J., Meeusen, R., & Pauw, K. D. (2023). Passive Shoulder
Exoskeleton Support Partially Mitigates Fatigue-Induced Effects in Overhead Work.
Applied Ergonomics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2022.103903
Bock, S. D., Ghillebert, J., Govaerts, R., Tassignon, B., Rodriguez-Guerrero, C., Crea, S.,
Veneman, J. F., Geeroms, J., & Meeusen, R. (2022). Benchmarking Occupational
Exoskeletons: An Evidence Mapping Systematic Review. Applied Ergonomics.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103582
Cardoso, A., Colim, A., & Sousa, N. (2020). The effects of a passive exoskeleton on muscle
activity and discomfort in industrial tasks. Occupational and Environmental Safety and
Health II, 237–245.
Cha, J., Monfared, S., Stefanidis, D., Nussbaum, M. A., & Yu, D. (2019). Supporting Surgical
Teams: Identifying Needs and Barriers for Exoskeleton Implementation in the Operating
Room. Human Factors the Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720819879271
Chae, U. R., Kim, K., Choi, J., Hyun, D. J., Yun, J., Lee, G. H., Hyun, Y. G., Lee, J., & Chung,
M.-S. (2021). Systematic Usability Evaluation on Two Harnesses for a Wearable
Chairless Exoskeleton. International Journal of Industrial Ergonomics.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ergon.2021.103162Daratany, C., & Taveira, A. (2020). Quasi-experimental study of exertion, recovery, and worker
perceptions related to passive upper-body exoskeleton use during overhead, low force
work. Human Interaction, Emerging Technologies and Future Applications II:
Proceedings of the 2nd International Conference on Human Interaction and Emerging
Technologies: Future Applications (IHIET–AI 2020), April 23-25, 2020, Lausanne,
Switzerland, 369–373.
De Bock, S., Ghillebert, J., Govaerts, R., Elprama, S. A., Marusic, U., Serrien, B., Jacobs, A.,
Geeroms, J., Meeusen, R., & De Pauw, K. (2020). Passive shoulder exoskeletons: More
effective in the lab than in the field? IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and
Rehabilitation Engineering, 29, 173–183.
Dijsseldonk, R. B. v., Ilse J. W. van Nes, Geurts, A. C. H., & Keijsers, N. L. (2020). Exoskeleton
Home and Community Use in People With Complete Spinal Cord Injury. Scientific
Reports. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-020-72397-6
Elprama, S., Vanderborght, B., & Jacobs, A. (2022). An Industrial Exoskeleton User Acceptance
Framework Based on a Literature Review of Empirical Studies. Applied Ergonomics.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2021.103615
Elprama, S., Vannieuwenhuyze, J., Bock, S. D., Vanderborght, B., Pauw, K. D., Meeusen, R., &
Jacobs, A. (2020). Social Processes: What Determines Industrial Workers’ Intention to
Use Exoskeletons? Human Factors the Journal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics
Society. https://doi.org/10.1177/0018720819889534
Farris, D. J., Hicks, J. L., Delp, S. L., & Sawicki, G. S. (2014). Musculoskeletal Modeling
Deconstructs the Paradoxical Effects of Elastic Ankle Exoskeletons on Plantar-Flexor
Mechanics &Amp; Energetics During Hopping. Journal of Experimental Biology.
https://doi.org/10.1242/jeb.107656
Ferraro, S. D., Falcone, T., Ranavolo, A., & Molinaro, V. (2020). The Effects of Upper-Body
Exoskeletons on Human Metabolic Cost and Thermal Response during Work Tasks-ASystematic Review. International Journal of Environmental Research and Public Health.
https://doi.org/10.3390/IJERPH17207374
Ferreira, G., Gaspar, J., Fujão, C., & Nunes, I. L. (2020). Piloting the use of an upper limb
passive exoskeleton in automotive industry: Assessing user acceptance and intention of
use. Advances in Human Factors and Systems Interaction: Proceedings of the AHFE
2020 Virtual Conference on Human Factors and Systems Interaction, July 16-20, 2020,
USA, 342–349.
Financial Results for Publicly Held Exoskeleton Companies 2016 – 2022. (2023, March 29).
https://exoskeletonreport.com/2023/03/financial-results-for-publicly-held-exoskeleton-
companies-2016-2022/
Fry, R., & Braga, D. (n.d.). FOR RELEASE DECEMBER 14, 2023.
Gillette, J. C., & Stephenson, M. L. (2019). Electromyographic Assessment of a Shoulder
Support Exoskeleton During on-Site Job Tasks. Iise Transactions on Occupational
Ergonomics and Human Factors. https://doi.org/10.1080/24725838.2019.1665596
Goršič, M., Song, Y., Dai, B., & Novak, D. (2021). Evaluation of the HeroWear Apex back-assist
exosuit during multiple brief tasks. Journal of Biomechanics, 126, 110620.
Harant, M., Näf, M., & Mombaur, K. (2023). Multibody Dynamics and Optimal Control for
Optimizing Spinal Exoskeleton Design and Support. Multibody System Dynamics.
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11044-023-09877-w
Howard, J., Murashov, V., Lowe, B. D., & Lu, M. (2019). Industrial Exoskeletons: Need for
Intervention Effectiveness Research. American Journal of Industrial Medicine.
https://doi.org/10.1002/ajim.23080
Howard, J., Murashov, V., Lowe, B. D., & Lu, M.-L. (2020). Industrial exoskeletons: Need for
intervention effectiveness research. American Journal of Industrial Medicine.
https://doi.org/10.1002/AJIM.23080Hwang, J., Yerriboina, V. N. K., Ari, H., & Kim, J.-H. (2021). Biomechanical Evaluation of Back-
Support Exoskeletons During Patient Transfers. Proceedings of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society Annual Meeting. https://doi.org/10.1177/1071181321651067
Jackson, R. W., & Collins, S. H. (2015). An Experimental Comparison of the Relative Benefits of
Work and Torque Assistance in Ankle Exoskeletons. Journal of Applied Physiology.
https://doi.org/10.1152/japplphysiol.01133.2014
Kermavnar, T., Vries, A. W. de, Looze, M. P. de, & O’Sullivan, L. (2021). Effects of industrial
back-support exoskeletons on body loading and user experience: An updated systematic
review. Ergonomics. https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2020.1870162
Kim, S., Madinei, S., Alemi, M. M., Srinivasan, D., & Nussbaum, M. A. (2020). Assessing the
potential for “undesired” effects of passive back-support exoskeleton use during a
simulated manual assembly task: Muscle activity, posture, balance, discomfort, and
usability. Applied Ergonomics. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APERGO.2020.103194
Kim, S., Moore, A., Srinivasan, D., Akanmu, A., Barr, A., Harris-Adamson, C., Rempel, D. M., &
Nussbaum, M. A. (2019). Potential of Exoskeleton Technologies to Enhance Safety,
Health, and Performance in Construction: Industry Perspectives and Future Research
Directions. IISE Transactions on Occupational Ergonomics and Human Factors, 7(3–4),
185–191. https://doi.org/10.1080/24725838.2018.1561557
Kim, S., Nussbaum, M. A., Esfahani, M. I. M., Alemi, M. M., Alabdulkarim, S., & Rashedi, E.
(2018). Assessing the influence of a passive, upper extremity exoskeletal vest for tasks
requiring arm elevation: Part I - “Expected” effects on discomfort, shoulder muscle
activity, and work task performance. Applied Ergonomics.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APERGO.2018.02.025
Kozinc, Ž., Baltrusch, S., Houdijk, H., & Šarabon, N. (2021). Short-term effects of a passive
spinal exoskeleton on functional performance, discomfort and user satisfaction in
patients with low back pain. Journal of Occupational Rehabilitation, 31, 142–152.Kuber, P. M., Abdollahi, M., Alemi, M. M., & Rashedi, E. (2022). A Systematic Review on
Evaluation Strategies for Field Assessment of Upper-Body Industrial Exoskeletons:
Current Practices and Future Trends. https://doi.org/10.1007/S10439-022-03003-1
Kuber, P. M., Alemi, M. M., & Rashedi, E. (2023). A Systematic Review on Lower-Limb
Industrial Exoskeletons: Evaluation Methods, Evidence, and Future Directions.
https://doi.org/10.1007/S10439-023-03242-W
Laevo FLEX 3.0 is the First-Ever Exoskeleton Issued Personal Protective Equipment PPE CE
Mark. (2022, April 13). https://exoskeletonreport.com/2022/04/laevo-flex-3-0-is-the-first-
ever-exoskeleton-issued-personal-protective-equipment-ppe-ce-mark/
Latella, C., Tirupachuri, Y., Tagliapietra, L., Rapetti, L., Schirrmeister, B., Bornmann, J., Gorjan,
D., Čamernik, J., Fritzsche, L., Gonzalez-Vargas, J., Babič, J., Nori, F., & Pucci, D.
(2022). Analysis of Human Whole-Body Joint Torques During Overhead Work With a
Passive Exoskeleton. Ieee Transactions on Human-Machine Systems.
https://doi.org/10.1109/thms.2021.3128892
Looze, M. P. de, Bosch, T., Krause, F., Stadler, K. S., & O’Sullivan, L. (2015). Exoskeletons for
Industrial Application and Their Potential Effects on Physical Work Load. Ergonomics.
https://doi.org/10.1080/00140139.2015.1081988
Looze, M. P. de, Vries, A. W. de, Krause, F., & Baltrusch, S. (2021). Three-Stage Evaluation for
Defining the Potential of an Industrial Exoskeleton in a Specific Job.
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-74614-8_28
Lowe, B. D., Billotte, W. G., & Peterson, D. R. (2019). ASTM F48 Formation and Standards for
Industrial Exoskeletons and Exosuits. IISE Transactions on Occupational Ergonomics
and Human Factors, 7(3–4), 230–236. https://doi.org/10.1080/24725838.2019.1579769
Luger, T., Bär, M., Seibt, R., Rieger, M. A., & Steinhilber, B. (2021). Using a Back Exoskeleton
During Industrial and Functional Tasks—Effects on Muscle Activity, Posture,
Performance, Usability, and Wearer Discomfort in a Laboratory Trial. Human Factors theJournal of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society.
https://doi.org/10.1177/00187208211007267
Madinei, S., Alemi, M. M., Kim, S., Srinivasan, D., & Nussbaum, M. A. (2020). Biomechanical
assessment of two back-support exoskeletons in symmetric and asymmetric repetitive
lifting with moderate postural demands. Applied Ergonomics.
https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APERGO.2020.103156
McFarland, T., & Fischer, S. L. (2019). Considerations for Industrial Use: A Systematic Review
of the Impact of Active and Passive Upper Limb Exoskeletons on Physical Exposures.
IISE Transactions on Occupational Ergonomics and Human Factors.
https://doi.org/10.1080/24725838.2019.1684399
Medrano, R. L., Thomas, G. C., Margolin, D., & Rouse, E. J. (2023). The Economic Value of
Augmentative Exoskeletons and Their Assistance.
https://doi.org/10.36227/techrxiv.22203583
Meyer, J. T., Schrade, S. O., Lambercy, O., & Gassert, R. (2019). User-Centered Design and
Evaluation of Physical Interfaces for an Exoskeleton for Paraplegic Users.
https://doi.org/10.1109/icorr.2019.8779527
Moyon, A., Poirson, E., & Petiot, J.-F. (2018). Experimental Study of the Physical Impact of a
Passive Exoskeleton on Manual Sanding Operations. Procedia Cirp.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procir.2018.04.028
NIOSH. (n.d.). Hiearchy of controls. Retrieved May 26, 2024, from
https://www.cdc.gov/niosh/learning/safetyculturehc/module-3/2.html
Nussbaum, M. A., Nussbaum, M. A., Esfahani, M. I. M., Alemi, M. M., Jia, B., & Rashedi, E.
(2018). Assessing the influence of a passive, upper extremity exoskeletal vest for tasks
requiring arm elevation: Part II – “Unexpected” effects on shoulder motion, balance, and
spine loading. https://doi.org/10.1016/J.APERGO.2018.02.024Ogunseiju, O., Gonsalves, N., Akanmu, A., & Nnaji, C. (n.d.). Subjective Evaluation of Passive
Back-Support Exoskeleton for Flooring Work. https://doi.org/10.29007/3jk9
Orekhov, G., Fang, Y., Cuddeback, C. F., & Lerner, Z. F. (2021). Usability and performance
validation of an ultra-lightweight and versatile untethered robotic ankle exoskeleton.
Journal of Neuroengineering and Rehabilitation, 18, 1–16.
Papp, E., Wölfel, C., & Krzywinski, J. (2020). ACCEPTANCE AND USER EXPERIENCE OF
WEARABLE ASSISTIVE DEVICES FOR INDUSTRIAL PURPOSES. Proceedings of the
Design Society: DESIGN Conference. https://doi.org/10.1017/DSD.2020.319
Pesenti, M., Antonietti, A., Gandolla, M., & Pedrocchi, A. (2021). Towards a Functional
Performance Validation Standard for Industrial Low-Back Exoskeletons: State of the Art
Review. Sensors. https://doi.org/10.3390/s21030808
Pinho, J. P., & Forner-Cordero, A. (2022). Shoulder Muscle Activity and Perceived Comfort of
Industry Workers Using a Commercial Upper Limb Exoskeleton for Simulated Tasks.
Applied Ergonomics. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.apergo.2022.103718
Qu, X., Qu, C., Ma, T., Yin, P., Zhao, N., Xia, Y., & Qu, S. (2021). Effects of an Industrial
Passive Assistive Exoskeleton on Muscle Activity, Oxygen Consumption and Subjective
Responses During Lifting Tasks. Plos One. https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0245629
Reid, C. R., Nussbaum, M. A., Gregorczyk, K., Harris-Adamson, C., Kyte, K., Lowe, B. D.,
Smets, M., & Zmijewski, R. (2017). Industrial Exoskeletons: Are We Ready for Prime
Time Yet?: Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society ... Annual
Meeting. https://doi.org/10.1177/1541931213601733
Schmalz, T., Colienne, A., Bywater, E., Fritzsche, L., Gärtner, C., Bellmann, M., Reimer, S., &
Ernst, M. (2022). A Passive Back-Support Exoskeleton for Manual Materials Handling:
Reduction of Low Back Loading and Metabolic Effort during Repetitive Lifting. IISE
Transactions on Occupational Ergonomics and Human Factors, 10(1), 7–20.
https://doi.org/10.1080/24725838.2021.2005720Schmalz, T., Schändlinger, J., Schuler, M., Bornmann, J., Schirrmeister, B., Kannenberg, A., &
Ernst, M. (2019). Biomechanical and Metabolic Effectiveness of an Industrial
Exoskeleton for Overhead Work. International Journal of Environmental Research and
Public Health. https://doi.org/10.3390/ijerph16234792
Steele, K. M., Jackson, R. W., Shuman, B. R., & Collins, S. M. (2017). Muscle Recruitment and
Coordination With an Ankle Exoskeleton. Journal of Biomechanics.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jbiomech.2017.05.010
Tarbit, J., Hartley, N., & Previte, J. (2022). Exoskeletons at Your Service: A Multi-Disciplinary
Structured Literature Review. Journal of Services Marketing. https://doi.org/10.1108/jsm-
02-2022-0045
Van Engelhoven, L., Poon, N., Kazerooni, H., Barr, A., Rempel, D., & Harris-Adamson, C.
(2018). Evaluation of an adjustable support shoulder exoskeleton on static and dynamic
overhead tasks. Proceedings of the Human Factors and Ergonomics Society Annual
Meeting, 62(1), 804–808. https://doi.org/10.1177/1541931218621184
Walter, T., Stutzig, N., & Siebert, T. (2023). Active Exoskeleton Reduces Erector Spinae Muscle
Activity During Lifting. Frontiers in Bioengineering and Biotechnology.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fbioe.2023.1143926