JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 1
LoDIP: Low light phase retrieval with deep image
prior
Raunak Manekar*, Elisa Negrini*, Minh Pham, Daniel Jacobs, Jaideep Srivastava
Abstract—Phase retrieval (PR) is a fundamental challenge in shot noise, iterative phase retrieval algorithms, including ER,
scientific imaging, enabling nanoscale techniques like coherent HIO, become unstable, facing challenges such as getting
diffractive imaging (CDI). Imaging at low radiation doses be-
trapped in local minima, stagnation, and failure to converge.
comes important in applications where samples are susceptible
One category of proposed solutions for the low-dose chal-
to radiation damage. However, most PR methods struggle in
low dose scenario due to the presence of very high shot noise. lenge involve modifications to the optical data acquisition
Advancements in the optical data acquisition setup, exemplified setup of CDI [1, 6, 7]. A notable example is in-situ CDI,
by in-situ CDI, have shown potential for low-dose imaging. as introduced by Lo et al. [1] and further explored in [8].
But these depend on a time series of measurements, rendering
A dose-tolerant static region is positioned next to the sample
them unsuitable for single-image applications. Similarly, on the
and is illuminated with a higher radiation dose. This ensures
computational front, data-driven phase retrieval techniques are
not readily adaptable to the single-image context. Deep learning sufficient light reaches the detector while maintaining a low
based single-image methods, such as deep image prior, have radiation dose on the sample. Multiple measurements are
been effective for various imaging tasks but have exhibited taken over time and the static region is leveraged as a robust
limited success when applied to PR. In this work, we propose
time-overlap constraint which regularizes the phase retrieval
LoDIP which combines the in-situ CDI setup with the power
optimization. However, in order to leverage the time-invariant
of implicit neural priors to tackle the problem of single-image
low-dose phase retrieval. Quantitative evaluations demonstrate static region as real-space constraint, this method requires
the superior performance of LoDIP on this task as well as multiple measurements (that is multiple diffraction patterns).
applicability to real experimental scenarios. Adapting this setup for single-image scenarios results in
IndexTerms—deepimageprior,deepgenerativemodels,com- suboptimal reconstructions (see HIO-stat column in Fig. 4 ).
putational imaging, phase retrieval, inverse problems, low light The solution we propose in this paper is to design a novel
imaging, low photon count data-driven computational algorithm to address single image
low-dose phase retrieval. Data-driven approaches have shown
I. INTRODUCTION potential for simpler versions of phase retrieval at low-photon
counts[9,10],buttheycannotbereadilyadaptedtothesingle-
Coherent diffractive imaging (CDI) is a lensless imaging
image context due to the requirement for a large training
technique [2] used for high resolution imaging at nanoscale.
dataset. Deep learning based single-image methods such as
CDI has found broad applications across different disciplines
deep image prior (DIP) [11, 12] have been used in the past
due to its remarkable ability to provide high-resolution struc-
in the single-image context. While they have demonstrated
tural information about a wide range of specimens from
success in simpler phase retrieval scenarios [13, 14, 15],
biological specimens to nanoscale objects [3].
they struggle in low dose situations, as evident from our
Unlike visible light, X-rays have high penetrating power
experiments Fig. 4 and from previous literature on the topic
and thus can be used to image thick, unfixed specimens.
[16, 17].
However,manysamplesofinterestforCDI,suchasbiological
To address these issues, in this work we propose a deep
material,polymersororganicsemiconductors,requireminimal
learning method designed for single-image low-dose phase
radiation exposure to prevent damage during data acquisition
retrieval. More specifically, we propose LoDIP, a single-
[4, 5]. Thus, there is considerable interest in techniques that
image method for low-dose phase retrieval based on DIP
minimizesampleradiationexposureandenableX-rayimaging
and inspired by in-situ CDI. We use the modified imaging
at extremely low photon counts.
setup consisting of a static region illuminated with a high
The main challenge is that imaging at low photon counts
dose of radiation alongside the sample of interest which is
leads to very high shot noise in the acquired measurements
illuminated by low-light. This increases the amount of light
(diffraction pattern) and makes the subsequent image recon-
incident on the detector, without increasing the radiation dose
struction (i.e. phase retrieval) very challenging. Under high
on the sample. Then we modify the DIP framework to exploit
*theseauthorscontributedequallytothiswork.correspondingauthor:R. theadditionalconstraintscomingfromthissetup.Experiments
Manekar (manek009@umn.edu) R. Manekar and J. Srivastava are with the show that the proposed method LoDIP can reliably work
DepartmentofComputerScienceandEngineering,UniversityofMinnesota,
for single-image low-dose phase retrieval both for simulated
Minneapolis,MN,USA.(email:manek009@umn.edu,srivasta@umn.edu.E
Negrini is with the Department of Mathematics, University of California, and experimental data. In particular our experiments show
Los Angeles, Los Angeles, CA, USA (email: negrini@math.ucla.edu). M. the advantages of LoDIP over state of the art methods:
PhamandD.JacobsarewiththeDepartmentofPhysicsandAstronomy,and
first, being completely data driven, LoDIP does not require
CaliforniaNanoSystemsInstitute,UniversityofCalifornia,LosAngeles,CA,
USA(email:minhrose@ucla.edu,danieljacobs@physics.ucla.edu) specialized algorithmic training to optimize the parameters to
4202
beF
72
]hp-pmoc.scisyhp[
1v54771.2042:viXraJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 2
Fig.1. CoherentDiffractionImaging(CDI)employsacoherentX-raybeamdirectedatasample,capturingtheresultingdiffractionpatternona2Ddetector.
Acomputationalalgorithmisthenappliedtoreconstructthedesiredsampleimage.Inspiredbyin-situCDI[1],LoDIPintroducestwomodificationstothe
CDIsetup.First,itinvolvesimagingthesamplealongsideastaticregion.Secondly,thestaticregionisexposedtoahighradiationdose,whilethesample’s
exposure is significantly reduced through the use of an attenuator. In the computational step, LoDIP takes both the diffraction pattern and an estimated
reconstructionofthestaticregionasinputs,generatingasamplereconstructionasitsoutput.
obtain satisfactory results. This makes LoDIP accessible to a Here, F represents the Fourier transform, converting the
broadusercommunity.Secondly,ourexperimentsdemonstrate spatial information contained in the object matrix X into
that LoDIP outperforms state-of-the-art methods by yielding the frequency domain. The magnitude operation |·| is applied
reconstructions with reduced noise (higher peak signal-to- element-wise, capturing the squared amplitude of the trans-
noise ration) while preserving resolution (comparable Fourier formed frequencies, thus simulating the diffraction pattern
Ring Correlation). Third, since LoDIP is based on the DIP resulting from the interaction of an incident wave with the
framework, it does not require a large training dataset, in object.
contrast with other deep learning approaches. Finally, being To meet the oversampling criteria, which helps to mitigate
designed for single-image phase retrieval, LoDIP can produce thenon-uniquenessofthephaseretrievalproblem,theoriginal
comparablereconstructionstotheoriginalinsituCDImethod object X is placed in an empty background such that m =
without requiring a time series of measurements. 2 × n. In simulated settings, this oversampling is achieved
byzero-paddingX beforeapplyingtheforwardoperator.The
overall goal of the phase retrieval problem is to recover the
II. RELATEDWORK
image X from the captured diffraction pattern Y.
A. Coherent Diffractive Imaging Generally,someinformationaboutthesupportoftheobject
(i.e. the location of the object) within the empty background
In Coherent Diffractive Imaging (CDI), an object is illu-
isknown.LetS ∈Cm×m betheknownsupportinformation.
minated by a highly coherent light source. The interaction 0
S is a matrix containing ones where the object of interest is
between the object and the incident wave results in the 0
estimatedtobe,zerosotherwise.Ingeneralonemaynotknow
generation of a diffraction pattern, which is subsequently
theexactsupportoftheobjectofinterest,butonlyanestimate
detected. However, while detectors capture the magnitude of
of it. This makes the retrieval harder since it leaves some
the diffracted wave, the phase information is lost. As a conse-
translationfreedom(seeFig.6forexperimentswithinaccurate
quence, the process of reconstructing the image of the object
support estimate).
of interest necessitates the development of a computational
With these assumptions, the phase retrieval problem can be
algorithmdesignedtorecoverthelostphasefromtheacquired
formulated as an optimization problem:
diffractionpattern.Thisiscommonlyreferredtoasthe“phase
retrieval”problem.Asshownin[18],ifthediffractionpattern (cid:18) (cid:12) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:12)2(cid:19)
min ℓ Y,(cid:12)F Xˆ (cid:12) ,
is sufficiently oversampled, the phase can be retrieved from (cid:12) (cid:12)
Xˆ∈Cn×n
thediffractionpatternviaiterativealgorithms(seeforinstance
s.t.(1−S )⊙Xˆ =[0] (II.2)
[19]). 0 m×m
Representing the object of interest by the complex-valued where the first term imposes that II.1 is satisfied, while the
matrix X ∈ Cn×n and the captured diffraction pattern by second term is the support constraint. The objective function
Y ∈Rm×m, in the conventional phase retrieval configuration in the above formulation is referred to as the magnitude
the diffraction pattern Y is obtained through the application constraintordataconsistencyterm.Thesupportconstraintim-
of the following forward process: poses that the reconstructed object has the estimated support.
Wenotethattheobjectivefunctioncanalsobewritteninterms
Y =|F(X)|2 (II.1) √
of the Fourier magnitudes (not squared), i.e. l( Y,|F(X)|),JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 3
Fig.2. Examplesfromthesimulateddataatdifferentlevelsofilluminationofthesampleregionasmeasuredinphotonsperpixel(Np/px).[Left]Thefirst
twocolumnsarethediffractionpatternandtheimagesamplewithoutastaticstructure.[Right]Andthelasttwocolumnsarethesamesamplewithastatic
region. [Top] The first row has a high illumination of 80k Np/px on both the sample and the static region. [Bottom] Whereas the second row has a high
illuminationof80kNp/pxonthestaticregionandalowilluminationof800Np/pxonthesample.Itcanbeseenthatatlowerillumination(bottomrow),
thesamplehasverylowpixelvalues.
this gave similar results in our experiments as the squared offers a strong overlap-in-time constraint for facilitating the
case. convergence of phase retrieval optimization. In the original
in situ CDI paper experiments show the reconstruction of the
motionoflow-dosesamplessuchasglioblastomacellsthrough
B. Phase retrieval for low-light imaging
Oversampling Smoothness (OSS) algorithm [24].
Imaging at cellular or atomic scales necessitates use of X-
rayradiation.However,manysamplesofinterestforCDI,such C. Deep Learning for phase retrieval
as biological material, polymers or organic semiconductors,
Recentdata-drivendeeplearningmethodsforphaseretrieval
require minimal radiation exposure to prevent damage during
[10, 27, 28, 29] have demonstrated that deep neural networks
data acquisition. As a consequence,there is considerable in-
(DNN) within a supervised learning framework can enhance
terest in techniques that minimize sample radiation exposure
performance in low-light conditions. However, despite some
and enable X-ray imaging at extremely low-photon counts.
initial successes, deep learning methods for phase retrieval
The major challenge of working in the low-dose case is the
are yet to see widespread adoption among microscopy prac-
strong presence of noise in the captured signal. In practice,
titioners. There are a few reasons for why this happens:
most of the existing PR methods [20, 21, 22, 23, 24, 25]
model training often requires a large dataset, making them
struggle to work in the low dose setting (high noise). This
unusableinthesingle-imagesetting;trainingoftenalongtime
comesinadditiontotheexistingchallengeofworkingwithout
and GPU resources; the reconstruction performance heavily
accuratesupportinformationwhichitselfissufficientformany
dependsonthequalityofdataprovidedforthemodeltraining.
of the existing algorithms to fail (unless additional strategies
Finally, each model has to be retrained to be used on samples
are adopted like the shrink-wrap method [26]).
captured under different experimental settings. In this work,
Attemptshavebeenmadeatlow-photonphaseretrievalthat
we propose a deep learning-based method based on deep
modify the imaging setup of the problem [1, 6, 7]. While [6]
image prior which can function in a single-image setting
relies on a phase diverse approach, [1, 7] use in the imaging
without requiring a large dataset and can be used across
setup a static region made of heavy metals (usually gold)
datasets and experimental setups.
whichcanwithstandhighenergylight.Amongthesemethods,
in-situCDI[1]achievesasubstantialorderofmagnitudedose
D. Neural Networks as a prior
reduction over other methods. The main idea is to monitor a
dynamic process over time containing two distinct regions: After the success of convolutional neural networks (CNNs)
a dynamic area containing the sample which continuously on image classification tasks [30], neural networks and par-
changes, and a static region that remains stationary in time. ticularly CNNs have improved the state-of-the-art in many
Thestaticregionissubjecttosignificantlyhigherillumination computer vision tasks. The majority of these instances were
compared to the sample, ensuring sufficient light falls on the within the framework of supervised learning, requiring the
detector, while keeping the radiation dose low for the sample. use of extensive datasets for training. More recent works (see
Aseriesofdiffractionpatternsiscollectedovertime,resulting for instance [31, 32, 33]) showed that neural networks can
in interference between the static and dynamic regions. The succeed in approximating images distribution (this is known
static region’s presence in each time step’s measurement asgenerativemodeling).ThissuccessledtotheuseoftrainedJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 4
CNNsasapriorforregularizinginverseproblemsincomputer A. LoDIP: Data acquisition
vision [34]. The main idea is to pre-train the model on a
Thesampleofinterestisplacedwithinafinitesupportnext
similar dataset (possibly for a different task) and use them
to a static region of heavily scattering, dose-tolerant object
for inverse problems in a single-sample setting, i.e. without
such as a gold (Au) pattern on an optical stage. The X-
re-training. Around the same time it was discovered that even
ray illumination on the dose-sensitive sample is reduced to a
an untrained neural network can be used as a strong prior
tolerablelimitbythepresenceofanattenuator,whilethestatic
for natural images [11, 12] and can be successfully used to
region is exposed to the full dose of the incident illumination.
regularize inverse problems on natural images.
Far-field diffraction patterns recorded from this setup are
The surprising success of untrained neural prior or deep
formed by the interference in Fourier space between the high-
image prior (DIP) on inverse problems in image restoration
dosestaticregionandthesample.ThesecontainPoissonnoise
andenhancementhasbeenfollowedbyworksaimedatunder-
relative to the total illumination on the detector. Given the
standingitsunderlyingmechanisms[35].Subsequentresearch
high-dose illumination on the static region and the known
has resulted in various extensions and adaptations, includ-
support, it is possible to obtain a high-quality static region
ing approaches involving early stopping strategies [14, 36],
reconstruction. In this work we use an established iterative
methods addressing spectral bias improvements [37], and
method, Generalized Proximal Smoothing (GPS) initialized
innovative applications [38]. For a comprehensive overview
with 1000 iterations of HIO.
of the extensive body of work on untrained neural priors in
We note explicitly that the placement of the object and
image enhancement, we recommend a recent comprehensive
the static structure do not influence the reconstruction given
survey [39].
by LoDIP, as long as their supports do not overlap. More
Untrained neural priors have also been applied to computa-
specifically,letS(·)betheoperatorwhichextractsthesupport
tionalimaginginverseproblems[40,41,42]includingsimpler
(location of non-zero elements) of a given image. Then, we
versionsofphaseretrieval[13,14,15,43].However,compared
assume that the object and the static region have a non-
to the setting used in this paper (far-field Fraunhoffer diffrac-
overlapping supports, i.e. S(X)⊙S(U)=[0] .
m×m
tion), these works tackle a much simpler settings for phase
retrieval (e.g. near-field Fresnel diffraction).
B. LoDIP: Phase Retrieval
In this work, we adopt the in-situ CDI setup for the single-
image phase retrieval and complement it with an untrained ForLoDIP,theknownstaticregionintheabovedataacqui-
neural network prior in the computational algorithm. Our sition step provides us with a useful constraint to regularize
method is able to produce accurate reconstructions even in andimprovetheconvergenceoftheoptimizationproblem.By
the low dose setting, thanks to the in-situ CDI set up and incorporating the static structure U ∈ Ck×k in the original
is able to produce results for single-image phase retrieval phase retrieval formulation, the forward process becomes:
since the untrained neural network does not require any data. Y =|F(X+U)|2 (III.1)
Experiments on simulated and experimental data demonstrate
the efficacy of this method over either of these methods alone Here X and U are appropriately zero-padded to have the
and other state of the art methods. same dimension. In a similar way the optimization problem
becomes:
III. PROPOSEDMETHOD (cid:16) (cid:17)
min ℓ Y,|F(X+U)|2 ,
Theproposedmethod,whichwerefertoasLoDIP,modifies X∈Cn×n
thedataacquisitionsetupofconventionalCDItoincorporatea s.t.(1−S )⊙X =[0] (III.2)
0 m×m
high-dosestaticregioninspiredbythein-situCDIsetup.While
in-situ CDI leverages the static region as a time-invariant
In LoDIP this setup is further generalized by incorporating
constrainttoreconstructasequenceofdynamicmeasurements,
the deep image prior framework. In the traditional deep
thehigh-dosestaticregionservesadifferentpurposeinLoDIP
image prior setup, for recovering an image X ∈ Cn×n from
where we are interested in the single-image setting.
its measurements Y ∈ Cm×m the optmization problem is
Firstly, it increases the available light for image formation
formulated as:
on the detector, effectively reducing the impact of shot noise.
Additionally, given the high-dose illumination, it is easy min ℓ(Y,A(g (z))), (III.3)
W
to produce an accurate reconstruction of the static region. W
The known static region is then used as a strong constraint whereY =A(X)+η,Aistheknownforwardoperatorand
to improve convergence of the phase retrieval optimization. ηisthenoise.TheoptimizationvariableX isre-parameterized
Secondly,itmitigatestheambiguitiesarisingfromsymmetries with a new function g (z), generally a convolutional neural
W
in the forward process which is a fundamental difficulty of network.HereW arethelearnableparametersofthenetwork
phase retrieval, (see for instance [19, 44, 45]). and z is a random input seed which is fixed throughout the
While these adaptations significantly enhance the perfor- optimizationprocess.InLoDIPwechooseztobetherecorded
mance of established phase retrieval methods (such as HIO) diffraction pattern to provide a strong relation between input
atlowradiationdoses,ourexperiments(seeFig.3),showthat and desired output during the optimization process.
LoDIP can further improve the final reconstruction quality by More in specifically, we extend the deep image prior setup
incorporating an untrained neural prior for phase retrieval. to incorporate the constraints coming from the above setup:JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 5
weincludetheknownstaticregion,theknownsamplesupport measured with a 534 nm HeNe laser. The dataset utilized in
as well as the relative illumination doses on sample and static this study is sourced from the work of Lo et al. [1]. The
regions. Since the different doses on the sample and the static staticstructureisa100µpinholeexposedtothesameincident
region lead to very different range of pixel values for X and illuminationasthesample.Unlikethefirsttwodatasetsabove,
U we add a scaling factor (k) to the optimization objective thisdatahasbeencollectedusingaprobe.Furtherinformation
(Section III-B) to bring the expected output of the neural about the generation of simulated data and optical laser data
network to the range [0,1]. This greatly improves the final collection can be found in the original paper [1]. .
reconstructionquality.Finallytheoptimizationproblemsolved a) Experimental setup and data generation: The exper-
by LoDIP is: imental setup is similar to the one in [1]. The size of the
(cid:16) (cid:17) entire image (here, 512x512) corresponds to the size of the
min ℓ Y,|F(k∗g W (z)+U)|2 , detector in the real experimental setup. The support of the
W
sample region is 170x170 pixels. This gives an oversampling
s.t.(1−S )⊙X =[0] (III.4)
0 m×m
ratioofapproximately3.0whichishigherthanthetheoretical
Following the literature on this topic, we have used a U- requirement of 2. The sample and the static structure have
Net[46]withskipconnectionsandReLUactivationfunctions. non-overlapping support and the static structure is set to have
The implementation of LoDIP is very flexible and can ac- half the radius of the sample region (however, the method is
commodatemultiplemodifications.First,anysuitablenetwork independent of the static region size).
architecturecanbeusedintheproposedsetup.Second,LoDIP b) Simulating low-light conditions: Based on previous
can be modified to work in the multiple measurements setting studies on low-dose phase retrieval [1] and [8] on low-dose
of the original in-situ CDI paper.This interesting modification phaseretrieval,theilluminationonthesamplehasbeenvaried
is left for a future work. Third, LoDIP can seamlessly in- from2.5x105 to2.5x109 photonsper µm−2.Theillumination
corporate a rough reconstruction of the sample as initializa- on the static structure has been fixed at 2.5x109 photons per
tion so it can be effectively combined with other techniques µm−2. We show results on the low doses of 2.5x106 and
designed to generate high-quality initializations for iterative 2.5x107 photons per µm−2 which corresponds to 800 and 80
phase retrieval methods [44]. Fourth, LoDIP can be used in photons per pixel (Np/px) based on the simulation geometry.
the presence of a probe function by incorporating it in the This results in different illuminations of the sample and static
forward operator (this was done in Section IV-B to produce images. This is clearly seen in Fig. 2, columns two and four,
the results for experimental data whose generation required where the sample region becomes darker in the bottom row
a probe). This makes LoDIP easily adjustable for diverse image, whereas the static image remains the same. Note that
experimental conditions in contrast to existing state-of-the- as the sample is illuminated by low-dose light, the diffraction
art methods such as GPS [25] which would require major pattern is also darker: most of the pixels are close to zero and
modifications to accommodate different experimental setups. so Poisson noise is very high in this case.
Fifth,theperformanceofLoDIPisnotsensitivetotherelative Theilluminationinphotonsperpixelhasbeencalculatedby
size or relative location of the sample and the static structure, dividing this number of incident photons on the entire sample
nor to the specific choice of the static structure. A static area by the total number of pixels containing the sample. The
structure design step such as in [45, 47] has the potential to lighting conditions have been graded in number of incident
improve the performance, but is not necessary. In fact in our photonsperpixel(Np/pxinFig.2).Basedonthetotalnumber
experiments we obtain accurate reconstructions independently of incident photons, Poisson noise has been applied. Additive
of the choice of the static structure (specifically, for each white Gaussian noise is commonly used as an approximation
google image reconstruction we use a different static region). for Poisson noise. However, this approximation is only valid
Finally, unlike Fourier holography [47, 48], the proposed at high photon counts. Since in this case we work with
method works with different illuminations of the sample and low photon counts, we directly sample from the Poisson
the static region. distributionwithmeanequaltothenumberofincidentphotons
on a pixel:
IV. EXPERIMENTALRESULTSANDDISCUSSION
# incident photons
A. Data N /px= (IV.1)
p
# pixels
We perform experiments on three kinds of data. First, we Np
create a simulated data1 using a procedure similar to [49]. s= (cid:80) (IV.2)
Y
i,j i,j
Natural images are used to create the sample region and the
1
static region for each sample in the dataset. Examples of the Y˜ =Poisson(Y ·s)· (IV.3)
s
generated images can be seen in Fig. 2. Next, we create a
simulation images of biological cell using physically accurate
B. Results
simulations of a gold lacey for the static structure and a
For all experiments we compare the relative performance
biological cell for the sample region2, these can be found in
of the proposed method (LoDIP) with other popular methods
Fig. 4.
Finally, we demonstrate the applicability of LoDIP on 1Datahasbeenmadeavailablehere
experimental diffraction patterns2 from live glioblastoma cells 2Dataispubliclyavailablein[1]JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 6
Fig.3. ExperimentalResultsonsimulateddata.Left:ReconstructionofLowResolutionSetimagesfor800Np/pixel(Toprows)and80Np/pixel(Bottom
rows).Right:ReconstructionofHighResolutionSetimagesfor800Np/pixel(Toprows)and80Np/pixel(Bottomrows).Eachimageshowsazoomed-in
viewofonlythesampleregion.
which can be used in this setup. Specifically, we compare resolution set respectively. The complementary qualities of
with Hybrid input-output (HIO) [50]; Deep Image Prior [11] the datasets enable a more comprehensive evaluation of each
(DIP) with no static region information; HIO-stat which is a method’s denoising capability and achievable resolution. For
modificationofHIOthatusesastaticregion;andGeneralized eachdataset,wecomparedthereconstructionsofeachmethod
proximal smoothing (GPS) [25] which is the state of the art across12samples,witheachsampleutilizingadifferentimage
methodforphaseretrieval.HIOandDIPworkwithdiffraction for its static structure and sample region.
patterns collected without a static region (see column 1 in
Followingpreviousworksonreconstructionwithnoisymea-
Fig.2.Restofthemethods,namelyHIO-stat,GPSandLoDIP
surements[51],wemeasurethereconstructionaccuracyforall
use the static region, however LoDIP also exploits neural
experiments in this paper using using Peak Signal-to-Noise
network priors.
Ratio (PSNR). Higher values of PSNR indicate better fidelity;
Structural Similarity Index (SSIM) [53] which measures the
a) Reconstruction of natural images: The proposed
similaritybetweentwoimages,evaluatingluminance,contrast,
method’srobustnessandgeneralityareevaluatedusingnatural
and structure for enhanced accuracy in assessing perceptual
images.Twocommonlyusednaturalimagedatasetsfortesting
image quality. Again higher values indicate better reconstruc-
phase retrieval algorithms were selected: the Set12 dataset
tion; R-factor (R ) [25] which measures the degree of
[51, 52, 53] and internet-sourced stock images used in [49]. real
agreement between observed and predicted data, commonly
Foreachimage,diffractionpatternswerefirstgeneratedusing
used in the assessment of image reconstruction quality. A
the forward model outlined in Section III and Section IV-A.
smallerR-factorindicatesacloseragreementbetweenthetrue
Results were presented for two low-dose scenarios: 800 and
and reconstructed image.
80 photons per pixel. We observed that the Set12 images
exhibited higher resolution and finer details compared to The first two rows of Table I show the results for PSNR,
the stock images, thus we refer to these as high and low SSIMandR averagedovertheentiretestsetof12images
realJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 7
TABLEI
QUANTITATIVECOMPARISONOFLODIPANDHIO-STATPERFORMANCE.FOREACHMETRIC,THEREPORTEDVALUESREPRESENTTHEMEANOVERALL
THESAMPLESINTHEDATASET
Np/px=800 Np/px=80
LowresolutionSet
PSNR↑ SSIM↑ R real↓ PSNR↑ SSIM↑ R real↓
LoDIP 28.52 0.76 0.07 25.09 0.63 0.10
HIO-stat 21.55 0.47 0.18 13.11 0.17 0.44
GPS 22.96 0.53 0.13 13.91 0.29 0.39
HighResolutionSet
LoDIP 23.56 0.59 0.09 20.01 0.42 0.14
HIO-stat 19.90 0.57 0.13 13.99 0.24 0.29
GPS 19.16 0.45 0.15 10.83 0.17 0.40
Biologicalcellsample
LoDIP 26.97 0.68 0.11 19.08 0.32 0.26
HIO-stat 21.27 0.50 0.18 12.21 0.14 0.39
GPS 23.68 0.53 0.15 15.14 0.19 0.42
Fig.4. ExperimentalResultsonbiologicalcellsample.(Toprow)Reconstructionat800Np/pixel.(Bottomrow)Reconstructionat80Np/pixel).
resolution set as more fine detail has to be reconstructed.
Fig. 3 displays a comparison of the results of LoDIP, HIO
with static structure and GPS for images in the low resolution
set(left)andhighresolutionset(right).Tostudytherobustness
of our method with respect to the experimental setup we used
acircularmaskforlowresolutionsetandasquareoneforthe
high resolution set. From this figure we can clearly see that
GPS and LoDIP produce the best results (as already shown
by the metrics in the table), but that GPS produces images
that are more noisy than LoDIP reconstructions, showing that
LoDIPhasastrongdenoisingability.Thefigureshowsalsothe
choiceofthemaskforthesampleregiondoesnotinfluencethe
reconstruction quality for LoDIP (and for the other methods).
We also note that iterative methods such as HIO-stat and
Fig. 5. Comparison of FRC values for GPS and LoDIP reconstructions on
GPS require parameter tuning by experts in the field and
biologicalcellat800Np/pxand80Np/px.
oftenmultipleindependentrunsofthealgorithmarenecessary
to obtain good reconstruction. On the other hand, LoDIP
for the low and high resolutions sets. Since DIP and HIO hyper-parametertuningisminimalandconvergenceisusually
without reference regions did not provide good results in this obtained in one run. These experiments show that LoDIP is
case we omit those methods here. From the table we can see abletoprovideaccurateanddenoisedreconstructionsforboth
thatLoDIPattainsbetterresultsacrossallmetricsforbothdata photoncountswhilepreservingtheresolutionobtainedbystate
sets and photon counts. The better performance of LoDIP is of the art iterative method like GPS.
especially clear in the low photon counts case where LoDIP b) Reconstruction of biological cell sample: Computa-
accuracy is approximately double the accuracy of the other tional microscopy represents a major potential application of
methods. Finally, as expected, the error is higher for the high the proposed method. Following previous works on PR forJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 8
Fig. 6. Reconstruction using LoDIP at 80 Np/px without knowledge of accurate support. The columns from left to right are (1) The ground truth, (2)
reconstructionwithknowledgeoftheexactsupport(PSNR=20.08),(3)reconstructionwithanapproximatesupportof3xtheactualsize(PSNR=20.06),(4)
4x the actual size (PSNR=19.85). Both visually and quantitatively, the LoDIP reconstruction is robust to inaccurate specification of the support. PSNR is
calculatedonlyovertheexactsampleregion.
CDI[1,8],weevaluatedtheperformanceofLoDIPonrealistic the known support estimate is 3 times and 4 times the size of
and physically accurate simulated data for a prototypical live the actual support. From these results we can see that LoDIP
cell. , The static structure and biological cell were simulated reconstructions are robust to inaccurate support specification.
as done in [1]. The results in this section use a simulated Widelyusedphaseretrievalalgorithmsstrugglewhenaccurate
20-nm thick gold lacey pattern as the static structure and a support information is not available [26, 43]. This can be
simulated cell consisting of a vesicle containing water and partially mitigated by employing heuristic subroutine such
protein aggregates. as shrinkwrap [26] to refine the support estimate every few
Fig. 4 shows the reconstructions from the same HIO, DIP, iterations. While effective, these end up increasing the total
HIOwithstaticregion,LoDIPandGPSatbothdoses(respec- number of hyperparameters needed to be tuned. LoDIP does
tively800and80photons/pixel).Thestaticregionisunknown not require any such subroutine for support estimation.
and estimated using the procedure described in Section III-A. c) Reconstruction from experimental data: Finally, we
Similartothecaseofnaturalimages,GPSandLoDIPproduce perform an experiment to demonstrate the proposed method
the best reconstructions in both cases with LoDIP providing a onexperimentallycaptureddiffractionpatterns(oneofthemis
lessnoisyreconstructedimagethanGPSespeciallyinthelow showninFig.7leftcolumn).Unlikethepreviousexperiments,
photon counts case. HIO and DIP without reference regions the object is complex-valued and the optical setup includes a
fail in the reconstruction. The last row of Table I show the probe. The data for this section is the one provided in [1].
results for PSNR, SSIM and R in the low photons counts We note explicitly that in this dataset the static and sample
real
case. Again LoDIP outperforms the other methods across all images have the same high dose, so this is not exactly the
metrics. setupforwhichourmethodisdesigned.Infact,ourmethodis
FRC is a technique used in microscopy [1, 8] to assess the especiallyadvantageousinthelowdosesetting,astheprevious
resolution and overall quality of a reconstruction: it calculates experimentsshow,whileitobtainscomparableresultsasother
the correlation coefficient between the Fourier transforms of methods in the high dose setting. Nonetheless, this setup is
two images, measured within concentric rings of varying spa- veryclosetotheoneofinterestsoweincludeditinthiswork.
tial frequencies. The resolution is assessed based on the drop Generatinganewexperimentaldatasetwithdifferentdoseson
in correlation at high frequencies, with a threshold of 0.367 the static and sample images is left for a future work.
(for more details see [54]). Higher FRC values correspond to Theoriginalin-situCDImethod[1]uses50diffractionpat-
better resolution. Fig. 5 displays the Fourier Ring Correlation terns with a fixed time-invariant static structure required in all
(FRC) for both photon counts cases for LoDIP and GPS. the images. HIO-stat and LoDIP use only a single diffraction
The resolution of the reconstruction obtained by LoDIP is pattern and perform single-instance phase retrieval. This is an
comparable to the one obtained by GPS. This indicates that advantage over in situ CDI since as in many experimental
the denoising capability of LoDIP results in only a minimal setups a truly static structure is difficult to ensure because of
loss of fine-scale details. the data collection procedure (e.g. in collecting tomographic
In practice, image reconstruction without precise support data, which requires shifting or tilting both the sample and
information presents a common and challenging problem. To the static structure). In this section, the reconstruction given
concludethissection,weinvestigatetherobustnessofthepro- by in situ CDI is used as a proxy for the ground truth. In
posed LoDIP method when dealing with only approximately fact, a comparison between in situ CDI and LoDIP would
known support for the biological cell example in the low be unfair since LoDIP uses 50 times less data (only one
photons count case. diffraction pattern instead of 50). A comparison with GPS
In Fig. 6, the second column shows reconstruction at 80 is not possible for this data since the current version of GPS
Np/px when accurate size and shape of the support is known. does not support Fresnel propagation and adding this would
Thelasttwocolumnsshowthereconstructionwhenthesizeof require major modifications which are outside of the scopeJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 9
Fig.7. Reconstructionofexperimentaldata(Left)Experimentallycaptureddiffractionpattern.(Right)Reconstructionfromdifferentmethods.Themeanof
thetopfivereconstructionsfrom20independentrunsisshowninthefigure.Thestaticandsampleimagesinthisexamplehavethesamehighdose.LoDIP
is especially advantageous in the low dose setting, as the previous experiments show, so as expected, in this high dose setting LoDIP obtains comparable
resultsasinsituCDIandHIOintermsofRF.However,LoDIPusesasinglediffractionpatterntoproduceareconstructionofcomparablequalityasin-situ
CDIwhichuses50samples.Moreover,whileHIO-statreconstructionhassimilarRF asLoDIP,itcontainsvisibleartefacts(indicatedbythearrows).
of this work. In these experiments, LoDIP and HIO-stat have does not (again the in situ CDI reconstruction is treated as
been modified to incorporate the known probe function. a proxy for the ground truth in this case). Therefore, these
Since there is no ground truth available, to evaluate our results highlight the robustness and adaptability of LoDIP,
results we use R-factor in the Fourier domain. This measures showcasing its ability to easily accommodate changes in the
the disagreement between the captured diffraction pattern Y data acquisition setup and maintain reliable reconstructions
(cid:16) (cid:17)
to the Fourier magnitudes |F Xˆ | of the reconstruction Xˆ across varying experimental conditions.
and is defined as:
TABLEII
(cid:12) (cid:16) (cid:17) (cid:12) QUANTITATIVECOMPARISONONEXPERIMENTALDATA.THEMEANAND
R (Xˆ)=
(cid:80) i,j(cid:12) (cid:12)|F Xˆ | i,j −Y i,j(cid:12) (cid:12)
(IV.4)
ST OA VN ED RA 2R 0D IND DEV EPIA ET NI DO EN NO TF RR E- CF OA NC ST TO RR U(R CTF IO) NV SAL EU AE CS HA OR FE 5C DA IL FC FEU RL EA NT TED
F (cid:80) i,jY
i,j
SAMPLES.
The reconstruction obtained through in situ CDI yields an RF
R-factor of 30.22%(±0.97%). As explained before in situ HIO-stat 34.70%(±0.03%)
LoDIP 33.20%(±0.03%)
CDI utilizes 50 diffraction patterns for its reconstruction.
Comparing this R-factor directly with LoDIP, which only
uses a single diffraction pattern, would be unfair due to the
substantial difference in data quantity needed to obtain the
V. CONCLUSIONANDFUTUREWORK
reconstruction. However, we can use in situ CDI R-factor Emerging deep learning methods present several opportuni-
as a benchmark to assess the performance of our method. ties to improve upon and expand the scope of computational
The average R from 20 independent reconstructions based imaging techniques that require processing steps framed as
F
on a single diffraction pattern using both LoDIP and HIO- mathematical optimization problems. The LoDIP approach,
stat is presented in Table II. Remarkably, LoDIP achieves a introducedinthiswork,integratestheoptimizationframework
comparable R-factor to in-situ CDI, highlighting its efficacy of untrained neural network priors with a precise forward
evenwithouttheneedformultiplediffractionpatterns,making model inspired by the in-situ CDI setup. This combination
itlessdata-intensive.Interestingly,HIO-statalsodemonstrates aimstorecoversampleimagesfrommeasuredfar-fielddiffrac-
acomparableR-factortoLoDIPinthisscenario.It’simportant tion patterns, particularly in situations where well-established
to note, however, that this success is primarily attributed iterative algorithms struggle to achieve proper convergence.
to the high photon count setting of this experiment, where We have demonstrated that LoDIP yields an improvement in
many methods perform well. It is crucial also to note that, reconstructionacrossmultiplemetricsandsamples,especially
as demonstrated in previous experiments, HIO-stat’s perfor- under low-dose conditions. Moreover, it does not require
mance diminishes in low photon count settings, providing labeled training data, complex tuning of hyper-parameters, or
less accurate results than LoDIP in this more realistic case. supervisionfromaspecialistinphaseretrievalalgorithms.We
Finally, Fig. 7 shows the averaged top 5 reconstructions out testedLoDIPformultiplesamplesandstaticregionsincluding
of 20 independent runs for all methods. We see that HIO-stat syntheticdatageneratedfromgoogleimages,realisticbiologi-
introduces visible artifacts in its reconstruction while LoDIP calcellsandexperimentaldatawithknownandunknownstaticJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 10
regions. Our experiments demonstrate LoDIP’s versatility, [14] R. Heckel and P. Hand, “Deep decoder: Concise image represen-
showcasing its successful application to a wide variety of tations from untrained non-convolutional networks,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:1810.03982,2018.
samples. Furthermore, we showed that LoDIP outperforms
[15] E.Bostan,R.Heckel,M.Chen,M.Kellman,andL.Waller,“Deepphase
state-of-the-art methods in obtaining a denoised reconstructed decoder:self-calibratingphasemicroscopywithanuntraineddeepneural
image,whilepreservingresolution.Weanticipateapplications network,”Optica,vol.7,no.6,pp.559–562,2020.
[16] K. Tayal, C.-H. Lai, V. Kumar, and J. Sun, “Inverse problems, deep
of the LoDIP method to X-ray imaging of dose-sensitive
learning, and symmetry breaking,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2003.09077,
samples of importance in a variety of fields, such as organic 2020.
semiconductors relevant to modern perovskite solar cells and [17] Z.Zhuang,D.Yang,F.Hofmann,D.Barmherzig,andJ.Sun,“Practical
phase retrieval using double deep image priors,” arXiv:2211.00799,
battery materials, as well as biological samples concerning
2022.
cellular interactions and life cycles. [18] J.Miao,D.Sayre,andH.Chapman,“Phaseretrievalfromthemagnitude
ofthefouriertransformsofnonperiodicobjects,”JOSAA,vol.15,no.6,
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS pp.1662–1669,1998.
[19] Y. Shechtman, Y. C. Eldar, O. Cohen, H. N. Chapman, J. Miao, and
The work is supported by STROBE: A National Science M. Segev, “Phase retrieval with application to optical imaging: A
FoundationScience&TechnologyCenterundergrantnumber contemporary overview,” IEEE Signal Processing Magazine, vol. 32,
no.3,pp.87–109,may2015.
DMR1548924.E.N.isalsopartiallysupportedbytheSimons
[20] J.R.Fienup,“Reconstructionofanobjectfromthemodulusofitsfourier
PostdoctoralprogramatIPAMandNSFDMS1925919andby transform,”Opticsletters,vol.3,no.1,pp.27–29,1978.
AFOSR MURI FA9550-21-1-0084. The authors acknowledge [21] J. Miao, J. Kirz, and D. Sayre, “The oversampling phasing method,”
ActaCrystallographicaSectionD:BiologicalCrystallography,vol.56,
the Minnesota Supercomputing Institute (MSI) at the Univer-
no.10,pp.1312–1315,2000.
sity of Minnesota for providing resources that contributed to [22] H. H. Bauschke, P. L. Combettes, and D. R. Luke, “Phase retrieval,
the research results reported within this paper. error reduction algorithm, and fienup variants: a view from convex
optimization,” Journal of the Optical Society of America A, vol. 19,
TheauthorsthankJianwei(John)Miao(UCLA)andStanley
no.7,p.1334,jul2002.
J.Osher(UCLA)fortheirvaluablefeedbackwhilecompleting [23] D. R. Luke, “Relaxed averaged alternating reflections for diffraction
this project. imaging,”Inverseproblems,vol.21,no.1,p.37,2004.
[24] J.A.Rodriguez,R.Xu,C.-C.Chen,Y.Zou,andJ.Miao,“Oversampling
smoothness:aneffectivealgorithmforphaseretrievalofnoisydiffraction
REFERENCES
intensities,”Journalofappliedcrystallography,vol.46,no.2,pp.312–
[1] Y.H.Lo,L.Zhao,M.Gallagher-Jones,A.Rana,J.J.Lodico,W.Xiao, 318,2013.
B. Regan, and J. Miao, “In situ coherent diffractive imaging,” Nature [25] M.Pham,P.Yin,A.Rana,S.Osher,andJ.Miao,“Generalizedproximal
communications,vol.9,no.1,p.1826,2018. smoothing(gps)forphaseretrieval,”OpticsExpress,vol.27,no.3,pp.
[2] J. Miao, P. Charalambous, J. Kirz, and D. Sayre, “Extending the 2792–2808,2019.
methodologyofx-raycrystallographytoallowimagingofmicrometre- [26] S.Marchesini,H.He,H.N.Chapman,S.P.Hau-Riege,A.Noy,M.R.
sizednon-crystallinespecimens,”Nature,vol.400,no.6742,pp.342– Howells,U.Weierstall,andJ.C.Spence,“X-rayimagereconstruction
344,1999. fromadiffractionpatternalone,”PhysicalReviewB,vol.68,no.14,p.
[3] J. Miao, T. Ishikawa, I. K. Robinson, and M. M. Murnane, “Beyond 140101,2003.
crystallography:Diffractiveimagingusingcoherentx-raylightsources,” [27] A. Sinha, J. Lee, S. Li, and G. Barbastathis, “Lensless computational
Science,vol.348,no.6234,pp.530–535,2015. imagingthroughdeeplearning,”Optica,vol.4,no.9,p.1117,sep2017.
[4] G.N.George,I.J.Pickering,M.J.Pushie,K.Nienaber,M.J.Hackett, [28] A.Goy,K.Arthur,S.Li,andG.Barbastathis,“Lowphotoncountphase
I. Ascone, B. Hedman, K. O. Hodgson, J. B. Aitken, A. Levina, retrievalusingdeeplearning,”PhysicalReviewLetters,vol.121,no.24,
C. Glover, and P. A. Lay, “X-ray-induced photo-chemistry and X-ray dec2018.
absorptionspectroscopyofbiologicalsamples,”JournalofSynchrotron [29] T. Uelwer, A. Oberstraß, and S. Harmeling, “Phase retrieval using
Radiation,vol.19,no.6,pp.875–886,Nov2012.[Online].Available: conditionalgenerativeadversarialnetworks,”arXiv:1912.04981,2019.
https://doi.org/10.1107/S090904951203943X [30] A.Krizhevsky,I.Sutskever,andG.E.Hinton,“Imagenetclassification
[5] E. F. Garman and M. Weik, “X-ray radiation damage to biological withdeepconvolutionalneuralnetworks,”CommunicationsoftheACM,
macromolecules: further insights,” Journal of Synchrotron Radiation, vol.60,no.6,pp.84–90,2017.
vol. 24, no. 1, pp. 1–6, Jan 2017. [Online]. Available: https: [31] D.P.KingmaandM.Welling,“Auto-encodingvariationalbayes,”arXiv
//doi.org/10.1107/S160057751602018X preprintarXiv:1312.6114,2013.
[6] C. T. Putkunz, J. N. Clark, D. J. Vine, G. J. Williams, M. A. Pfeifer, [32] I. Goodfellow, J. Pouget-Abadie, M. Mirza, B. Xu, D. Warde-Farley,
E. Balaur, I. McNulty, K. A. Nugent, and A. G. Peele, “Phase-diverse S.Ozair,A.Courville,andY.Bengio,“Generativeadversarialnetworks,”
coherentdiffractiveimaging:Highsensitivitywithlowdose,”Physical CommunicationsoftheACM,vol.63,no.11,pp.139–144,2020.
reviewletters,vol.106,no.1,p.013903,2011. [33] D.P.KingmaandP.Dhariwal,“Glow:Generativeflowwithinvertible
[7] T.-Y. Lan, P.-N. Li, and T.-K. Lee, “Method to enhance the resolution 1x1convolutions,”Advancesinneuralinformationprocessingsystems,
of x-ray coherent diffraction imaging for non-crystalline bio-samples,” vol.31,2018.
NewJournalofPhysics,vol.16,no.3,p.033016,2014. [34] A. Bora, A. Jalal, E. Price, and A. G. Dimakis, “Compressed sensing
[8] X. Lu, M. Pham, E. Negrini, D. Davis, S. J. Osher, and J. Miao, using generative models,” in International Conference on Machine
“Computational microscopy beyond perfect lenses,” arXiv preprint Learning. PMLR,2017,pp.537–546.
arXiv:2306.11283,2023. [35] Z.Cheng,M.Gadelha,S.Maji,andD.Sheldon,“Abayesianperspective
[9] A.Goy,K.Arthur,S.Li,andG.Barbastathis,“Lowphotoncountphase onthedeepimageprior,”inProceedingsoftheIEEE/CVFConference
retrievalusingdeeplearning,”Physicalreviewletters,vol.121,no.24, onComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,2019,pp.5443–5451.
p.243902,2018. [36] H. Wang, T. Li, Z. Zhuang, T. Chen, H. Liang, and J. Sun, “Early
[10] M. Deng, S. Li, A. Goy, I. Kang, and G. Barbastathis, “Learning to stoppingfordeepimageprior,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2112.06074,2021.
synthesize:robustphaseretrievalatlowphotoncounts,”Light:Science [37] Z. Shi, P. Mettes, S. Maji, and C. G. Snoek, “On measuring and
&Applications,vol.9,no.1,p.36,2020. controlling the spectral bias of the deep image prior,” International
[11] D. Ulyanov, A. Vedaldi, and V. Lempitsky, “Deep image prior,” in JournalofComputerVision,vol.130,no.4,pp.885–908,2022.
Proceedings of the IEEE conference on computer vision and pattern [38] Y.Gandelsman,A.Shocher,andM.Irani,“”double-dip”:unsupervised
recognition,2018,pp.9446–9454. imagedecompositionviacoupleddeep-image-priors,”inProceedingsof
[12] U.Dmitry,A.Vedaldi,andL.Victor,“Deepimageprior,”International theIEEE/CVFConferenceonComputerVisionandPatternRecognition,
JournalofComputerVision,vol.128,no.7,pp.1867–1888,2020. 2019,pp.11026–11035.
[13] F.Wang,Y.Bian,H.Wang,M.Lyu,G.Pedrini,W.Osten,G.Barbas- [39] Y.Lu,Y.Lin,H.Wu,Y.Luo,X.Zheng,andL.Wang,“Alloneneeds
tathis,andG.Situ,“Phaseimagingwithanuntrainedneuralnetwork,” to know about priors for deep image restoration and enhancement: A
Light:Science&Applications,vol.9,no.1,p.77,2020. survey,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2206.02070,2022.JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.14,NO.8,AUGUST2021 11
[40] M.Z.DarestaniandR.Heckel,“Acceleratedmriwithun-trainedneural
networks,” IEEE Transactions on Computational Imaging, vol. 7, pp.
724–733,2021.
[41] A. Qayyum, I. Ilahi, F. Shamshad, F. Boussaid, M. Bennamoun, and
J. Qadir, “Untrained neural network priors for inverse imaging prob-
lems: A survey,” IEEE Transactions on Pattern Analysis and Machine
Intelligence,2022.
[42] G. Ongie, A. Jalal, C. A. M. R. G. Baraniuk, A. G. Dimakis, and
R.Willett,“Deeplearningtechniquesforinverseproblemsinimaging,”
IEEEJournalonSelectedAreasinInformationTheory,2020.
[43] K.Tayal,R.Manekar,Z.Zhuang,D.Yang,V.Kumar,F.Hofmann,and
J.Sun,“Phaseretrievalusingsingle-instancedeepgenerativeprior,”in
Applied Industrial Spectroscopy. Optica Publishing Group, 2021, pp.
JW2A–37.
[44] R. Manekar, Z. Zhuang, K. Tayal, V. Kumar, and J. Sun, “Deep
learninginitializedphaseretrieval,”inNeurIPS2020WorkshoponDeep
LearningandInverseProblems,2020.
[45] R.Hyder,Z.Cai,andM.S.Asif,“Solvingphaseretrievalwithalearned
reference,”inComputerVision–ECCV2020:16thEuropeanConference,
Glasgow,UK,August23–28,2020,Proceedings,PartXXX16. Springer,
2020,pp.425–441.
[46] O.Ronneberger,P.Fischer,andT.Brox,“U-net:Convolutionalnetworks
for biomedical image segmentation,” in International Conference on
Medicalimagecomputingandcomputer-assistedintervention. Springer,
2015,pp.234–241.
[47] D. A. Barmherzig, J. Sun, P.-N. Li, T. J. Lane, and E. J. Candes,
“Holographic phase retrieval and reference design,” Inverse Problems,
vol.35,no.9,p.094001,2019.
[48] I. McNulty, J. Kirz, C. Jacobsen, E. H. Anderson, M. R. Howells,
and D. P. Kern, “High-resolution imaging by fourier transform x-ray
holography,”Science,vol.256,no.5059,pp.1009–1012,1992.
[49] D. J. Chang, C. M. O’Leary, C. Su, D. A. Jacobs, S. Kahn, A. Zettl,
J. Ciston, P. Ercius, and J. Miao, “Deep-learning electron diffractive
imaging,”Physicalreviewletters,vol.130,no.1,p.016101,2023.
[50] J.R.Fienup,“Phaseretrievalalgorithms:acomparison,”AppliedOptics,
vol.21,no.15,p.2758,aug1982.
[51] C. A. Metzler, P. Schniter, A. Veeraraghavan, and R. G. Baraniuk,
“prdeep: Robust phase retrieval with a flexible deep network,” arXiv
preprintarXiv:1803.00212,2018.
[52] K.Zhang,W.Zuo,Y.Chen,D.Meng,andL.Zhang,“Beyondagaussian
denoiser: Residual learning of deep cnn for image denoising,” IEEE
transactionsonimageprocessing,vol.26,no.7,pp.3142–3155,2017.
[53] H.Lawrence,D.A.Barmherzig,M.Eickenberg,andM.Gabrie,“Low-
photonholographicphaseretrievalviaadeepdecoderneuralnetwork,”
inOpticalSensors. OpticaPublishingGroup,2021,pp.JTu5A–19.
[54] M. van Heel and M. Schatz, “Fourier shell correlation threshold
criteria,” Journal of Structural Biology, vol. 151, no. 3, pp. 250–
262, 2005. [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
article/pii/S1047847705001292