Designing Robots to Help Women*
Martin Cooney1, Lena Klasén2, and Fernando Alonso-Fernandez1
Abstract—Robots are being designed to help people in an
increasing variety of settings–but seemingly little attention
has been given so far to the specific needs of women, who
represent roughly half of the world’s population but are
highly underrepresented in robotics. Here we used a specu-
lative prototyping approach to explore this expansive design
space:First,weidentifiedsomepotentialchallengesofinterest,
including crimes and illnesses that disproportionately affect
women, as well as potential opportunities for designers, which
were visualized in five sketches. Then, one of the sketched
scenarios was further explored by developing a prototype, of a
robotic helper drone equipped with computer vision to detect
hidden cameras that could be used to spy on women. While
object detection introduced some errors, hidden cameras were
identified with a reasonable accuracy of 80% (Intersection
over Union (IoU) score: 0.40). Our aim is that the identified
challenges and opportunities could help spark discussion and
inspiredesigners,towardrealizingasafer,moreinclusivefuture
through responsible use of technology.
I. INTRODUCTION
Within the general area of Feminist Human-Robot Inter-
Fig.1. Basicconcept:robotscouldbedesignedtohelpwomenrelatedto
action (HRI), the current paper focuses on exploring how crime,illness,andday-to-daychallenges
robotscouldbedesignedtohelpwomentodealwithvarious
common challenges, as pictured in Fig. 1.
There are sometimes discrepancies in how we want the in 1972, and the right to carry out some combat jobs in the
world to function, and how the world actually functions: We US army only in 2016).
believe that people should be treated equally, with similar As we look toward the future, in which technologies like
rights and opportunities, and that women are an impor- Artificial Intelligence (AI) and robotics are expected to help
tant group to consider, in line with the concept of gender people to live better lives, we find similar indications of
mainstreaming and the UN’s Sustainable Development Goal potential marginalization: For example, reported examples
5.1,2 Yet despite constituting roughly half of the human of gender bias in AI include Google preferentially showing
population, women have been historically marginalized, un- high-paying ads to men, Amazon’s hiring system prefer-
derrepresented,ignored,andrestricted[1].3 Somebeliefscan ring applications from men, Google Translate defaulting to
seemhumorousinretrospect,liketheideathatwomenmight male pronouns, LinkedIn suggesting that female names are
not be able to ride trains as their uteruses might fly out mistaken, and Google searches for women often turning up
of their bodies due to high speeds. Other more sobering eroticcontent[2].Asanotherexample,AutonomousVehicles
examples question rights that might seem fundamental, like (AVs)arepoisedtocontributetosafe,efficienttransport,but
the rights to vote, run, or defend, which have been granted even basic vehicular features such as seat belts, airbags, and
only recently in some countries (e.g., the right to vote was crash dummies have up until recently seemingly not taken
granted in Liechtenstein only in 1984, the right to run with female body sizes into account, leading to an increased rate
men in the Boston Marathon in the United States (US) only of injury in traffic accidents (47% higher between 1998 and
2008 in the US). Furthermore, as Winkle et al. describe,
*We gratefully acknowledge support from the Swedish Innovation
female opinions have also been highly underrepresented in
Agency(VINNOVA)fortheproject"AI-PoweredCrimeSceneAnalysis"
1M. Cooney, and F. Alonso-Fernandez are with the School of In- HRIstudies,aswithHuman-ComputerInteraction[3]:robot
formation Technology, Halmstad University 301 18 Halmstad, Sweden designersaregenerallynotfemale,andexamplesoftackling
martin.daniel.cooney@gmail.com
women’s aims and needs appear to be few. (Note: In using
2L.KlaséniswiththeComputerVisionLaboratory(CVL),Department
of Electrical Engineering (ISY), Linköping University, 581 83 Linköping, the term "women" here, we do not focus on non-binary
SwedenandDepartmentofNationalOperations,SwedishPoliceAuthority, or gender-fluid cases, although our ideation might also be
10266Stockholm,Swedenlena.klasen@liu.se
relevant to some degree for such groups; as well, we follow
1eige.europa.eu/gender-mainstreaming/what-is-gender-mainstreaming
2unwomen.org/en/node/36060 the typical convention that "sex" refers to biological state
3womansday.com/life/real-women/a55991/no-women-allowed/ and "gender" to social identity.)
4202
rpA
5
]OR.sc[
1v32140.4042:viXraOne barrier is that the designated design space is so In contrast to the above studies, much work has looked at
expansive: Women face various challenges that can seem how robots could use sensing to help people in general. For
"wicked"anddifficulttosolveduetotheircomplex,unclear, example,inourownpreviouswork,weexploredhowarobot
and interconnected nature. Furthermore, robotic capabilities could seek to defend a person who is being attacked [9].
are ever-expanding; various kinds of robots can be imagined We also experimented with combining object detection in
(e.g.,drones,wheeledrobots,humanoids,exoskeletons,etc.) RGB and thermal trace detection to detect activities, which
that could either be carried by a woman, located in an inspired our prototype in the current paper [10]. However,
environment, or sent by an authority such as the police these works have not focused on the unique requirements
or Emergency Medical Services (EMS). Thus, the context of women. Thus, it seemed like the question of how robots
suggestedtheusefulnessoffollowingacriticalapproachthat could help women could benefit from some additional atten-
can elicit new insights into both theory and practice. tion.
The remainder of the paper is structured as follows: In
III. METHOD
SectionIIwebrieflyframeandmotivateourworkincompar-
To identify challenges and opportunities, a speculative
ison to previous work. Section III describes the speculative
prototyping approach was followed. Speculative prototyping
prototyping approach we adopted, as well as challenges and
aims to "drag" potentially important future scenarios from
opportunities identified. Section IV goes deeper into one
the foggy realm of imagination closer to the real world,
specific scenario via a prototype, and Section V discusses
visualizing in a thought-provoking, clear, visceral manner,
results.
as a means to begin a process of critical exploration [11].
In summary, the current paper’s contribution is two-fold:
Thus, rapid ideation sessions were first conducted to iden-
• Theoretical. We identify and explore some new oppor- tify challenges affecting women. Next, opportunities were
tunities and challenges related to useful tasks for robot
identified. Ideas were recorded without judgement, then
designers to help a large user group (women).
afterwards merged and reworked with priority attributed to
• Practical. We explore one scenario in more depth, those that seemed valuable, different, and requiring further
reporting on a new proof-of-concept of a robot.
study.(Indoingso,weaimedtoroughlyalignourselveswith
Suvin’s concept of "cognitive estrangement", described by
II. RELATEDWORK
Bartolotta in terms of seeking to capture "fictional world-
Previous related work seems to have mostly focused on affordances imbued with cognitive potential" [12].) Thus,
topics outside of the scope of the current paper, such as some representative scenarios were chosen and transformed
differences in how women and men perceive robots, or sex intosketches.Furthermore,oneofthesesketcheswasfurther
robots. For example, women were observed to place more developed into a physical prototype, which was used to also
trust than men in the idea of a security robot [4], and sex gain some insight into practical concerns.
robots,ratherthanpromotingobjectificationofwomen,could A. Challenges Faced by Women
actually foster liberalization and sex-positivity [5]).
What then are some of the challenges that seem to be
However,afewstudieshaveexploredhowrobotdesigners
predominantlyfacedbywomen?Inconsideringthisquestion
could address challenges specific to women. One work that
here, we adopt a zemiological perspective; i.e., a broad view
is highly relevant to the current topic is by Winkle et al.,
that can encompass various potential harms, in relation to
who proposed Feminist HRI, highlighting the importance
health, crime, and day-to-day activities.
of examining and challenging power, in considering diverse
1) Crimes: Crimes that disproportionately affect women
perspectives,emotions,embodiment,and"lowpower"users,
include voyeurism, sexting without permission, stalking, in-
to achieve responsible design [6]. As well, Winkle and
decent exposure, domestic abuse (including intimate partner
Mulvihillexploredhowrobotscouldbeusedtoabusewomen
abuse), rape (including date rape, acquaintance rape, mari-
inadomesticviolence(DV)scenario,towardsupportingrisk
tal rape, gang rape, and war rape), molestation (grabbing,
mitigation [7]. The authors comment briefly on possibilities
groping), child abuse and grooming, forced prostitution
of using ambient sensor data or mobile apps to help detect
(including sex trafficking, sexual slavery, forced marriage,
DV,yetadvisecaution–referringtoastudybyCooksonetal.
revenge porn, and forced participation in the production of
that discusses how digital interventions can be overly hyped
pornography),andotherformsofsexualassault,harassment,
andunder-deliver,haveunintendedconsequencesandhidden
bullying,andviolence[13].4 Wenotethatthesetermsarenot
costs, and alone are no "magical bullet" [8]. A difference
exclusive but often contain some overlap. As well, crimes
with the current work is that these studies did not seek to
can be further detailed in terms of individual actions. For
speculate on what kinds of specific tasks future robots could
example, physical violence can involve slapping, pushing,
one day perform to help women, as we seek to do here. For
hitting, kicking, hair-pulling, choking, burning, or assault
example, helping could also be possible one day for robots
with objects such as knives or guns. Also, even such non-
inaDVscenario,asperpetratorstypicallytrytoisolatetheir
sexual violence can relate to sex, since women who are
victimsandavoidhavingtheircrimesrecordedorobserved–
smaller can be seen as easier targets [14].
a task that could be complicated by the close presence of a
robot outfitted with sensors. 4https://pcar.org/about-sexual-violence/adultsSuch distressing experiences are not limited to any one ties in Sweden related to immigration, integration, and
country. For example, a report from 2002 indicated that crime [20]: Especially victims coming from other cultures
two thirds of Swedish women have been sexually harassed can find themselves in a position of weakness, segregated,
or experienced violence [15]: In more detail, over half of and like they have no one to talk to: They might not know
women have been sexually harassed, and around half have the local language (Swedish), be allowed to go outside, or
experienced violence (a quarter physical violence, one in be aware of Swedish norms (i.e., no one might explicitly
three sexual violence), including around a quarter of young tell them that is not okay for a man to beat a woman).
women 18-24 just in the past year; one out of every five They might also visit religious centers that reinforce non-
womenhasalsobeenthreatenedbyaman.Numbersarealso Swedish views, like that they must obey the men in their
disturbingintheUS,wherearoundtwothirdsofwomenhave families, or that they could be punished or killed for having
experienced violence, and around one fifth of women have a local boyfriend. For example, views in Africa on DV can
been raped, usually by someone they knew [13]. In some be startlingly different, with acceptance of wife beating at
regions, such as West or South Asia and Africa, women can 77% in Mali and Uganda; overall, "51% of African women
also face risks of female genital mutilation, honor killings, report that being beaten by their husbands is justified if they
stonings, acid throwing, blinding, persecution due to alleged either go out without permission, neglect the children, argue
witchcraft, and forced suicide (e.g. Sati, in which a widow back, refuse to have sex, or burn the food."6
is forced to die on her husband’s funeral pyre5). Another key problem with DV is that repeat offenses are
The crimes above can be categorized as occurring re- common[21].Forexample,officersmightpickupacriminal
motely, or in proximity. Of the first non-contact category, onFridayforbeatingawoman,thenreleasehimonSaturday,
voyeurism, also related to scopophilia, upskirting and peep- in a pattern that repeats itself each week. The perpetrator as
ing, could be one useful problem for initial exploration: wellcanescalate,beatingharderandhardereachtime,which
In contrast to more serious crimes where the "stakes" can canendinmurder.Somemechanismisneededtobreaksuch
be extremely high if a mistake is made, voyeurism has damaging spirals.
been called a "harmless wrong", as victims often don’t Varioussuggestionshavebeenmadeforhowsuchwomen
know they have been victimized and thus do not suffer could be helped: For example, phone calls to DV helplines
trauma [16]. Moreover, current legislature regarding filming can be masked, and women freed from family phone plans
without consent seems to support technological approaches on request.7 As well, cues such as drawing a black dot on
to limit video voyeurism, and it is also arguably clear one’s hand, selecting a red pen at a hospital, or uttering
how voyeurism can be stopped, by preventing a criminal keywords like “Angela” or “Minotaur” at a bar, can be
from viewing and filming victims. As well, voyeurism is used to surreptitiously seek help.8,9,10 However, it’s not
animportant,widespreadproblem:Althoughactualnumbers clear how effective such existing strategies are: Backlash
are difficult to predict, voyeurism has been described as effects could exist; if the aggressor learns about such a
an epidemic in Korea, with over 6000 cases reported each communication, the victim could be beaten more. Further-
year [17]. When footage is spread, the result can be "social more, perpetrators typically seek to "gaslight" or manipulate
death", causing some women to attempt suicide. For such victims into doubting themselves, by establishing narratives
reasons, in 2018, approximately 20,000 women marched to to maintain power and control, e.g., telling victims that
protest spy cameras, with 200,000 signing a petition, which they are crazy, useless, or to blame, and that this is how
resultedin agovernment planto hire8000 workersto tackle things must be [22]. As a result of repeatedly experiencing
theproblem.Aswell,inSweden,inananonymoussurveyof traumatic and uncontrollable events, including physical and
2,450randomlyselected18–60year-oldsconductedin1996, psychologicalabuse,victimsoftenhavelittleself-esteemleft,
7.7% of respondents described deriving sexual satisfaction andfrequentlydevelopposttraumaticstressdisorder(PTSD),
from spying on others having sex [18]. Thus, it could be majordepressivedisorder(MDD),or"learnedhelplessness",
usefulforwomenifvoyeurismcouldbemoreeasilydetected which contribute to submissiveness and reduce a woman’s
and prevented. belief that her actions could lead to a positive result [23].
Of crimes that occur in proximity, two kinds that seem Thus, while successful arrests could help to reduce repeated
more difficult to tackle, but highly important, include DV offences by approximately half [21], as with other crimes
andrape.Forexample,inSweden,therearetypicallynowit- such as sex trafficking or forced marriage, battered women
nessestoDV,astheattacksoccur"behindcloseddoors"[19]. are often trapped, and it’s hard for women themselves to
As such, various statistics on DV can be found, but the break free.
real numbers, and hence the true extent of this problem, are Then, what might be needed? As above, one challenge
unknown. As well, hospital records are often generated as a
resultofattacks,butpoliceareusuallynotallowedtoaccess 6https://blogs.worldbank.org/en/africacan/domestic-violence-and-poverty-
these data; victims can also feel retraumatized and uncared in-africa-when-the-husbands-beating-stick-is-like-butter
for when interacting with healthcare staff.
7https://ksltv.com/602266/fcc-adopts-new-cellphone-rules-designed-to-
keep-domestic-violence-victims-safer/
Furthermore, recent discourse has highlighted difficul-
8www.bbc.com/news/blogs-trending-34326137
9themighty.com/2020/01/domestic-violence-preventionsign-red-marker/
5https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Sati_(practice) 10canadianwomen.org/signal-for-help/is getting information to the victims, so they are no longer processessurroundingrapekits.Insomecases,rapekitshave
alone. Also, women who are victims need to be protected; been destroyed before testing without notifying victims. In
something should be done for them without them having to some other countries, lack of rape kits or trained examiners
start the process. can also be a problem. The result can include decreased
Another important problem to combat is rape, which communitytrustinpolice,aswellasmissedopportunitiesto
shares many similarities with DV: Rapes are usually con- identify serial perpetrators and prevent new rapes and other
ducted by perpetrators known to the victim; the crime is crimes–as rapists are often also guilty of other crimes such
committed in close contact; its repercussions are among the as burglary, assault, and murder.
most serious of crimes (leading to chronic health problems 2) Health Challenges: Health problems that
such as PTSD, MDD, and substance abuse); help-seeking disproportionately affect women include breast cancer,
victimsoftenexperiencea"secondrape"inbeingrepeatedly gynecological/period-related problems (e.g., premenstrual
interrogated,doubted,blamed,warned,anddiscouraged;and syndrome (PMS)/premenstrual dysmorphic disorder
a chronic failure to report or investigate rape has been (PMDD), perimenopause/menopause, dysmenorrhea,
noted [24] [25]. In some countries, like the US, clearance endometriosis, ovarian and cervical cancer), complications
rates for rape also appear to be low (e.g. in the 60 percent duetopregnancy(includingdifficultchildbirthandabortion,
range, compared to Japan in the high 90s, with rapes being as well as perinatal depression), eating disorders, anxiety,
about 100 times more common) [26]. migraines, osteoporosis and autoimmune diseases [28].14
Currently, in Sweden, one obstacle to preventing rape In general, women in the European Union (EU) report
through adopting new technologies comes from the legal poorerhealthandpoorermentalwell-beingthanmen,andare
system. For example, the European Parliament, in its recent morelikelytohavehealthlimitationsovertheirlifetime[28].
"Artificial Intelligence Act", has banned real-time detection, This might be why women are also more inclined than men
onthebasisofthepotentialformistakes.11 Moreconcretely, to attempt suicide [29]. It also often takes women longer to
in an urban environment with surveillance cameras, it is be diagnosed with illnesses, possibly due to gender bias.15
not permitted to detect rape in real time and alert police. 3) Other Day-to-Day Challenges: The UN lists eleven
Rape must happen first–everyone is required to wait–then largest hurdles for women’s equality by 2030, which in-
the images can be used, after judicial approval is obtained. cludes lack of women in leadership positions, workplace
As such, currently much of the potential use of AI is discrimination, and an imbalance in unpaid care work [30].
lost, and the integrity of victims is not upheld. Thus, here For example, the report mentions typical rates of 20-30% of
the challenge seems to be not merely technical but also managersbeingfemale,womenearningglobally51centsper
political. While it’s clear that current recognition systems dollar earned by men, and an estimated extra two hours of
areimperfect,variousexamplesofworkingreal-timesystems unpaidcareworkeachdaythatwomenwillstillbeexpected
exist, not just in pacemakers and brakes, but also employing to spend by 2050.
computer vision, from Tesla cars doing real-time inference Physically,womenarealsoonaveragesmaller,shorterand
fromcameras,toreal-timepixelizationoffacesontelevision. weaker than men (possessing less muscle mass and bone
Furthermore, a basis exists for how to handle imperfect density and more body fat) [31]. This might not merely
recognition in standards such as SOTIF (ISO/PAS 21448).12 affect various day-to-day tasks such as reaching high-up
Thus, an example of a prototype of how robots could detect items, carrying heavy objects, and opening tight containers;
and prevent crime in real-time at an early stage could also forexample,heightalsoaffectsperceiveddominance,which
be useful as a way to affect thought regarding legislature. mightexplainwhymostChiefExecutiveOfficers(CEOs)of
Another problem involves bottlenecks in processing evi- Fortune 500 companies tend to be tall men [32]. Another
dence.Disturbingly,itseemstherearehundredsofthousands difference is often seen in clothing, which has repercussions
of untested "rape kits" in the US, some of which are not related to health and crime. Some clothes can be used by
processedevenafter30years[27].13 Thisforensicevidence, criminals as an excuse to commit crimes, such as purses
which is costly and requires hours of invasive handling of thatseemeasytosnatch,orrevealingclothingsuchasskirts,
victims,issometimesnotsentonwardforanalysisorcannot whichcanbeseentoinviteupskirtphotographyorrape[33].
be handled due to insufficient resources. Various potential InSweden,perpetratorssometimesalsocomefromcountries
causes have been put forward such as budget cuts; victim- with different cultures, where they might never have seen
blaming and bias against women and victims of sex crimes; any of their female relatives (e.g., mother or sister) naked,
slow workflows due to fear of contamination and inefficient or women in light clothes; they might also have never been
orredundanttesting/auditingrequirements;lackofatracking explicitly told by anyone how things are in Sweden.
system for forensic evidence; and misunderstandings of As well, certain clothes can be impractical, such as high
heels, which can lead to foot pain or tripping, or even
11https://www.europarl.europa.eu/news/en/press-
room/20240308IPR19015/artificial-intelligence-act-meps-adopt-landmark- 14https://online.regiscollege.edu/online-masters-degrees/online-master-
law science-nursing/womens-health-nurse-practitioner/resources/health-issues-
12https://www.iso.org/standard/77490.html specific-womens-health/
13https://usafacts.org/articles/how-many-rape-kits-are-awaiting-testing-in- 15https://www.weforum.org/agenda/2024/02/womens-health-gap-
the-us-see-the-data-by-state/ healthcare/merely a lack of clothes with (large) pockets, leading to smoke.16 A robot could also prevent criminals from getting
increased use of handbags, which can be stolen [34]. In too close not only to a woman, but also to objects; e.g., it
some countries, women can be hassled or killed if they do couldpreventsomeonefromgettingclosetoawoman’sdrink
not clothe themselves in a certain way (e.g., by Mutawa toinsertasedative.Ifawomaninaman’spresencesuddenly
"religious police" or relatives, if a hijab is deemed to not be seems incapacitated, this could also indicate that the robot
sufficientlyset);15girlswerereportedlyburnedalivein2002 should call for help or separate them. Intent to attack (e.g.,
in an incident when the Mutawa beat girls trying to escape hands balled into fists or hidden, getting close, angry/loud
from a burning school without their hijabs [35]. Women are language, etc.) could also be detected.
also more targeted by the fashion and cosmetics industries, In a more complex scenario, a remote robot might be
which are among the biggest international businesses, and alerted (e.g., by detecting nearby victims’ screams [40]), or
encouraged to spend more time on physical appearance and be sent by authorities. In such a case, advanced capabilities
beautyproducts(e.g.,seekingtoavoidtanninginAsia)[36]. mightberequiredtodistinguishtrueattacksfromjokes,skits,
As well, products are sometimes sold at higher prices tar- or play-fighting, and make judgements about "distinction"
geting women that only differ in packaging, fragrance, or and "proportionality": A robot might need to identify which
color (e.g., razors similar to those sold to men, but just in person is the victim and which is the perpetrator–a highly
pink color); such gender-based price segmentation has been challenging task when multiple people are present. As well,
described as a "pink tax", and has also been observed to decisions about the level of force to use might include
some extent in Sweden [37]. someanalysisofforcedifferentials,backdropsandcrossfire.
Additionally,agedetectioncouldalsobeusedtodetectchild
abuse or forced marriage, and flying robots or soft robots
B. How Robots Could Help Women couldbeusefultoenterclosedbuildingsinwhichtrafficking
might be occurring.
1) Robots Helping to Fight Crime: In regard to
Duringacrime,therobotcouldtargettheassailantfroma
voyeurism, hidden spy cameras could be detected. For ex-
difficult angle (e.g., from behind or from above for a drone)
ample, Sami et al. describe a smartphone app that uses
with pepper spray or laser to dazzle the assailant’s eyes,
laser/time of flight to detect hidden cameras [38]. Yu et al.
whileemittingloudsoundsandbrightlightstoseekhelp.As
usedathermalcameratodetecthiddencamerasviaheat[39].
well,therobotcouldtrytomarktheattackerortheirvehicle
Here we also build a prototype drone aimed at dissuading
with paint, and record license plates, or interfere with their
voyeurismbydetectinghiddencameras.Onedifferencewith
movement. The robot could also provide advice during the
theconceptforourprototypeisthatbothapproachesabovein
attack: e.g., to drop to the ground to be harder to move and
their current form still require a human to think of installing
to avoid being taken to a "second location".
and running an app and to move around an apartment
Robots could also help post-hoc, if an attack could not be
searching for devices themselves, which might not be easy
prevented.ForDV,anAItoolcouldtrackhospitalrecordsto
in hard-to-reach or high locations. Another difference is that
assess risk, if current laws are changed. Federated learning,
our proposed approach also involves object detection.
e.g., downloading updates to AI models for detecting DV
In regard to proximate crimes like DV, rape, molestation, without uploading sensitive or restricted data, could be one
andstalking,robotscouldseektopreventwomanfrombeing way to ensure that private data are not misused. After a
targeted and perpetrators from getting away (i.e., preventing rape, a robot with a sterile compartment could somehow try
the perpetrator’s ability to carry out an attack and ensuring to facilitate rape testing immediately, avoiding waiting time
justice is served). Deterrence could be partially achieved by at hospitals, also since robots lack the DNA of a human
reducing times in which young women must be alone, e.g., investigator (there might be less risk of contamination). As
via the company of a robot that can record evidence and part of this, robots could also visually analyze victim’s
call for help. Robots could accompany women if there is a bodies. Fernandes et al. proposed and evaluated a deep
perceivedrisk,suchasinahomewhereDVhasoccurred,or learning approach to identify genital lesions that could be
if she needs to move through a dangerous part of a city, like evidence of rape, using a dataset of roughly 400 images
aparkinglotatnight.Robotslikedronesalreadycouldseem collected by the Southern Denmark Sexual Assault Referral
threatening,takingoff,buzzingloudly,flyingerratically,and Centre (78 from non-consensual and 316 from consensual
threatening collision, if someone gets too close. This could intercourse) [41]. Robots could also help to search for a
belikesuddenlysummoningaloudbarkingdogtoone’said, hostageorcorpse,ortrackfleeingattackers.Intheundesired
thatcanotherwisebeturnedoffandcarriedeasily,andcould casethatawomanhasbeenmurdered,robotsarebeingbuilt
also help to avoid purse-snatching or upskirting. A robot to do forensics on corpses, like the Virtobot system [42].
could also indicate a woman’s personal space by projecting 2) Robots Helping to Support Health: To detect health
a circle of light around her, or shine a light on a stalker
problems, a robot could generate three-dimensional (3D)
following a woman. One related example in the literature
scans of a person using a Lidar device. For example, scans
exists, of a "spider dress" designed by Anouk Wipprecht
that inflates, extending mechanical arms, by monitoring
16https://medium.com/@intel/is-that-a-spider-on-your-dress-or-are-you-
proximity and a woman’s breathing; another variant releases happy-to-see-me-da25075314b9can already be done using Lidar devices in IPhone Pros or tools could help to level the playing field, by allowing
IPads. The benefits are: anyone to be large, tall, and strong. For example, this might
• Current methods sometimes haven’t been updated for allow smaller women to become accepted as leaders, or to
a long time and could be upgraded. For example, tape be accepted as equals, receiving equal pay, in physically
measuresareusedtomeasurebellygirthforpregnancy, intensive jobs such as construction or policing. As well,
which can be inaccurate. smallerwomencouldreachhigh-upitems,carryheavyloads,
• People can measure themselves outside of infrequent and open tight packages–and maybe even better defend
doctorvisitsandhavecontinuouscontrolovertheirown against attackers, helping them to fight back and be too
health data (relating to data democratization and data- heavy to knock down or abduct. Furthermore, alloparenting
driven care). For example, in some parts of Sweden, robots capable of raising children in a good way could also
breasts x-rays can be done every five years, and in help [46]; for example, when pay is unequal due to the
between, patients are expected to wait. fear that women will leave work to take care of children,
or women are overwhelmed with unpaid care.
In more detail, such 3D scans could be used to detect breast
4) Sketches: From the pool of scenarios, five were se-
cancer, anorexia, and abnormalities:
lected and transformed into sketches, as shown in Fig. 2.
• Achangeinabreast(e.g.duetoalump)couldindicate
potential cancer. IV. PROTOTYPE
• Weight loss in a short time could indicate anorexia.
Theoretical ideas alone sometimes miss practical realities
• A scan could help someone to understand that it is
that can be exposed by prototyping. To gain further insight
normal for women to not all be shaped like photo
into one of the scenarios, proposed in the first sketch, a
models or porn stars (i.e., there is much variance). For
proof-of-concept was created, as shown in Fig. 3, in three
example,thisisagoalintheinitiativeofVisualSweden
called "Visual Vulva".17 steps:Preparation.First,amock-upenvironmentwascreated
containing some objects with hidden cameras and distractor
Where simply scanning is insufficient, robots could inter-
objects intended to make the detection task more difficult.
vene in a more complex manner. For example, robots have
In total, 22 objects were gathered, a similar number to
beendesignedtocarryoutclinicalbreastexaminations.18 As
previouspapers:ToiletPaperRoll,Book,PETBottle,Pouch
well, AI systems have been designed for diagnosing ovarian
(Snowman), Toy Car, Toy Mammoth, Pill Bottle, Toy Frog,
cancer [43], which can be tackled via robotic surgery [44].
Wine Box, Lamp, Toy Box, Clock, Toy Horse, Gum Bottle,
Anxiety and depression (which are sometimes exacerbated
Toy Egg, Glasses, Banana, Sponge, Sunscreen, Toy Buzzer,
by loneliness) could be aided by cuddly companion robots
MedicineBox,PaperRoll.SomestandardLogitech/Plexgear
suchasParo[45].Tohelpwomenwiththeirperiods,arobot
webcams were hidden within five objects: Toilet Paper Roll,
could apply heat or massage to minimize cramping, and
ToyCar,PillBottle,WineBox,Lamp.Furthermore,asimple
remind about drinking or offer water to minimize bloating.
OpenCV program showing the video feed was run for each
To further help women with eating disorders, a robot could
camera to simulate recording.20
try to prevent binge eating (e.g., hide food or discourage
Robot Motion. Second, we recorded some footage of the
purchases), provide dietary advice, reinforce a positive body
drone, a Ryze Tello, flying in front of the objects. We
image, stop excessive exercise by positive distraction, or
explored various forms of control, e.g., manually controlled
cook with a person.
thedroneviatheRyzeTellosmartphoneapp,aswellasusing
To help women during pregnancy, a robot could perform
theEasyTellopythonlibrary21 toissuecommandsandobtain
duties like a midwife, checking baby position (upside down
video, and detecting ArUco markers that could be used to
ornot)andheartrate,etc.Forwomenexperiencingmorning
guide the robot or for distance estimation.
sickness, a robot could detect patterns to identify causes of
Hidden camera detection. Third, we explored how spy
ill feeling (e.g., if certain foods are a problem) and make
cameras could be detected using a thermal camera/RGB
healthy food. Various robots capable of making food exist,
camera. Since the cameras weighed too much (90g without
including a prototype we developed that checked how salty
battery, vs. 80g payload for the drone), for our initial explo-
or sweet its cooking was to ensure healthiness.19 As well,
ration, data were obtained with the camera placed on a desk
a robot could detect vomiting, and clean when needed. A
approximately 1.5m in front of the mock-up environment.
robot could also detect fainting and either catch the woman
Fig. 4 shows this basic process: Raw RGB and thermal
or call for help if needed. The robot could also find places
data were obtained using, respectively, a Sony IMX219 8-
for a woman to rest when walking, like benches in shadow,
megapixel sensor, and an inexpensive 80 x 60 FLIR camera
and fan or cool her.
capable of detecting heat in the range of 8–14 µm. After
3) Robots Helping with Other Day-to-Day Challenges:
calculating a mapping, the thermal camera was used to find
Regardingotherday-to-daychallenges,exoskeletonsorother
warm areas in view that might arise from a hidden camera.
Simplified thresholding was conducted to derive a mask.
17https://www.visualsweden.se/en/aktuella-projekt/ar-jag-normal/
18https://www.bristol.ac.uk/news/2023/october/new-robot-could-help-
diagnose-breast-cancer-early.html 20https://opencv.org/
19https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=6eqmtkOm-Tk 21https://pypi.org/project/easytello/(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e)
Fig.2. Sketches:(a)Nazar -Ahelpfulflying"eye"couldsense"evil"suchashiddencamerasinawoman’sroom,(b)Hero-Aroboticbarriercould
seek to ensure that people intending harm cannot enter a woman’s personal space, (c) Midwife - A helper robot can take care of pregnant women, (d)
Allo-Aroboticbabycarriagecantrytohelpmothersbytakingcareofrepetitivechildraisingtasks,(e)Equa-skeleton-Exoskeletonscouldcreateequal
conditions
Next, an algorithm was run to detect which objects might inal, medical, and day-to-day. From these challenges were
be responsible for the warm spots. The aim was to reduce born ideas for opportunities, of how designers could use
the area that needs to be searched and make it easier to robotstobetterwomen’slives.Fivescenarioswerevisualized
find the cameras. YOLO version 8s from Ultralytics was via sketches. Furthermore, the first sketch was implemented
run on the RGB image with the confidence parameter set to as a prototype, of a drone system that uses a thermal/RGB
0.1 to detect the locations of objects as a set of bounding camera to detect hidden cameras. A summary of this work
boxes.22 YOLO uses deep learning (a convolutional neural is also available via an online video.23
network) to detect objects, where the confidence threshold Regarding the simplified prototype intended to detect hid-
handles non-maximum suppression. Finally, bounding boxes dencameras,theresultof80%accuracy(IoU0.401)seemed
enclosing heat traces were selected as the output of the reasonable,giventhechallengingmock-upandthesimplified
system, representing objects potentially concealing cameras, approach. As a result of some simplified experimentation,
that a robot could either remove or show to a human. we observed that lowering the confidence parameter allows
As a result, 5/5 of the cameras’ heat signatures were YOLO to detect more bounding boxes, such that all five
clearly visible after thermal thresholding, resulting in five objects of interest are detected; a demerit is that reduc-
detected contours. Next, boundary boxes were detected for ing the confidence threshold results in many more objects
4/5(80%)oftheobjectsenclosinghiddencameras(although detected, which can result in overlapping bounding boxes
overall, only half, or 11, or the 22 objects were detected and increased complexity. Also, although the IoU score is
by YOLO). Finally, the agreement between the ground truth imperfect,webelievethisshouldnotbeadeal-breakersince
and system output regarding locations of objects concealing a robot or person is not limited to checking only the exact
hiddencameraswascalculated.TheaverageIntersectionover inside of each bounding box but can also check the vicinity,
Union(IoU)was0.401(min=0.0for theToyCarwhichwas as long as they have a rough estimate of where the camera
not detected as an object, max=0.881 for the Wine Box). might be.
Also, YOLO can be used not only to obtain bounding
V. DISCUSSION
boxes, but also to recognize objects. This could be useful
In the current paper, three main categories of challenges in various ways. For example, some natural heat sources
that disproportionately affect women were identified: crim- like ovens or people could be removed from consideration.
22https://www.ultralytics.com/yolo 23https://youtu.be/7slpfGD1sEUFig.3. Prototypeconcept:adronecouldcheckaroomforhiddencameras
(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Lamp
Wine Detected
Book Toy Frog Box IoU:0.881
PET Toy
PTo apile et r Bottle T Co ay r Mammoth BoP til tl l e Toy Box D Ioe Ut :e 0c .t 1e 7d 4 M IoUis :s e 0d .0! D Ioe Ut :e 0c .t 7e 5d 9 D Ioe Ut :e 0c .t 1e 9d 1
* Pouch * *
Toy
Paper Roll Toy Buzzer Sponge * Glasses * Horse
Clock
Toy Egg Gum
Medicine Box Sunscreen Banana Bottle
(e) (f)
Fig.4. ImageProcessing:(a-b)rawRGBandthermalimages,(c-d)intermediateoutputfromYOLOandthresholdonthermaltraces,(e-f)comparison
ofoverallgroundtruth–wherepurpleboxeswithredasterisksarethetarget,anddistractorobjectsarelabelledinothercolors–andthesystemoutput,with
groundtruthinblue,outputingreenFor others, such as lamps or computers, a model of where criminals could also potentially misuse robots to get others
suchdevicesnormallybecomewarmcouldbeusedtodetect in trouble (e.g., getting an accomplice wearing a mask to
anomalies caused by hidden cameras. As well, a label could trick the robot into thinking an innocent person committed a
bedirectlyprovidedtothehumaninregardtowhichobjects crime). Thus, one importantarea of future work will involve
are expected to contain hidden cameras. However, in our refining such scenarios, such that for example robots could
simplified exploration, object recognition appeared to have be used to facilitate legal processes by delivering new or
been challenging, possibly due to illumination, the cluttered better forms of evidence in courts.
mock-up environment, or camera limitations. As can be Anotherquestionregardswhowillcontrolwomen’sability
seen in Fig. 4, four objects were recognized correctly, two to protect themselves with robots. Although governments
teddy bears, a clock, and a book, whereas seven objects introduce various rules and regulations, they might not "set
were recognized incorrectly, as a sink, cup, bottle, donut, the pace", since criminals can ignore rules, and people often
cellphone, knife, and book. In such a case, a robot might be use apps, which have their own terms. While users cannot
abletoavoidhavingtorecognizeobjectsbyinsteadshowing be aware of all sets of terms for the apps they use, even if
peoplewherecamerasareexpectedtobelocatedonascreen rules of technology providers might be in conflict, it seems
(e.g., either a screen on the robot, or by sending a picture to like women themselves could set up the apps and robots
a person’s smartphone). they need for protection, e.g., detecting rapes in real-time
Along the side, one thing we observed during preparation with a drone. And, if such usage becomes widespread, it
was that hooking up all five cameras to an old desktop couldmotivatemodifyingexistingrestrictions.Therefore,we
resulted in crashes, possibly due to overwhelming the band- believe that prototyping solutions in this area could be a
width on the same USB bus, so for subsequent attempts useful showcase for what AI can do to help people.
several computers were used. Another observation was that In summary, we believe that further exploration of the
our drone, like other typical drones used by the community challengesandopportunitiesthatariseindesigningrobotsto
such as Crazyflie, would not able to detect objects on the help women could help us to realize a safer, more inclusive
ceiling due to its camera placements, as it only has two future for women, and thereby for all of society.
cameras, that look forward and below respectively.
REFERENCES
A. Limitations and Future Work
[1] H.Lewis,DifficultWomen:AHistoryofFeminismin11Fights(The
The current work is limited by various factors, including
SundayTimesBestseller). RandomHouse,2020.
a bias toward focusing on Sweden, given our location. As [2] C. Tannenbaum, R. P. Ellis, F. Eyssel, J. Zou, and L. Schiebinger,
well, our ideas come only from us, whereas future studies “Sexandgenderanalysisimprovesscienceandengineering,”Nature,
vol.575,no.7781,pp.137–146,2019.
shouldgatherideasfromalargerpooloffemaleparticipants,
[3] K. Winkle, E. Lagerstedt, I. Torre, and A. Offenwanger, “15 years
indifferentcountries.Ourideasarealsospeculative,andthus of (who) man robot interaction: Reviewing the h in human-robot
by intention largely ignore some current realities: e.g., that interaction,”ACMTransactionsonHuman-RobotInteraction,vol.12,
no.3,pp.1–28,2023.
robots are costly, difficult to maintain and fix, and limited
[4] D. Gallimore, J. B. Lyons, T. Vo, S. Mahoney, and K. T. Wynne,
in battery life and capabilities. For the prototype, results are “Trusting robocop: Gender-based effects on trust of an autonomous
limited by the controlled lab environment (e.g., detecting of robot,”FrontiersinPsychology,vol.10,p.482,2019.
[5] T. Kubes, “New materialist perspectives on sex robots. a feminist
expensive, upper range spy cameras from blurry images of
dystopia/utopia?”SocialSciences,vol.8,no.8,p.224,2019.
a moving drone might require more complex methods).
[6] K. Winkle, D. McMillan, M. Arnelid, K. Harrison, M. Balaam,
Furthermore, new technologies create not only opportuni- E. Johnson, and I. Leite, “Feminist human-robot interaction: Disen-
tangling power, principles and practice for better, more ethical hri,”
ties,butalsopotentiallynewcrimes.Robotdesignersshould
in Proceedings of the 2023 ACM/IEEE International Conference on
consider ahead of time how robots could be misused, and Human-RobotInteraction,2023,pp.72–82.
factor in such questions. For example, how to ensure that [7] K. Winkle and N. Mulvihill, “Anticipating the use of robots in
times or images recorded by a robot are accurate. Another domesticabuse:Atypologyofrobotfacilitatedabusetosupportrisk
assessmentandmitigationinhuman-robotinteraction,”inProceedings
question is if robots could inadvertently harm the women of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
that they seek to help. For example, wind from a drone’s Interaction,2024,pp.781–790.
propellers could disturb a crime scene, stirring up dust, [8] T. P. Cookson, L. Fuentes, J. M. Zulver, and A. Nelson, “Fit for
purpose? assessing the accessibility, theory of action, and account-
erasing evidence or introducing contamination. Or, robots
ability of digital technology interventions for sexual and gender-
could make it harder for women to escape or hide (e.g. if based violence prevention and response,” Gender, Technology and
a costly or large robot crashes, blocks an escape route, or Development,vol.27,no.2,pp.184–206,2023.
[9] M. Cooney, M. Shiomi, E. K. Duarte, and A. Vinel, “A broad view
betrays a woman’s location). As well, the concepts in the
onrobotself-defense:Rapidscopingreviewandculturalcomparison,”
developedsketchescouldalsobepotentiallymisusedtoharm Robotics,vol.12,no.2,p.43,2023.
women. For example, the camera detecting prototype could [10] M. Cooney and J. Bigun, “Pastvision+: Thermovisual inference of
recent medicine intake by detecting heated objects and cooled lips,”
be used by criminals to ensure that their cameras are well-
FrontiersinRoboticsandAI,vol.4,p.61,2017.
hiddenandwillnotbeeasilydetected.Or,arobotthatguards [11] M. Tironi, “Speculative prototyping, frictions and counter-
a woman’s personal space could be hacked to slip a sedative participation: A civic intervention with homeless individuals,”
DesignStudies,vol.59,pp.117–138,2018.
into her drink. Furthermore, (although it is estimated that
[12] S. Bartolotta, “Beyond suvin: Rethinking cognitive estrangement,”
false accusations, e.g., of rape, tend to be not so common) Between,vol.12,no.23,pp.49–68,2022.[13] C. for Disease Control, Prevention et al., “National intimate part- [33] Z.D.PetersonandC.L.Muehlenhard,“Wasitrape?thefunctionof
ner and sexual violence survey,” Recuperado de http://www. cdc. women’srapemythacceptanceanddefinitionsofsexinlabelingtheir
gov/violenceprevention/nisvs,2010. ownexperiences,”SexRoles,vol.51,pp.129–144,2004.
[14] E. Madriz, Nothing bad happens to good girls: Fear of crime in [34] F. Ichikawa, J. Chipchase, and R. Grignani, “Where’s the phone? a
women’slives. UnivofCaliforniaPress,2023. study of mobile phone location in public spaces,” in 2005 2nd Asia
[15] E. Lundgren, G. Heimer, J. Westerstrand, and A.-M. Kalliokoski, PacificConferenceonMobileTechnology,ApplicationsandSystems.
“Capturedqueen,men´sviolenceagainstwomenin,”2002. IEEE,2005,pp.1–8.
[16] S. P. Green, Criminalizing sex: A unified liberal theory. Oxford [35] P. Chesler, “Ban the burqa? the argument in favor,” Middle East
UniversityPress,2020. Quarterly,2010.
[36] J. L. Rondilla and P. R. Spickard, Is lighter better?: Skin-tone
[17] B.D.Teshome,“Spycameraepidemicinkorea:Asituationalanaly-
discriminationamongAsianAmericans. Rowman&Littlefield,2007.
sis,”AsianJournalofSociologicalResearch,pp.1–13,2019.
[37] M. Kardetoft, “The pink tax: An investigation of gender-based price
[18] N. Långström and M. C. Seto, “Exhibitionistic and voyeuristic be-
discriminationintheswedishmarketforpersonalhygieneproducts,”
havior in a swedish national population survey,” Archives of sexual
2022.
behavior,vol.35,pp.427–435,2006.
[38] S.Sami,S.R.X.Tan,B.Sun,andJ.Han,“Lapd:Hiddenspycamera
[19] D.Pratt-Eriksson,I.Bergbom,andE.D.Lyckhage,“Don’taskdon’t
detectionusingsmartphonetime-of-flightsensors,”inProceedingsof
tell: Battered women living in sweden encounter with healthcare
the 19th ACM Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems,
personnelandtheirexperienceofthecaregiven,”Internationaljournal
2021,pp.288–301.
ofqualitativestudiesonhealthandwell-being,vol.9,no.1,p.23166,
[39] Z.Yu,Z.Li,Y.Chang,S.Fong,J.Liu,andN.Zhang,“Heatdecam:
2014.
detectinghiddenspycamerasviathermalemissions,”inProceedings
[20] S.Pulkkinen,“"theswedishroadisnotours":Narratingthefinnish
ofthe2022ACMSIGSACConferenceonComputerandCommunica-
communityofvalueinparliamentarydebateonyouthcrimeandstreet
tionsSecurity,2022,pp.3107–3120.
gangs,”2024.
[40] R. Mathur, T. Chintala, and D. Rajeswari, “Identification of illicit
[21] S.Amaral,G.B.Dahl,V.Endl-Geyer,T.Hener,andH.Rainer,“De- activities&screamdetectionusingcomputervision&deeplearning,”
terrenceorbacklash?arrestsandthedynamicsofdomesticviolence,” in 2022 6th International Conference on Intelligent Computing and
NationalBureauofEconomicResearch,Tech.Rep.,2023. ControlSystems(ICICCS). IEEE,2022,pp.1243–1250.
[22] H. P. Hailes and L. A. Goodman, ““they’re out to take away your [41] K.Fernandes,J.S.Cardoso,andB.S.Astrup,“Adeeplearningap-
sanity”: A qualitative investigation of gaslighting in intimate partner proachfortheforensicevaluationofsexualassault,”PatternAnalysis
violence,”JournalofFamilyViolence,pp.1–14,2023. andApplications,vol.21,pp.629–640,2018.
[23] N. Bargai, G. Ben-Shakhar, and A. Y. Shalev, “Posttraumatic stress [42] L. C. Ebert, W. Ptacek, R. Breitbeck, M. Fürst, G. Kronreif, R. M.
disorder and depression in battered women: The mediating role of Martinez, M. Thali, and P. M. Flach, “Virtobot 2.0: the future of
learned helplessness,” Journal of Family Violence, vol. 22, pp. 267– automated surface documentation and ct-guided needle placement in
275,2007. forensicmedicine,”Forensicscience,medicine,andpathology,vol.10,
[24] R. Campbell, “The psychological impact of rape victims.” American pp.179–186,2014.
psychologist,vol.63,no.8,p.702,2008. [43] S.Mitchell,M.Nikolopoulos,A.El-Zarka,D.Al-Karawi,S.Al-Zaidi,
[25] D.P.BrydenandS.Lengnick,“Rapeinthecriminaljusticesystem,” A. Ghai, J. E. Gaughran, and A. Sayasneh, “Artificial intelligence
J.Crim.L.&Criminology,vol.87,p.1194,1996. in ultrasound diagnoses of ovarian cancer: A systematic review and
[26] L.C.Parker,TheJapanesepolicesystemtoday:Acomparativestudy. meta-analysis,” Cancers, vol. 16, no. 2, 2024. [Online]. Available:
MESharpe,2001. https://www.mdpi.com/2072-6694/16/2/422
[27] G. Lion, “Bringing untested rape kits out of storage and into the [44] V.Gallotta,C.Certelli,R.Oliva,A.Rosati,A.Federico,M.Loverro,
courtroom:encouragingthecreationofpublic-privatepartnershipsto C.Lodoli,N.Foschi,K.Lathouras,A.Fagottietal.,“Roboticsurgery
eliminatetherapekitbacklog,”HastingsLJ,vol.69,p.1009,2017. in ovarian cancer,” Best Practice & Research Clinical Obstetrics &
Gynaecology,p.102391,2023.
[28] D. Barbieri, A. G. Cazorla, L. THIL, B. Mollard, J. Ochmann, and
[45] N.Jøranson,I.Pedersen,A.M.M.Rokstad,andC.Ihlebaek,“Effects
V.Peciukonis,“Genderequalityindex2021:Health,”2021.
on symptoms of agitation and depression in persons with dementia
[29] E. Baca-Garcia, M. M. Perez-Rodriguez, K. M. Keyes, M. A.
participatinginrobot-assistedactivity:acluster-randomizedcontrolled
Oquendo,D.S.Hasin,B.F.Grant,andC.Blanco,“Suicidalideation
trial,”JournaloftheAmericanMedicalDirectorsAssociation,vol.16,
andsuicideattemptsintheunitedstates:1991–1992and2001–2002,”
no.10,pp.867–873,2015.
Molecularpsychiatry,vol.15,no.3,pp.250–259,2010.
[46] R. T. McClelland, “Robotic alloparenting: A new solution to an old
[30] G. Azcona, A. Bhatt, G. F. Fillo, Y. Min, H. Page, and S. You,
problem?”TheJournalofMindandBehavior,pp.71–98,2016.
“Progressonthesustainabledevelopmentgoals:Thegendersnapshot
2023,”2023.
[31] J. Stevens, E. G. Katz, and R. R. Huxley, “Associations between
gender, age and waist circumference,” European journal of clinical
nutrition,vol.64,no.1,pp.6–15,2010.
[32] L. E. Butera, “Height, power, and gender: Politicizing the measured
body,”Master’sthesis,BowlingGreenStateUniversity,2008.