Impact of Connected and Automated Vehicles on Transport
Injustices
Laura Martínez-Buelvas*, Andry Rakotonirainy, Deanna Grant-Smith, and Oscar Oviedo-
Trespalacios.
Abstract— Connected and automated vehicles (CAVs) are performance variability, a primary cause of road accidents
poised to transform the transport system. However, significant and fatalities, and alleviating traffic congestion, CAVs have
uncertainties remain about their impact, particularly regarding the potential to significantly improve the efficiency and
concerns that this advanced technology might exacerbate safety of land transport [1]. Notwithstanding this potential,
injustices, such as safety disparities for vulnerable road users one critical concern surrounding the deployment of CAVs is
(VRUs). Therefore, understanding the potential conflicts of this their potential to amplify persistent injustices within the
technology with societal values such as justice and safety is transport system, especially regarding their interactions with
crucial for responsible implementation. To date, no research vulnerable road users (VRUs). Pedestrians, lacking external
has focused on what safety and justice in transport mean in the
protective devices to absorb the physical impact of a crash,
context of CAV deployment and how the potential benefits of
face a heightened risk of becoming casualties in road
CAVs can be harnessed without exacerbating the existing
accidents [2]. This vulnerability is reflected in global road
vulnerabilities and injustices VRUs face. This paper addresses
trauma statistics, where pedestrians account for over 1.3
this gap by exploring car drivers’ and pedestrians’ perceptions
million annual fatalities, representing 26% of the total [3].
of safety and justice issues that CAVs might exacerbate using
Consequently, pressing questions emerge: what does safety
an existing theoretical framework. Employing a qualitative
and justice in transport mean in the context of CAV
approach, the study delves into the nuanced aspects of these
deployment, and how can the potential benefits of CAVs be
concepts. Interviews were conducted with 30 participants (40%
pedestrians) in Queensland, Australia, aged between 18 and 79. harnessed without exacerbating the existing vulnerabilities
These interviews were recorded, transcribed, organised, and and injustices faced by VRUs?
analysed using reflexive thematic analysis. Three main themes
Some progress has been made in understanding the
emerged from the participants’ discussions: (1) CAVs as a
unintended consequences of adopting CAVs, particularly
safety problem for VRUs, (2) CAVs as a justice problem for
concerning interactions with VRUs and managing social
VRUs, and (3) CAVs as an alignment with societal values
justice and sustainability impacts [4]. For example, [5]
problem. Participants emphasised the safety challenges CAVs
conducted a comparative analysis of the predictive capacities
pose for VRUs, highlighting the need for thorough evaluation
of the Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB), the Technology
and regulatory oversight. Concerns were also raised about
CAVs potentially marginalising vulnerable groups within Acceptance Model (TAM), and the Unified Theory of
society. Participants advocated for inclusive discussions and a Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) regarding
justice-oriented approach to designing a comprehensive pedestrians’ intentions to cross a road in front of a fully
transport system to address these concerns. autonomous vehicle (AV). The results revealed that
pedestrians’ confidence in their ability to cross in front of an
I. INTRODUCTION
AV and their perception of approval from significant others
Connected and Automated Vehicles (CAVs) are a played crucial roles in determining their intention to do so.
transformative class of technology, capable of Another study employed a statistical model known as a
communicating with each other and with traffic infrastructure random parameters beta hurdle model to explore appropriate
to navigate without human input. By reducing human fines for pedestrians who intentionally block fully automated
vehicles. Results indicated that age, gender, education level,
violations, attitudes, behaviours promoting social
*Laura Martínez-Buelvas is with Queensland University of Technology interactions, and perceived ease or difficulty of interacting
(QUT), Centre for Accident Research and Road Safety – Queensland
with fully automated vehicles would impact the likelihood
(CARRS-Q), QLD 4059, Australia; on leave from Universidad Tecnológica
and propensity of fines. The authors conclude that when
de Bolívar, Department of Industrial Engineering, Cartagena, Colombia
(corresponding author e-mail: formulating adoption strategies for fully automated vehicles
laurapatricia.martinezbuelvas@hdr.qut.edu.au – lmartinez@utb.edu.co) in urban transport, transport agencies, federal governments,
Andry Rakotonirainy PhD is with Queensland University of Technology and stakeholders must address factors beyond legislation to
(QUT), Centre for Accident Research and Road Safety – Queensland ensure safe integration to prevent conflicts between
(CARRS-Q), QLD 4059, Australia (e-mail: r.andry@qut.edu.au).
pedestrians and fully automated vehicles [6]. Another
Deanna Grant-Smith PhD is with Queensland University of Technology
research analysed equity implications in autonomous vehicle
(QUT), Faculty of Business & Law, School of Management, QLD 4000,
Australia (e-mail: deanna.grantsmith@qut.edu.au) (AV) policies, categorising them into access, multimodal
Oscar Oviedo-Trespalacios PhD is with Delft University of Technology, transportation, and community well-being. The authors
Faculty of Technology, Policy and Management, Section of Safety and advocated prioritising a shared AV model over the prevailing
Security Science, 2628 BX Delft, The Netherlands (e-mail:
private ownership, emphasising positive sustainability
O.OviedoTrespalacios@tudelft.nl)implications such as incorporating electric energy sources to that worries you about them and their implementation?
address racial disparities with AVs [7]. On the contrary, [8] Before delving into CAV-related topics, participants were
examined the potential inequities CAVs may create for queried about their familiarity with CAVs and whether they
VRUs. The study developed a conceptual framework that were aware of any potential future challenges posed by this
considers current research and adoption trajectories of CAVs technology. We provided a brief overview of what constitutes
that can result in social injustices such as maintaining current a CAV for those lacking knowledge.
road trauma risk for VRU, increase in pollution, traffic
Participants were interviewed face-to-face or via MS
injuries, road responsibility, and space loss. Grasping these
Teams for between 45 and 60 minutes. All interviews were
tensions is key to shedding light on issues regarding the
audio-recorded and transcribed verbatim. Regarding the
impact of technology, which may cause its rejection or result
sample size, our desired data quality level drove our sample
in unforeseen outcomes or intended and perverse
size selection following [11] proposing that semi-structured
consequences.
interviews are suitable for small sample sizes. Each
CAVs are expected to be deployed in the coming years participant received a $50 e-gift Australia card for
[9], and attention is now turning towards how CAVs should participating in the study. The Research Ethics Committee
be regulated to facilitate a responsible adoption of the approved this study (reference number 6593). Finally, data
technology, considering alignment with broader societal collection took place between February and April 2023.
issues such as safety, justice, and sustainability [10]. This
B. Participants
research addresses a gap in justice-sensitive strategies by
emphasising the importance of considering the potential Pedestrians or car drivers aged 18 years or older residing
impacts of CAVs and actively including the experiences of in the greater Brisbane area (Queensland, Australia) who
VRUs. For this reason, this paper evaluates the perceptions of were willing to participate in a face-to-face or MS Teams
pedestrians and car drivers about the safety and justice of interview were eligible for inclusion in this study. A total of
CAVs deployment through an existing theoretical framework 30 participants (18 car drivers and 12 pedestrians) agreed to
developed by [8]. We acknowledge that the impact of CAV participate. The car drivers had an age range of 20–79 years
deployment on justice in transport would remain uncertain if (M = 48.3, SD = 18.77), while the pedestrians were aged
VRUs are not taken into account. Our research seeks to between 18 and 61 years (M = 36.0, SD = 12.94). On
bridge this gap by engaging with road users in identifying average, car drivers reported driving approximately 4.67 days
critical concerns that policymakers and technology per week, while pedestrians reported walking an average of
developers must address. 6.5 days per week. All participants’ details are presented in
Table I.
II. METHOD
A. Procedure TABLE I. ‘PARTICIPANTS’ DETAILS
For this study, we employed a qualitative research Participant
Age (years) Gender Nationality
Code
method using semi-structured interviews with car drivers and
D1 61 M Australia
pedestrians to explore their awareness of issues that the
D2 79 M UK
deployment of CAVs into level 5 of automation may create
D3 60 F Australia
or exacerbate in the transport system. The decision to include D4 46 M Australia
pedestrians in the study is justified by their inherent D5 78 F Australia
vulnerability and frequent interactions with motorised D6 42 M China
vehicles. Additionally, incorporating car drivers into the D7 57 F Australia
D8 70 F Australia
research offers a comprehensive viewpoint, considering their
D9 25 NB Australia
paramount role in the transport system, the more logical
D10 37 F Australia
market segment, and the potential influence on policy. D11 26 F Canada
D12 53 F Australia
The conceptual framework “A transport justice approach
D13 20 M India
to integrating vulnerable road users with automated D14 58 F Australia
vehicles” developed by [8] was used to guide the interview D15 34 F Australia
schedule. It focuses on three dimensions of transport justice: D16 36 F Australia
equality, fairness, and access. The procedure was the D17 20 F Australia
D18 68 F Australia
following: we examined pedestrians’ and car drivers’
P1 61 F Australia
perceptions of safety and justice within the existing transport
P2 28 F Australia
infrastructure with questions such as, what does justice/safety
P3 29 F Iran
in transport mean for you and what needs to change in the P4 23 M Philippines
transport system to improve justice/safety? Additionally, we P5 53 M Australia
explored their awareness of any safety or justice issues that P6 54 F Australia
could arise or worsen with the introduction of CAVs. We P7 37 F Bangladesh
P8 18 F Nepal
presented examples of transport system inequities
P9 32 F Australia
experienced by VRUs developed in the conceptual
P10 38 F Argentina
framework design by [8]. Then we asked questions such as,
P11 24 M Australia
what do you think about the transport justice problems CAVs P12 35 M Australia
will bring in the future and, now that you are aware of some
of the problems associated with CAVs, is there anything elseC. Data analysis being made about them, about the benefits that they might
bring, and you know it’s not.” [P12]
Reflective thematic analysis, a theoretically adaptable
qualitative data interpretation method [12], was used to “…it just doesn’t seem real. There are too many things to
analyse the data collected from the interviews. The deductive, consider when you’re on the road. Is the automation
semantic, and critical realist/essential approach adopted going to be able to do all these moves that you have to
facilitated pattern identification in the dataset [13]. Following make? Stop, or do pedestrians have to?” [D18]
[8]’s conceptual framework, we analysed the potential
transport system inequities that VRUs could experience due CAV interaction with the current infrastructure was also
to the deployment of CAVs in the future. raised as a concern: “I think the technology and
infrastructure are years away from matching up to them
The co-authors engaged in discussions on coding, theme being an effective prospect.” [D15]
development, and interpretation of participant quotes,
resolving differences through dialogue until a consensus was Due to these concerns and uncertainties, additional
achieved. To maintain confidentiality, participant quotes are research on CAV adoption is required to facilitate in-depth
presented with pseudonyms, where “D” denotes driver and discussions and deliberations about their safety benefits and
“P” denotes pedestrian. challenges in relation to addressing injustices regarding
safety for VRUs:
III. RESULTS
“I think that there’d have to be a lot more research and
Three main themes synthesised participants’ responses evidence. There has to be proof that they’re safe. I’d have
concerning safety and justice problems that may arise from to be proof that they’re safer than current ones.” [D5]
wider CAV deployment. The themes were common among
“More research should be done because you should build
all participants, with no discernible variations based on age or
that trust between the person and the technology before
gender. Identified differences were reported.
you fully engage with it. So, for as long as there’s no data
A. CAVs as a safety problem for VRUs about this yet, then maybe I would have reservations
CAVs can potentially reduce crashes and significantly using this.” [P4]
enhance road safety by reducing human variability and
B. CAVs as a justice problem for VRUs
bolstering safety measures. However, both participants
Previous research has acknowledged the significant
concurred that safety remains a paramount concern in
advantages of CAVs, such as enhanced accessibility to
developing and implementing CAVs, as they present unique
transport services for non-drivers or people with disabilities
safety challenges for other road users, including VRUs such
[14,15]. Despite this, many participants expressed concerns
as pedestrians and cyclists. Consequently, the implementation
about the potential for CAVs to further exclude vulnerable
of CAVs requires comprehensive evaluation and regulatory
population groups from participating in mainstream society,
oversight. The consensus is that despite considerable
as many will not have access to or be able to afford high-end
technological advancements in automation, CAVs will be
infallible. Indeed, participants expressed scepticism about the technology:
current state of CAV safety interactions with VRUs and “I would like to see these cars be available for people
infrastructure and the need for more research to provide who need the most, which is those with disabilities, who
confidence in their widespread adoption. are vision impaired and so on. But it makes me think that
these cars would be available and affordable for the same
Drivers remarked,
people who can buy a Tesla car, you know? Rich people
“There’s no good evidence that there has been any who already have lots of money and who want to use it.”
improvement in safety or risk to people through injury.” [P6]
[D1]
Many participants recognised the systemic injustices in
“No automated system is foolproof, which is why I don’t the transport system and the need to ensure that all
think we’ll ever have fully automated cars that improve individuals, regardless of their background or identity, have
the safety of the VRUs.” [D5] equal access to the rights and benefits of CAV introduction.
Relatedly, a pedestrian stated that ensuring the safety of “It’s really important that social justice is absolutely
VRUs should be a fundamental element of all CAV design considered and accessibility for everyone. You know,
and planning for their broader use: coming back to what we talked about at the beginning,
everyone should be able to get from A to B in a safe,
“I guess, before we can progress with them [CAVs], we
pleasant, and accessible way.” [D7]
should focus on just pedestrians and other kinds of
vulnerable users’ safety before they progress much A greater understanding of the extent and characteristics
further because there are yet significant issues.” [P2] of the impact of CAVs on the transport system for all road
users remains needed. For example, one pedestrian expressed
Many participants raised concerns about the real-world
concern that reducing the space available for VRUs with the
functionality of CAVs and distrust in the technology:
introduction of CAVs will cause injustices related to
“It makes me think that it’s actually going to be even accessibility: “I don’t understand why they think that the
more challenging than I thought to make connected and congestion will be reduced by using these cars because these
automated vehicles work…there are a lot of assumptions cars will take the same space as the regular way vehicles. So,I don’t find it too logical because they prefer a separate lane, D. A thematic roadmap
like a separate spatial attention or special treatment. So, it
The analysis identified three key themes based on
will create more inequity.” [P7]
participants’ awareness of the justice problems and safety
Finally, many participants expressed their desire to challenges created or potentially exacerbated by the
improve accessibility and quality of life for all by sharing deployment of CAVs. These themes include CAVs as a
CAVs or improving public transport access: safety issue for VRUs, CAVs as a justice problem for VRUs,
and CAVs as an alignment with societal values problem.
“Free public transport and electrified public transport Concerns were voiced regarding CAVs potentially excluding
designed for everyone’s accessibility would be the vulnerable groups from society. To ensure the successful
number one priority. I think they need vehicles with lots of integration of CAVs into our transport system, participants
people sharing them.” [D7] advocated for centred on inclusive discussions and a justice-
oriented approach to comprehensive transport system design.
“I think the general aim should be how we can improve
everyone’s quality of life, especially for those who are the Fig 1. presents a thematic framework to visually represent
least benefited of all, like those who are disadvantaged.” these themes and their interrelationships with the conceptual
[P10] transport justice framework presented by [8]. Fig 1 maps
current or potential injustices experienced by VRUs that
C. CAVs as an alignment with societal values problem
CAVs would exacerbate in the future against the three
Participants voiced apprehensions that the current
dimensions of transport justice: equality, fairness, and access,
trajectory of CAV development and deployment is
following the conceptual framework developed by [8].
predominantly steered by industry and private sector agendas.
According to this framework and the findings of this study,
They fear these interests may need to align with the
CAVs pose safety risks to VRUs due to their preliminary
overarching objectives of sustainable development. This
technology development, increased crashes, shifting road
misalignment raises concerns about whether the benefits of
responsibilities, and the necessity for accessible warning
CAVs are tailored more towards commercial gain than public
systems to protect VRUs. Also, CAVs would create justice
welfare. These participants stress the importance of
issues for VRUs by reducing on-street space and potentially
considering the broader societal implications of CAVs. They
limiting access to services and inclusion for disabled and
argue that integrating these technologies into our transport
elderly individuals. Finally, CAVs pose societal value
systems should focus on technical and economic feasibility
challenges by affecting access, autonomy, and inclusion for
and how they can enhance the social fabric. This includes
disabled and elderly individuals, exacerbating congestion and
ensuring equitable access to transport, reducing
pollution, and altering road responsibilities between CAVs
environmental impact, and improving the overall quality of
and VRUs.
urban life.
IV. DISCUSSION
“I also think that, of course, companies will advocate for
this type of car, and they will always be saying good The present research found that CAVs are marked by
things, but because it is their business to sell you a car, significant scepticism regarding their purported safety
we should be careful with that. Governments, on the one benefits. This scepticism largely stems from concerns about
hand, want a society that thrives and that is modern, but their safety and real-world functionality. Arguably, this can
sometimes they forget about the most basic things: be explained by unethical industry practices that have misled
people.” [P9] the public concerning the automation capabilities of vehicles
in the market [16] and major safety-critical incidents with
“I think that part of the policy of creating, you know,
VRUs [17]. Furthermore, there’s a call for more rigorous
better cities is to ensure that many different groups and
research and evidence to validate the safety claims of CAVs.
ages and people of diversity are involved in the process,
So I think getting everybody else’s opinion and Participants underscored the need for careful
experiences is important.” [P6] consideration of social justice and equitable distribution of
technology benefits in implementing CAVs. These concerns
The design and implementation of CAVs should prioritise
somewhat align with previous research highlighting the
reducing the carbon footprint of the transport, thus
potential benefits of CAVs, such as improved access to
contributing to environmental sustainability. Additionally,
transport services for non-drivers or people with disabilities
deploying CAVs should be sensitive to the needs of all
[18-20]. Participants also highlighted the importance of social
population segments, including those who may need direct
justice in CAV deployment, stressing the need for equitable
access to these technologies. This could involve developing
distribution of resources and opportunities. There’s a
CAVs that enhance public transport systems or creating
recognition that the introduction of CAVs should not only
models that are affordable and accessible to a broader range
focus on technological advancement but also ensure that all
of users.
individuals, regardless of their socioeconomic background,
“Considering the environmental footprint price, I assume have equal access to the benefits brought by these vehicles.
CAV would be electric. I mean, if I get some statistics or
some data, then I could make a better option of judgment
to buy one.” [D13]
“I would like to be able to, you know, if these cars would
also help to reduce emissions.” [P6]Figure 1. A thematic roadmap contrasting the model presented by [8] and our findings
CAVs as a safety
problem for VRUs
Research about Crash
technology involvement
development of or traffic
CAVs injuries
Impact of
congestion
and air
Equality Fairness pollution in CAVs as a justice
Impact on VRUs
sharing road Justice problem for VRUs
responsibilities
between CAVS
and VRUs
Reduction of
on-street space
available for
VRUs
Access
Access to Access to services,
technology to autonomy, and CAVs as an alignment
protect or warn inclusion for disabled
VRUs and elderly people with societal values
problem
This indicates a need for policies prioritising community V. CONCLUSION
well-being and equitable access rather than focusing solely
This research emphasises the urgent requirement for
on supporting the introduction of a single technology like
policymakers and practitioners within the Connected and
CAVs.
Automated Vehicles (CAVs) industry to tackle the prevalent
Participants underscored the necessity of involving the doubts about CAVs’ safety advantages, especially concerning
community in discussions about the design and protecting vulnerable road users. The resolution to this doubt
implementation of CAVs to prevent potential misuse by the is to guarantee that the design and deployment of CAVs are
industry. They advocate for a proactive and future-centric both transparent and ethical, bolstered by thorough scientific
approach in developing and deploying CAVs, which involves research and evidence. Furthermore, it is critical to pivot
aligning these vehicles with anticipated long-term societal towards policies that propel technological progress,
changes. For instance, this could include designing CAVs to champion social justice, and ensure equitable accessibility
integrate with advanced smart city infrastructures, such as across all population segments, thereby integrating
traffic systems that adapt to varying road conditions in real technological progress with broader social objectives,
time. An explicit example would be if CAVs were equipped including sustainability.
with sensors and communication systems that interact with
Embracing a comprehensive strategy that melds safety
intelligent traffic lights to optimise traffic flow and reduce
research, ethical standards, and social equity with thoughtful
congestion.
strategic planning is pivotal. This strategy aims to guarantee
In addition, preparing for future environmental that the benefits derived from CAVs are shared fairly and
regulations is crucial, like ensuring CAVs are designed for have a beneficial impact on the well-being of communities.
easy upgrades to meet stricter emissions standards or to This study propels the conversation about CAVs forward by
incorporate renewable energy technologies. Anticipating integrating technological innovations with societal
urbanisation trends, CAVs could be designed with space- necessities, presenting a broad view that covers safety, ethical
saving features for densely populated areas, such as foldable considerations, and the enduring welfare of society. These
structures for compact parking or advanced safety systems to insights prove to be essential for policymakers, practitioners,
protect pedestrians in crowded urban settings. This forward- and developers advocating for a cohesive strategy that
thinking approach ensures that CAVs are technologically synchronises CAVs with societal aspirations.
advanced and remain relevant, beneficial, and sustainable
Lastly, a well-recognised limitation of this qualitative
within a dynamically changing societal context.
investigation, which is common to studies of this nature, is its
emphasis on depth over breadth. This methodological choiceinherently restricts the capacity to generalise the findings to parameters beta hurdle model with heterogeneity in the variance of the
broader populations. Furthermore, the potential for researcher beta distribution,” Analytic Methods in Accident Research, vol. 32, p.
100186, Dec. 2021. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.amar.2021.100186
subjectivity to influence both the analysis and interpretation
[7] K. Emory, F. Douma, and J. Cao, “Autonomous Vehicle Policies with
of data introduces an additional layer of complexity,
Equity Implications: Patterns And Gaps,” Transportation Research
underscoring the necessity of acknowledging these factors
Interdisciplinary Perspectives, vol. 13, no. 100521, pp. 1-8, 2022.
when evaluating the study’s contributions and implications. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2021.100521
This qualitative analysis raises significant questions about [8] L. Martínez-Buelvas, A. Rakotonirainy, D. Grant-Smith, and O.
developing and implementing technology, particularly Oviedo-Trespalacios, “A transport justice approach to integrating
making CAVs more attuned to societal needs. Readers with a vulnerable road users with Automated Vehicles,” Transportation
Research Part D: Transport and Environment, vol. 113, no. 103499,
technical background or those with a keen interest in the
pp. 1-11, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trd.2022.103499
technological aspects will find that the insights offered
[9] F. Blas, G. Giacobone, T. Massin, and F. Rodríguez Tourón, “Impacts
challenge existing paradigms and encourage re-evaluating of vehicle automation in public revenues and transport equity.
how CAV technologies can be designed and deployed to economic challenges and policy paths for Buenos Aires,” Research in
serve better and reflect societal priorities and values. This Transportation Business & Management, vol. 42, p. 100566, Mar.
perspective is crucial for ensuring that technological 2022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rtbm.2020.100566
[10] H. Strömberg et al., “A future without drivers? comparing users’,
advancements are socially responsible and aligned with the
urban planners’ and developers’ assumptions, hopes, and concerns
broader equity and sustainability goals.
about autonomous vehicles,” European Transport Research Review,
vol. 13, no. 1, Aug. 2021. https://doi.org/10.1186/s12544-021-00503-4
ACKNOWLEDGMENT [11] S. Q. Qu and J. Dumay, “The qualitative research interview,”
Qualitative Research in Accounting & Management, vol. 8, no. 3, pp.
This research is funded by iMOVE CRC and supported
238–264, 2011. https://doi.org/10.1108/11766091111162070
by the Cooperative Research Centres program, an Australian [12] V. Braun and V. Clarke, Thematic Analysis: A Practical Guide.
Government initiative [Project code: 5-006]. Laura London: SAGE Publications, 2022.
Martínez-Buelvas and Andry Rakotonirainy received [13] V. Braun and V. Clarke, “One size fits all? what counts as quality
support from the Motor Accident Insurance Commission practice in (reflexive) thematic analysis?,” Qualitative Research in
Psychology, vol. 18, no. 3, pp. 328–352, 2020.
(MAIC) Queensland. The funders had no role in the study
https://doi.org/10.1080/14780887.2020.1769238
design, data collection and analysis, publication decision, or
[14] K. Faber and D. van Lierop, “How will older adults use automated
manuscript preparation.
vehicles? assessing the role of AVs in overcoming perceived mobility
barriers,” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, vol.
REFERENCES 133, pp. 353–363, Mar. 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2020.01.022
[1] A. Faisal, T. Yigitcanlar, Md. Kamruzzaman, and G. Currie, [15] J. Yang and J. F. Coughlin, “In-vehicle technology for self-driving
“Understanding autonomous vehicles: A systematic literature review cars: Advantages and challenges for aging drivers,” International
on capability, impact, planning and policy,” Journal of Transport and Journal of Automotive Technology, vol. 15, no. 2, pp. 333–340, Mar.
Land Use, vol. 12, no. 1, pp. 45-72, 2019. [Online]. Available: 2014. https://doi.org/10.1007/s12239-014-0034-6
https://doi.org/10.5198/jtlu.2019.1405 [16] L. Dixon, “Autonowashing: The greenwashing of vehicle
[2] J. E. Rod, O. Oviedo-Trespalacios, T. Senserrick, and M. King, automation,” Transportation Research Interdisciplinary Perspectives,
“Older adult pedestrian trauma: A systematic review, meta-analysis, vol. 5, p. 100113, May 2020.
and grade assessment of injury health outcomes from an aggregate https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trip.2020.100113
study sample of 1 million pedestrians,” Accident Analysis &amp; [17] Y. Chu and P. Liu, “Human factor risks in driving automation
Prevention, vol. 152, no. 105970, pp. 1–18, 2021. crashes,” HCI in Mobility, Transport, and Automotive Systems, pp. 3–
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2021.105970 12, 2023. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-031-35678-0_1
[3] World Health Organization, “Advocates around the world #speakup [18] S. Sundararajan, M. Yousuf, M. Omay, A. Steinfeld, and J. M. Owens,
for #roadsafety,” World Health Organization, “Automated vehicles (AVS) for people with disabilities,” Lecture
https://www.who.int/news/item/05-05-2019-advocates-around-the- Notes in Mobility, pp. 85–90, Jun. 2018. https://doi.org/10.1007/978-
world-speakup-for-roadsafety (accessed Jan. 17, 2024). 3-319-94896-6_8
[4] X. Li, S.-A. Kaye, A. P. Afghari, and O. Oviedo-Trespalacios, [19] K. Faber and D. van Lierop, “How will older adults use automated
“Sharing roads with automated vehicles: A questionnaire investigation vehicles? assessing the role of AVs in overcoming perceived mobility
from drivers’, cyclists’ and pedestrians’ perspectives,” Accident barriers,” Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, vol.
Analysis & Prevention, vol. 188, p. 107093, 2023. 133, pp. 353–363, Mar. 2020.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.aap.2023.107093 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2020.01.022
[5] S.-A. Kaye, X. Li, O. Oviedo-Trespalacios, and A. Pooyan Afghari, [20] S. Sohrabi, H. Khreis, and D. Lord, “Impacts of autonomous vehicles
“Getting in the path of the robot: Pedestrians acceptance of crossing on Public Health: A Conceptual Model and policy recommendations,”
roads near fully automated vehicles,” Travel Behaviour and Society, Sustainable Cities and Society, vol. 63, p. 102457, Dec. 2020.
vol. 26, pp. 1–8, 2022. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tbs.2021.07.012 https://doi.org/10.1016/j.scs.2020.102457
[6] A. P. Afghari, E. Papadimitriou, X. Li, S.-A. Kaye, and O. Oviedo-
Trespalacios, “How much should a pedestrian be fined for
intentionally blocking a fully automated vehicle? A random