Cultural evolution in populations of
Large Language Models
J´er´emy Perez∗,1, Corentin L´eger1, Marcela Ovando-Tellez2, Chris Foulon2, Joan
Dussauld3, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer1, and Cl´ement Moulin-Frier1
1Flowers Team, INRIA, Bordeaux, France
2GIN-IMN, CNRS, Bordeaux, France
3Independent Researcher
Abstract
Research in cultural evolution aims at providing causal explanations for the change of culture
over time. Over the past decades, this field has generated an important body of knowledge, using
experimental, historical, and computational methods. While computational models have been very
successful at generating testable hypotheses about the effects of several factors, such as population
structure or transmission biases, some phenomena have so far been more complex to capture using
agent-based and formal models. This is in particular the case for the effect of the transformations
of social information induced by evolved cognitive mechanisms. We here propose that leveraging the
capacity of Large Language Models (LLMs) to mimic human behavior may be fruitful to address
this gap. On top of being an useful approximation of human cultural dynamics, multi-agents models
featuring generative agents are also important to study for their own sake. Indeed, as artificial
agents are bound to participate more and more to the evolution of culture, it is crucial to better
understand the dynamics of machine-generated cultural evolution. We here present a framework
for simulating cultural evolution in populations of LLMs, allowing the manipulation of variables
known to be important in cultural evolution, such as network structure, personality, and the way
social information is aggregated and transformed. The software we developed for conducting these
simulations is open-source and features an intuitive user-interface, which we hope will help to build
bridges between the fields of cultural evolution and generative artificial intelligence.
1 Introduction
depicting events considered foundational for a given
group), which have been found to possess many simi-
Mythsandstoriesarefoundineveryhumanculture lar elements, such as narratives featuring the collective
around the world. Research using phylogenetic meth- challenges faced in the history of the group [41]. This
ods has revealed that myths evolve in a way analogous raises questions regarding the factors that determine
to genes, progressively changing as some elements are the cultural success, the stability, and the directions of
discarded and new elements added as they are passed evolution of myths and stories.
through generations [44]. Some of these myths display
a surprising stability, being retained with minor mod- More generally, providing causal explanations to
ifications though generations. For example, the Baku the change of culture over time is the central aim of
dream-eater demons, mythological creatures made of research in cultural evolution. Contributions to this
various animal parts, have been part of the Japanese question are generally seen as falling into two schools
folklore since at least the 15th century [31]. Moreover, of thought: the first one, referred to as the Califor-
myths in distinct cultures seem to exhibit shared fea- nian school, adopts the framework of gene-culture co-
tures, possibly pointing to convergent evolution. This evolution [5] [7] [40] [18]. This school emphasizes how
is for example the case of historical myths (i.e., myths evolved social learning mechanisms and transmission
∗Correspondingauthor: jeremy.perez@inria.fr
1
4202
raM
31
]AM.sc[
1v28880.3042:viXraaa)) DDeeffiinnee aa nneettwwoorrkk ooff aaggeennttss bb)) DDeeffiinnee tthhee bbeehhaavviioorr ooff eeaacchh aaggeenntt cc)) EEvvoollvvee ssttoorriieess aaccrroossss sseevveerraall ggeenneerraattiioonnss ooff aaggeennttss
IInnppuutt pprroommpptt ........
LLLLM
M
 NNeeww ssttoorryy ........
eegg MMiissttrraall--77BB ........
........
Other generations
........
PPeerrssoonnaalliittyy
First generation ee..gg ““YYoouu aarree aa vveerryy ccrreeaattiivvee ppeerrssoonn””
PPeerrssoonnaalliittyy TTrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn ....
:: LLLLMM AAggeenntt ee..gg ““YYoouu aarree aa vveerryy ee..gg ““HHeerree iiss aa lliisstt ooff ssttoorriieess,, mmaakkee aa Generation 1 Generation 2 Generation N
:: NNeeiigghhbboorr lliinnkk ccrreeaattiivvee ppeerrssoonn”” nneeww oonnee bbyy ccoommbbiinniinngg tthheemm””
:: SSttoorriieess IInniittiiaalliizzaattiioonn LLiisstt ooff nneeiigghhbboorrss ssttoorriieess CCrr ppee eeaa rrtt ssee oo ss nntt aaoo lliirr ttii yyee ss aa nnww ddiitt hh EE nneevvoo iiggllvv hhee bb ooss rrtt ssoo rr aaiiee ccss cc oobb rryy dd iitt nnrraa ggnn ttss ooff oo yyrr oomm uuii rrnn ppgg ee tt rrhh ssoo ooss nnee aa lloo iittff yy yy aaoo nnuu ddrr
ee..gg ““TTeellll aa ssttoorryy”” iinniittiiaalliizzaattiioonn pprroommppttss ttrraannssffoorrmmaattiioonn pprroommppttss
Figure1: (a)LLMagentsareorganizedintonetworkswhereineachagentinteractswithneighboringagentsbyexchang-
ingstories. (b)Eachagentisassignedaspecificpersonalityandeitherinitializationinstructions(forthefirstgeneration)
ortransformationinstructions(afterthefirstgeneration),servingaspromptsforgeneratingnewstoriesfromtheirneigh-
bors’narratives. (c)Oncethenetworkstructureandagentcharacteristicsaredefined,wesimulatetheculturalevolution
oftextsacrossgenerationsofagents. Thesimulationbeginsbypromptingagentstoinitializestories,afterwhichweallow
the narratives to evolve dynamically through interactions within the agent network
biasesrespectivelycontributetothestabilityofculture of AI-generated cultural evolution. Indeed, although
and the direction of its evolution, and assume that the technology has long influenced cultural evolution, for
logic of natural selection applies to cultural traits as example with the invention of the printing press, some
it does for genes [40]. The second school, referred to authorshavearguedthattherecentadvancesingenera-
as the Parisian school, adopts the framework of Cul- tive algorithms are likely to result in an unprecedented
tural Attraction Theory (CAT) [43][36] [31]. Disagree- shift in cultural evolution. The fact that algorithms
ingonthecentralroleattributedtoselection,thisview are now participating in the creation of cultural traits
rather emphasizes how non-random transformations of sets us at the very beginning of an era of “machine
culturalinformationduringtransmissioneventscanex- culture”, defined as “culture mediated or generated by
plain how cultural traits progressively evolve toward machines” [6]. Therefore, studying the dynamics of
stableforms,whicharereferredtoasattractors. Taking machine-generated culture becomes highly important.
inspiration from population genetics, the Californian Applying paradigms from Cultural Attraction theory
schoolhassuccessfullyemployedcomputationalmodels to study LLMs has already began to generate precious
to generate predictions, for instance about the effect of insights about the bias exhibited by LLMs when trans-
groupsize[17],networkstructure[10][12],ortransmis- mitting linguistic content [2].
sion fidelity [27]. As for CAT, although computational Overall,itappearsthatthereismuchtogainbyus-
models have also been proposed [1] [30] [8], they were ingLLMsasagentstosimulatetheevolutionofculture.
mainly aimed at making conceptual points rather than So far, the fields of cultural evolution and generative
togeneratetestablepredictions,andattractiondynam- artificialintelligencehaveremainedquitedisconnected,
icshavethusbeenstudiedmainlythroughexperiments and facilitating exchanges between these fields seems
[21] [33] [32] [9][9] [14] and historical data analysis [22] promisingforgeneratingimportantfindings. Somepar-
[13]. allelworkshaveinvestigatedtheuseofLargeLanguage
This prevalence of experimental and historical Models as agents in multi-agent simulations, although
methods is likely attributable to the difficulty in cap- these studies were not specifically designed to model
turing factors of attraction—such as evolved psycho- cultural evolution [38][47].
logical mechanisms—that influence cultural evolution Here, we propose an open-source software for simu-
withinagent-basedorformalmodels. Here,wepropose lating the transmission and evolution of linguistic cul-
that this limitation of agent-based models can be over- ture in populations of Large Language models. This
comebyusinggenerativeartificialagents. Inparticular, software features an intuitive interface that allows to
using Large Language Models (LLMs) to simulate the manipulate many variables of interest, such as the
evolutionoflinguisticcultureappearsfruitful,aswecan structureofthesocialnetwork,thewaysinwhichdiffer-
expect those models to transform cultural information ent sources of information are aggregated, or the per-
in realistic ways. sonalities of the different agents. We also introduce
Ontopofallowingtogeneratehypothesesaboutthe several visualizations and measures that are useful for
causes of cultural change in humans societies, study- tracking the results of the simulations. We hope that
ing the evolution of culture in populations of genera- thistoolwillpavethewayformoreinteractionbetween
tive agents is also crucial to understand the dynamics the fields of cultural evolution and generative artificial
2(a) Similarity Matrix (b) Similarity graph (c) Words used at each generation
Figure 2: Visualization of the evolution of the texts generated along a chain of 50 agents (i.e. 50 generations of one
agent per generation). (a) The similarity matrix represents the semantic similarity between all stories generated. The
color of the cell at row i, column j corresponds to the similarity of the stories i and j, which here corresponds to the
stories generated at generation i and generation j. (b) The similarity graph is another way of visualizing the similarity
between all generated stories. Each node corresponds to one story, and the distance between node is proportional to the
semantic distance between corresponding stories. Stories generated at successive generations are linked by a wider edge
andarerassignedsimilarcolors. (c)Wealsovisualizethewordsusedateachgeneration. Wordsarealongthex-axis,and
generation along the y-axis. A dot at position (x,y) means that the word x was used in a story at generation y. A line
means that the corresponding word was used by two successive generations. We only display the first half of the figure
here. The complete figure can be found in the Fig. 15 of Appendix.
intelligence. Thissoftwareisopensourceandaccessible personality or have different personalities.
at this link.
2.2 Analysis
2 Methods
2.2.1 Similarity
2.1 Description of the model
Themainmetricweusetoanalyzeourresultsisthe
The model presented here simulates the cultural similarity between texts. To compute this metric, we
evolution of linguistic content in a population of large first use TfidfVectorizers from scikit-learn [39] to con-
language models (LLMs). Each agent can be seen as vert texts into meaningful numerical representations.
an independent instance of a LLM. The agent are ar- We then compute the cosine similarity [16] between
ranged according to a specified social network struc- all the texts generated, resulting in a similarity matrix
ture (Fig. 1.a). Network structures that can currently ofsize(N *N )X(N *N ),
agents generations agents generations
be generated with the software are detailed in the wherethecolorofthecell(i,j)representsthesimilarity
Appendix A. At the first generation, all agents are between story i and story j.
prompted with an Initialization Prompt. This prompt
From this similarity matrix, we extract more in-
describes what kind of content the agents should gen-
terpretable measures. The first one is the within-
erate. For example, one could chose “Tell me a story”
generation similarity, which captures how similar are
as the initialization prompt. All agents then output
the texts generated at a given generation with each
an answer by passing the initialization prompt to their
other. Thesecondoneisthesuccessivesimilarity,which
respectiveinstanceoftheLLM.Theagentsthentrans-
representstheaveragesimilaritybetweenthetextsgen-
mitstoriestotheirneighbors(accordingtothespecified
eratedatagivengenerationandthetextsgeneratedat
network structure): each agent receives a new prompt,
the previous generation. The last one is the similarity
whichistheconcatenationofaTransformationPrompt
withthefirstgeneration,whichistheaveragesimilarity
and the list of stories produced by its neighbors at
between the texts generated at a given generation and
the previous generation (Fig. 1.b). An example of a
the texts generated at the first generation.
Transformation Prompt could be “Here are some sto-
ries. Make up a new one by combining two of them”.
Agents can additionally be provided with a personal- 2.2.2 Visualization
ity, which is always added at the top of their prompt.
For example, a personality prompt could be “You are We also provide two visualization techniques that
veryimaginative”. Agentsmayeitherallhavethesame offer qualitative insights into the generated data.
3Word chains We extract the key words from each of an attractor. Fig. 2.c shows the chain-of-words rep-
text and represent their evolution though genera- resentation for this chain. This visualization allows to
tions. To extract keywords from texts, we tokenize notice that some words are very stable, being kept al-
the text into words, remove common stopwords and most throughout the chain, such as the word ”magic”,
non-alphanumeric tokens, calculate the frequency dis- while some words only last for the first few generations
tribution of the remaining words, and select the top before being lost, such as the word ”learn”.
keywords based on their frequency. This allows to vi-
sualize which words are the most frequent, the most
3.2 Effect of network structure
stable, or the most often reinvented.
We first manipulated the network structure by run-
ning 5 simulations of 10 agents for 10 generations, for
Similarity network We also represent the similar-
each network structure (Fig .3). We compared three
ity between generations using a graph network, where
network structures: a fully-connected network, a circle
each node represents a generation of texts. The posi-
network, and a caveman network with 2 cliques (see
tioning of nodes is determined by a layout algorithm
Fig .S1 of the Appendix). We only show one of the
providedbytheNetworkXlibrary[15], arrangingthem
five similarity matrices for each network structure, and
basedontheirsimilaritiesandinterconnections. Gener-
provide all matrices in Appendix C.2. Qualitatively,
ations with the highest similarity are positioned closer
thesimilaritymatricesrevealsdistinctpatternsforeach
together, and successive generations, represented by
network structure: while similarity appears to increase
similar colors, are linked by thicker edges. This ap-
homogeneouslyforthefully-connectednetwork,itdoes
proach provides an intuitive depiction of the evolution-
so in a clustered manner for the caveman and circle
ary dynamics of the generated content.
networks. Looking at the evolution of the similarity
measures, we observe that for all structures, stories get
moreandmoresimilartostoriesofthesamegeneration
3 Preliminary Results
andofthepreviousgeneration,indicatingaprogressive
homogenisationofthepopulation. Wealsoobservethat
The results presented in this paper are preliminary,
stories get more and more dissimlar with stories from
and are mainly meant to illustrate how one can ma-
the first generation. For all measures, these dynamics
nipulate with the different variables to see their effects
seem to happen at a faster rate for the fully-connected
on the measures described above. However, they do
structure than for the caveman network, itself faster
already offer some interesting insights.
thanthecirclenetwork. Theseresultsreplicatefindings
frompreviousworkinnetworkscienceandculturalevo-
3.1 Transmission chain lution,wheremodelsandexperimentsrevealthatmore
efficient networks (that is, networks with smaller aver-
We first illustrate the dynamics of the model us- agepathlength)leadtoquickerdiffusionofinformation
ing a linear transmission chain of 50 agents (i.e one and thus lower diversity [11] [12] [37] [26].
agent per generation for 50 generations). The initial-
ization and transmission prompts used are provided in
3.3 Effect of transformation prompt
the Section A of Appendix. The agents were not as-
signed any personality for this experiment (personality We then manipulated the transformation prompt
prompt is empty). Fig. 2.a shows the similarity ma- by running 5 simulations of 10 agents for 10 itera-
trix for this chain. We can notice that stories seem to tions (Fig. 4). We compared the effect of four differ-
evolve in a punctuated manner: there is an alternation enttransformationpromptsreferredtoas”Combine2”,
of phases where stories are transmitted with no modi- ”MinorChanges”,”Repeat”and”MaximizeDifference”.
fications, and phases where stories are modified. These The exact content of these prompts is provided in Ap-
dynamicsrecallpreviousobservationsfromexperiments pendix A.Thesedynamicsrevealthatcleardifferences
and modelling work in cultural evolution [24] [46] [35] can be observed, and those differences are aligned with
[34], where cultural information was found to evolve in what would be expected. For example, the Repeat
a sequence of bursts and stasis. The transition matrix prompt leads to high within- and between- generation
also suggests the existence of hierarchically structured similarity, while these metrics are low for the Maxi-
clusters of stories that are not identical but share some mizeDifference prompt. Apart for the MaximizeDiffer-
degreeofsimilarity. Fig.2.bshowsthegraphofsimilar- ence condition, all conditions show a gradual increase
ity of this chain, which allows to visualize how stories in the simlilarity with previous generation and within-
progressively evolve through a semantic space. Look- generation, indicating a progressive homogenisation of
ing atthis graph suggests thatstories got ”trapped” in the cultural content. Lastly, for all conditions but the
a specific part of the semantic space for a while (from Repeat condition, similarity with the initial generation
generation 14 to 41), possibly indicating the presence appears to decrease over time. This is in particular in-
4(a) (b) (c)
(d) (e) (f)
Figure 3: Effect of network structure : Cultural dynamics of a population of 10 agents over 10 generations for
three different types of network structures. (a), (b), (c) Similarity matrices for a fully-connected network, a caveman
network with 2 cliques, and a circle network. The index of a story is defined as the agent’s index (here between 0 and
10) + N * generation-index. For example, the story 3 belongs to the first generation, and story 13 to the second
agents
generation. The color of the cell at row i and column j represents the semantic similarity between stories i and j. Black
lines mark the separation between generations. (d) Evolution of the average similarity between stories produced at a
generation and stories at the generation just before.(e) Evolution of the average similarity between each pair of stories
produced at a given generation.(f) Evolution of the average similarity between stories produced a given generation and
stories produced at the first generation. Lines represent averages over 5 simulations, and the filled areas represent the
standard deviations.
teresting for the MaximizeDifference condition, as the condition: indeed, the NotCreative appears to exhibit
second generation was already instructed to maximize highersimilaritywiththefirstgeneration,betweensuc-
the difference with the first generation. cessive generations, and within generations compared
to the Creative condition. Also interesting is the fact
3.4 Effect of different personalities the the MixedPopulation condtion seems to be more
similar to the Creative condition than to the NotCre-
We then manipulated the personality assigned to ative condition, even though it contains Creative and
agents by running 5 simulations of 10 agents for 10 NotCreativeagentsinequalproportions. Thissuggests
generations (Fig. 5). We compared 4 different condi- that the cultural dynamics of an heterogeneous popu-
tions. In the first one, agents were not assigned any lation may not reflect the proportions of the different
personality. Inthesecondone, allagentswereassigned personalities it contains.
the personality ”Creative”. In the third one, all agents
were assigned the personality ”NotCreative”. In the
fourth one, half of the agents were assigned the per- 4 Discussion
sonality”Creative”andtheotherhalfwasassignedthe
personality ”NotCreative”. Details of the personality We introduced a framework for modelling cultural
prompts can be found in Appendix A. Although per- evolutioninpopulationofLLMsagents,alongwithsev-
forming more simulations would be necessary to draw eral metrics and visualizations that allows to extract
conclusions,itdoesseemthatdifferentpersonalitiesdif- qualitativeandquantitativeinsightsabouttheresulting
ferentiallyimpactculturaldynamics. Inparticular,our cultural dynamics. We presented how this framework
results suggest that agents in the Creative condition allowstomanipulateseveralvariablesknowntoimpact
generatemorevariationthanagentsintheNotCreative cultural evolution, namely the network structure, the
5(a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) (f) (g)
Figure 4: Effect of transmission prompts : Cultural dynamics of a population of 10 agents over 10 generations for
four different transmission prompts. (a), (b), (c), (d) Similarity matrices for the ”CombineTwo”, ”MinorChanges”,
”Repeat” and ”MaximizeDifference” transformation prompts. (e) Evolution of the average similarity between stories
produced at a generation and stories at the generation just before.(f) Evolution of the average similarity between each
pair of stories produced at a given generation.(g) Evolution of the average similarity between stories produced a given
generation and stories produced at the first generation. Lines represent averages over 5 simulations, and the filled areas
represent the standard deviations.
way of transforming previous social information, and ferent groups, all starting with the same story, evolve
agents’personalities. Althoughtheresultspresentedin over time.
thispaperarestillpreliminary,theyalreadyrevealsev- AlthoughLargeLanguagemodelsareausefulproxy
eral insights. First, the fact our simulations replicate of human behavior, some precautions must be taken
several findings from empirical and theoretical work when generalizing results of such simulation to human
in cultural evolution confirms that LLMs-based multi- behavior. First, because of the biases in their train-
agent models are an adequate tool for generating hy- ingset, LLMsaremainlyrepresentativeofwesterncul-
potheses about the dynamics of human culture. It also ture [3]. As such, they may not be able to capture
suggests that results from studies of human-generated the specific dynamics of other cultures. A potential
culturemayapplytomachine-generatedculture. More- waytoalleviatethatistousemodelsthatweretrained
over,wefoundthatmanipulatingpersonalityandsocial on more representative datasets, such as the BLOOM
information transformation appears to have significant model whose training data includes 46 different lan-
impact on the observed dynamics. This suggests that guages [49]. More generally, precisely evaluating to
using LLMs to study cultural evolution is promising, what extent current models miss some aspects of non-
as these variables have so far been difficult to model westernculturesisamajordirectionforfutureworkon
using traditional modelling tools. It also indicates that machine-generatedculturalevolution. Asecondlimita-
the dynamics of machine-generated culture will likely tion to keep in mind is that in some situations, LLMs
be influenced by the specific way in which generative maystruggletorole-playandimpersonatespecificchar-
agents are instructed to use pre-existing social infor- acters [25]. Better understanding to what extent they
mation, and which personality traits to emulate. take into account their assigned personality when cre-
These results were preliminary and should mainly atingculturalcontentisacrucialstepinordertoderive
be seen as proof of concept. Future work will involve hypotheses about human culture using such models.
performing more systematic and rigorous analyses of Another important difference between this model
the effect of the different variables on cultural evolu- and human cultural evolution is that the latter is
tion. It would also be interesting to compare how dif- grounded in a physical environment. As such, the suc-
6(a) (b) (c) (d)
(e) (f) (g)
Figure5: Effectofpersonalities: Culturaldynamicsofapopulationof10agentsover10generationsforfourdifferent
personnalities. (a), (b), (c), (d) Similarity matrices for ”NoPersonality”, ”Creative”, ”NotCreative” and Mixed popu-
lationof”Creative”and”NotCreative”. (e)Evolutionoftheaveragesimilaritybetweenstoriesproducedatageneration
andstoriesatthegenerationjustbefore.(f)Evolutionoftheaveragesimilaritybetweeneachpairofstoriesproducedata
givengeneration.(g)Evolutionoftheaveragesimilaritybetweenstoriesproducedagivengenerationandstoriesproduced
atthefirstgeneration. Linesrepresentaveragesover5simulations,andthefilledareasrepresentthestandarddeviations
cess of cultural traits not only depend on the cognitive Overall, we have sketched how using generative
mechanisms of the agents transmitting it, but also on agentstosimulateculturalevolutionmaybepromising,
their relationship with the environment of the agents both for generating hypotheses about human cultural
[45]. For example, beliefs in moralizing gods have been evolutionandforbetterunderstandingthedynamicsof
foundtobepredictedwithhighaccuracybytheecolog- machine-generated culture. We hope that making this
ical and historical context [4]. Extending this model to tool easy to use (see usage details in Appendix B) and
include interaction with a physical environment there- accessible to the scientific community will foster more
fore seems like a very promising direction. exchanges between the fields of cultural evolution and
generative artificial intelligence.
Finally, the current model assumes that personal-
ities are fixed and stable through time. However in
humans, there are feedback loops between the cultural Acknowledgements
traitsexpressedinagroupandthepersonalities,values
and preferences of its member [42] [19]. Including such
This research was partially funded by the French
interactionswouldbefruitfultomodelphenomenasuch
National Research Agency (ANR, project ECOCURL,
as opinion dynamics and polarization.
GrantANR-20-CE23-0006). Thisworkbenefittedfrom
Moregenerally,althoughweherefocusedonthedy- access to the Jean Zay (Idris) supercomputer associ-
namics of collective creation, this framework is suited ated with the Genci grant A0151011996. This research
to explore other questions related to collective behav- originatedasaprojectfromtheHackathonHack1Robo.
ior, including opinion dynamics, collective innovation We also thank Maxime Derex for participating in help-
and the evolution of language. ful discussions.
7References
[1] Alberto Acerbi, Mathieu Charbonneau, Helena Miton, and Thom Scott-Phillips. Culture without copying
or selection. Evolutionary Human Sciences, 3:e50, January 2021. Publisher: Cambridge University Press.
[2] Alberto Acerbi and Joseph M. Stubbersfield. Large language models show human-like content biases in
transmission chain experiments. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the United States of
America, 120(44):e2313790120, October 2023.
[3] Mohammad Atari, Mona J Xue, Peter S Park, Dami´an E Blasi, and Joseph Henrich. Which humans?, Sep
2023.
[4] Carlos A. Botero, Beth Gardner, Kathryn R. Kirby, Joseph Bulbulia, Michael C. Gavin, and Russell D.
Gray. The ecology of religious beliefs. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 111(47):16784–
16789, 2014.
[5] Robert Boyd and Peter J. Richerson. Culture and the Evolutionary Process. University of Chicago Press,
June 1988. Google-Books-ID: MBg4oBsCKU8C.
[6] Levin Brinkmann, Fabian Baumann, Jean-Fran¸cois Bonnefon, Maxime Derex, Thomas F. Mu¨ller, Anne-
MarieNussberger,AgnieszkaCzaplicka,AlbertoAcerbi,ThomasL.Griffiths,JosephHenrich,JoelZ.Leibo,
Richard McElreath, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Jonathan Stray, and Iyad Rahwan. Machine culture. Nature
Human Behaviour, 7(11):1855–1868, November 2023. Number: 11 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[7] Luigi Luca Cavalli-Sforza and Marcus W. Feldman. Cultural Transmission and Evolution: A Quantitative
Approach. Princeton University Press, May 1981. Google-Books-ID: FDfBDwAAQBAJ.
[8] NicolasClaidi`ere,ThomasC.Scott-Phillips,andDanSperber. HowDarwinianisculturalevolution? Philo-
sophicalTransactionsoftheRoyalSocietyB:BiologicalSciences,369(1642):20130368,May2014. Publisher:
Royal Society.
[9] NicolasClaidi`ere,KennySmith,SimonKirby,andJoelFagot.Culturalevolutionofsystematicallystructured
behaviour in a non-human primate. Proceedings. Biological sciences / The Royal Society, 281, December
2014.
[10] Nicole Creanza, Oren Kolodny, and Marcus W. Feldman. Greater than the sum of its parts? Mod-
elling population contact and interaction of cultural repertoires. Journal of The Royal Society Interface,
14(130):20170171, May 2017. Publisher: Royal Society.
[11] Maxime Derex and Robert Boyd. Partial connectivity increases cultural accumulation within groups. Pro-
ceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 113(11):2982–2987, March 2016. Publisher: Proceedings of
the National Academy of Sciences.
[12] MaximeDerex, CharlesPerreault, andRobertBoyd. Divideandconquer: intermediatelevelsofpopulation
fragmentationmaximizeculturalaccumulation.PhilosophicalTransactionsoftheRoyalSocietyB:Biological
Sciences, 373(1743):20170062, February 2018. Publisher: Royal Society.
[13] Edgar Dubourg and Nicolas Baumard. Why imaginary worlds? The psychological foundations and cultural
evolution of fictions with imaginary worlds. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, 45:e276, January 2022.
[14] Olga Feher, Haibin Wang, Sigal Saar, Partha P. Mitra, and Ofer Tchernichovski. De novo establishment of
wild-type song culture in the zebra finch. Nature, 459(7246):564–568, May 2009.
[15] AricHagberg,PieterSwart,andDanielSChult. Exploringnetworkstructure,dynamics,andfunctionusing
networkx. Technical report, Los Alamos National Lab.(LANL), Los Alamos, NM (United States), 2008.
[16] Jiawei Han, Micheline Kamber, and Jian Pei. 2 - Getting to Know Your Data. In Jiawei Han, Miche-
line Kamber, and Jian Pei, editors, Data Mining (Third Edition), The Morgan Kaufmann Series in Data
Management Systems, pages 39–82. Morgan Kaufmann, Boston, January 2012.
[17] Joseph Henrich. Demography and Cultural Evolution: How Adaptive Cultural Processes Can Produce
Maladaptive Losses—The Tasmanian Case. American Antiquity, 69(2):197–214, April 2004.
[18] Joseph Henrich. The Secret of Our Success: How Culture Is Driving Human Evolution, Domesticating Our
Species, and Making Us Smarter. In The Secret of Our Success. Princeton University Press, October 2015.
[19] E. Tory Higgins. Culture and Personality: Variability across Universal Motives as the
Missing Link. Social and Personality Psychology Compass, 2(2):608–634, 2008. eprint:
https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/pdf/10.1111/j.1751-9004.2007.00075.x.
8[20] Dan R. Johnson, James C. Kaufman, Brendan S. Baker, John D. Patterson, Baptiste Barbot, Adam E.
Green, Janet van Hell, Evan Kennedy, Grace F. Sullivan, Christa L. Taylor, Thomas Ward, and Roger E.
Beaty. Divergent semantic integration (DSI): Extracting creativity from narratives with distributional se-
mantic modeling. Behavior Research Methods, 55(7):3726–3759, October 2023.
[21] Michael L. Kalish, Thomas L. Griffiths, and Stephan Lewandowsky. Iterated learning: Intergenerational
knowledge transmission reveals inductive biases. Psychonomic Bulletin & Review, 14(2):288–294, 2007.
Place: US Publisher: Psychonomic Society.
[22] PiersKelly,JamesWinters,HelenaMiton,andOlivierMorin. Thepredictableevolutionoflettershapes: An
emergentscriptofWestAfricarecapitulateshistoricalchangeinwritingsystems. February2024. Publisher:
OSF.
[23] Yoed N Kenett. What can quantitative measures of semantic distance tell us about creativity? Current
Opinion in Behavioral Sciences, 27:11–16, June 2019.
[24] OrenKolodny,NicoleCreanza,andMarcusW.Feldman. Evolutioninleaps: Thepunctuatedaccumulation
and loss of cultural innovations. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences, 112(49):E6762–E6769,
December 2015. Publisher: Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences.
[25] Grgur Kovaˇc, R´emy Portelas, Masataka Sawayama, Peter Ford Dominey, and Pierre-Yves Oudeyer. Stick
to your role! stability of personal values expressed in large language models, 2024.
[26] David Lazer and Allan Friedman. The Network Structure of Exploration and Exploitation. Administrative
Science Quarterly, 52(4):667–694, December 2007. Publisher: SAGE Publications Inc.
[27] HannahM.LewisandKevinN.Laland.Transmissionfidelityisthekeytothebuild-upofcumulativeculture.
Philosophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 367(1599):2171–2180, August 2012.
[28] WingLian,BleysGoodson,GuanWang,EugenePentland,AustinCook,ChanvichetVong,and”Teknium”.
Mistralorca: Mistral-7bmodelinstruct-tunedonfilteredopenorcav1gpt-4dataset. https://huggingface.
co/Open-Orca/Mistral-7B-OpenOrca, 2023.
[29] Steven Loria. textblob documentation. Release 0.15, 2, 2018.
[30] Alex Mesoudi. Cultural selection and biased transformation: two dynamics of cultural evolution. Philo-
sophical Transactions of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 376, May 2021.
[31] Helena Miton. Cultural Attraction. February 2024. Publisher: OSF.
[32] Helena Miton, Nicolas Claidi`ere, and Hugo Mercier. Universal cognitive mechanisms explain the cultural
successofbloodletting. EvolutionandHumanBehavior,36(4):303–312,2015. Place: NetherlandsPublisher:
Elsevier Science.
[33] Helena Miton, Thomas Wolf, Cordula Vesper, Gu¨nther Knoblich, and Dan Sperber. Motor con-
straints influence cultural evolution of rhythm. Proceedings of the Royal Society B: Biological Sciences,
287(1937):20202001, October 2020. Publisher: Royal Society.
[34] Elena Miu, Ned Gulley, Kevin N. Laland, and Luke Rendell. Innovation and cumulative culture through
tweaks and leaps in online programming contests. Nature Communications, 9(1):2321, June 2018. Number:
1 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[35] JoelMokyr. PunctuatedEquilibriaandTechnologicalProgress. TheAmericanEconomicReview,80(2):350–
354, 1990. Publisher: American Economic Association.
[36] Olivier Morin. How Traditions Live and Die. Oxford University Press, 2016. Google-Books-ID: kSukC-
gAAQBAJ.
[37] Eleni Nisioti, Mateo Mahaut, Pierre-Yves Oudeyer, Ida Momennejad, and Cl´ement Moulin-Frier. So-
cial Network Structure Shapes Innovation: Experience-sharing in RL with SAPIENS, November 2022.
arXiv:2206.05060 [cs].
[38] Joon Sung Park, Joseph C. O’Brien, Carrie J. Cai, Meredith Ringel Morris, Percy Liang, and Michael S.
Bernstein. Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior, August 2023. arXiv:2304.03442
[cs].
[39] Fabian Pedregosa, Ga¨el Varoquaux, Alexandre Gramfort, Vincent Michel, Bertrand Thirion, Olivier Grisel,
Mathieu Blondel, Peter Prettenhofer, Ron Weiss, Vincent Dubourg, et al. Scikit-learn: Machine learning in
python. Journal of machine learning research, 12(Oct):2825–2830, 2011.
9[40] Peter J. Richerson and Robert Boyd. Not By Genes Alone: How Culture Transformed Human Evolution.
University of Chicago Press, June 2008.
[41] Amine Sijilmassi, Lou Safra, and Nicolas Baumard. ‘Our Roots Run Deep’: Historical Myths as Culturally
Evolved Technologies for Coalitional Recruitment. Behavioral and Brain Sciences, pages 1–44, January
2024. Publisher: Cambridge University Press.
[42] Paul E. Smaldino, Aaron Lukaszewski, Christopher von Rueden, and Michael Gurven. Niche diversity
can explain cross-cultural differences in personality structure. Nature Human Behaviour, 3(12):1276–1283,
December 2019. Number: 12 Publisher: Nature Publishing Group.
[43] Dan Sperber. Explaining Culture: A Naturalistic Approach. Oxford: Basil Blackwell, 1996.
[44] Jamshid J. Tehrani and Julien d’Huy. Phylogenetics Meets Folklore: Bioinformatics Approaches to the
Study of International Folktales. In Ralph Kenna, M´air´ın MacCarron, and P´adraig MacCarron, editors,
Maths Meets Myths: Quantitative Approaches to Ancient Narratives, Understanding Complex Systems,
pages 91–114. Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2017.
[45] Bill Thompson and Thomas L. Griffiths. Human biases limit cumulative innovation. Proceedings of the
Royal Society B: Biological Sciences, 288(1946):20202752, March 2021. Publisher: Royal Society.
[46] Sergi Valverde and Ricard V. Sol´e. Punctuated equilibrium in the large-scale evolution of programming
languages†. Journal of The Royal Society Interface,12(107):20150249,June2015. Publisher: RoyalSociety.
[47] Alexander Sasha Vezhnevets, John P. Agapiou, Avia Aharon, Ron Ziv, Jayd Matyas, Edgar A. Du´en˜ez-
Guzm´an, William A. Cunningham, Simon Osindero, Danny Karmon, and Joel Z. Leibo. Generative agent-
based modeling with actions grounded in physical, social, or digital space using Concordia, December 2023.
arXiv:2312.03664 [cs] version: 2.
[48] DuncanJ.Watts. Networks, Dynamics, andtheSmall-WorldPhenomenon. American Journal of Sociology,
105(2):493–527, September 1999.
[49] BigScienceWorkshop. BLOOM:A176B-ParameterOpen-AccessMultilingualLanguageModel, June2023.
arXiv:2211.05100 [cs].
10Appendix A Simulation details
LLM used The results presented in this paper were generated using MistralOrca [28], which is a version
of openAI’s Mistral-7B Model, instruct-tuned on Filtered OpenOrcaV1 GPT-4 Dataset. We used a quantized
GGUFv2 version, quantized using the method ”GGML-TYPE-Q4-K”.
Prompts used for the experiments For the chain of 50 agents (Section 3.1), the initialization prompt used
was”Imaginethatyouaretellingastorytoyourkid. Whatwouldthatstorybe? Justoutputthestory,nothing
else.” The transformation prompt used was ”Here is one or more stories you were told as a kid. It is now your
turn to tell a story at your kid. Tell that story. Write only one story. Do not output anything else.”.
For all other simulations, the initialization prompt was ”Tell me a story”. Except when manipulating the
transformation prompt, the transmission prompt for all simulations was CombineTwo. Here is the complete list
of transformation prompts used in our experiments :
• CombineTwo (default):
”You will receive stories. Pick the two stories you prefer, and create a story that is combination of
these two stories. Just output your story, don’t write anything else.”
• MinorChanges:
”You will receive a list of one or more stories. Create a new story by making some minor changes
to one of those stories. Just output one story, do not output anything else.”
• Repeat:
”You will receive stories. Select only one of these stories, and repeat it. Just output the story,
don’t write anything else.”
• MaximizeDifference:
”Youwillreceivestories. Createastorythatisasdifferentaspossiblefromthestoriesyoureceived.
Just output your story, nothing else.”
Except when manipulating the personality, the personality prompt was an empty string for all simulations.
When manipulating the personalities, the prompts were:
• Creative:
”For what follows, pretend that you are a very creative person.”
• NotCreative:
“For what follows, pretend that you are not a very creative person.”
Network structure Unless the network structure was the manipulated variable, the default structure was
a fully-connected network (Supplementary Fig .1.a). We also used a chain network (Supplementary Fig .1.d)
in Section 3.1, as well as circle (Supplementary Fig .1.b) and caveman (Supplementary Fig .1.d) networks in
Section 3.2.
11Supplementary Figure 1: Different types of networks used in our experiments with 10 agents. In a fully connected
network (a), every agent is directly connected to every other agent, enabling efficient dissemination of information. In
a circular network (b), agents are connected in a circular fashion, thereby forming a closed loop where stories flow
sequentially around the circle. The caveman network (c) consists of agents organized into cliques, with our example
showcasing two cliques of 5 agents each. In the chain network (d), agents are arranged linearly, and content generation
happens sequentially, meaning that agents only generate a story after receiving the story of the previous agent in the
chain.
Appendix B User Interface
Toallowresearcherstoeasilyuseourmodel,wedevelopedanintuitiveuserinterfacethatallowstomanipulate
the variables of interest and generate figures (see Supplementary Figure 2 ) . In the Simulation panel, users can
set these variables. Starting from the top of the panel, users can select how many agents they wish to simulate
(“Number of agents”), how many generations to simulate (“Number of generations”), and how many times to
repeatthesimulations(”Numberofseeds”). Userscanalsoselectwhichinitializationpromptandtransformation
prompttouse(“Initializationprompt”and“Transformationprompt”). Usersmayaddanewpromptsbyclicking
on the “Add prompt...” button. This opens a new window in which they can set the name and content of the
prompt. Users can also select which network structure to use for the simulation. When “sequence” is selected,
agents are arranged in a chain, and each agents waits to receive the output of the previous agent in the chain
beforegeneratingitsownoutput. Theotheroptionsare”Circle”,whichcreatesacyclicgraph,”Caveman”,which
creates a connected-caveman network [48] (in which case the user must also select the number of cliques), and a
”Fully-Connected”, which creates a fully-connected network. The structure of the chosen graph is displayed on
the right side of the window. Finally, users can also select the personalities to assign to the agents. A checkbox
allows to indicate whether all agents should have the same personality. If it is the case, users can select the
corresponding personality in the drop-down menu. Like for the prompts, users can add new personalities to the
list. If agents have different personalities, the users can assign each agent its personality in the corresponding
list. Ontopoftheseparameters,usersshouldgiveanametothesimulation,whichwillbethenameofthefolder
inwhichresultsaresaved. UsersshouldalsospecifytheURLtosendtherequesttoinordertogetanswersfrom
the LLM. We generated such an URL using a library from oogabooga (https://github.com/oobabooga/text-
generation-webui), and provide details of this procedure in the README file of our github repository. Once all
of these parameters have been set, users can run the simulations by clicking on ”Run”. Once the simulation has
terminated, figures will be generated and displayed in the Figures tab of the GUI, as well as being stored in the
result folder.
12Supplementary Figure 2: Screenshot of the Graphical User Interface
Appendix C Additional metrics and results
C.1 Additional metrics
Creativity To obtain the creativity of a text, we compute the average semantic distance between all pairs of
words in this text. This way of measuring creativity is supported by recent studies [23] [20].
Positivity and subjectivity We used TextBlob [29] to perform sentiment analysis on the content gener-
ated. In particular, we used their measures of positivity and subjectivity and looked at their evolution through
generations.
C.2 Additional results
The evolution of those additional metrics though generations is shown in Supplementary Figure 3, Supple-
mentary Figure 4 and Supplementary Figure 5
13(a) (b) (c)
Supplementary Figure 3: Evolution of additional metrics for four different network structures
(a) (b) (c)
Supplementary Figure 4: Evolution of additional metrics for four different transformation prompts: Combine2,
MinorChanges, Repeat, and MaximizeDifference
(a) (b) (c)
Supplementary Figure 5: Evolutionofadditionalmetricsfordifferentpersonalities: NoPersonality,Creative,NotCre-
ative, Mixed population of Creative and NotCreative
Supplementary Figure 6: All similarity Matrices for the Fully-Connected Network.
14Supplementary Figure 7: All similarity Matrices for the Caveman Network
Supplementary Figure 8: All similarity Matrices for the Circle Network
Supplementary Figure 9: All similarity Matrices for the MinorChanges transformation prompt
Supplementary Figure 10: All similarity Matrices for the Repeat Prompt
Supplementary Figure 11: All similarity Matrices for the MaximizeDifference transformation Prompt
15Supplementary Figure 12: All similarity Matrices for the Creative personality
Supplementary Figure 13: All similarity Matrices for the NotCreative personality
Supplementary Figure 14: All similarity Matrices for the Mixed Population
16Supplementary Figure 15: Complete rotated word chains plot of fig .2
17