A State-of-the-Art Review of Computational
Models for Analyzing Longitudinal Wearable
Sensor Data in Healthcare
Paula Lago
paula.lago@concordia.ca
Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, PERFORMCenter
Concordia University,Montreal, QC, Canada
August 1, 2024
Abstract
Wearabledevicesareincreasinglyusedastoolsforbiomedicalresearch,
asthecontinuousstreamofbehavioralandphysiologicaldatatheycollect
can provide insights about our health in everyday contexts. Long-term
tracking, defined in the timescale of months of year, can provide insights
of patterns and changes as indicators of health changes. These insights
can make medicine and healthcare more predictive, preventive,personal-
ized, and participative (The 4P’s). However, the challenges in modeling,
understanding and processing longitudinal data are a significant barrier
to their adoption in research studies and clinical settings. In this paper,
we review and discuss three models used to make sense of longitudinal
data: routines, rhythms and stability metrics. We present the challenges
associated with theprocessing and analysis of longitudinal wearable sen-
sor data, with a special focus on how to handle the different temporal
dynamics at various granularities. We then discuss current limitations
andidentifydirectionsforfuturework. Thisreviewisessentialtothead-
vancementofcomputationalmodelingandanalysisoflongitudinalsensor
datafor pervasivehealthcare.
1 Introduction
Modern phones and wearable sensors have emerged as indispensable tools for
capturingcontinuous,longitudinal,real-worldbehavioralandphysiologicaldata
for health and health research [66, 80, 55]. The unprecedented depth of infor-
mation,combinedwithadvancesinmachinelearning,opensthe doortofurther
ourunderstandingoftherelationshipbetweenhealthandbehavior,toautomat-
ically assess and predict health status, and to create personalized interventions
to improve health outcomes.
Onepracticalchallengetorealizethepotentialofresearchusingsuchsensors
is how to make sense of the large amounts of data collected over long periods.
As stated by Xu. et.al. [87], the information captured by these sensors, ”while
information-rich, is also information-vague”, requiring thoughtful analysis to
1
4202
luJ
13
]CH.sc[
1v56612.7042:viXraobtainvaluableinsights. Alargebodyofresearchhasfocusedonfindingfeatures
inthedatathatcorrelatewithaspecifichealthcondition,forexample,COVID-
19 [54], epilepsy [30], depression [17], schizophrenia [38], anxiety [73], or mild
cognitive disease [50] among others. While the results are encouraging, few
standards exist for the analysis. More often than not, the features are heavily
dependent on the device used and hard to generalize [1, 18], which makes it
difficult to translate researchfindings into policy or recommendations.
Longitudinaldatacansupportapplicationssuchasearlywarningsystemsby
identifyingchangesinbehavior[52]. Onecriticalaspectfortheseapplicationsis
findingtypicalpatternsinthedata. Thesetypicalpatternscanbeusedtosum-
marizethedata,findanomalies,andmeasurethestrengthofthe”typicality”or
”variability”inday-to-daylife. Researchhasshownassociationsofbehaviorreg-
ularitywithphysicalhealth[49,56],anddisruptionsofdailyroutinewerefound
to be associatedwith mental health disorders [46], thus providing a foundation
fortheneedtofindobjectivemeasuresofregularityanddisruptionusingsensor
data. For instance, activity patterns measured with passive sensors were found
tobeassociatedwithMildcognitivedisease[21]. However,thelackofstandards
to analyze sensor data has made results obtained so far non-generalizable and
difficult to replicate [69]. Consequently, there exists a pressing need to develop
theories,tools,andtechniquesthatnotonlymodelabaselineoftypicalpatterns
but also adeptly measure, interpret, and comprehend variations or changes to
such baseline.
This work provides a comprehensive review of existing methods to model
behavior and predict health using continuous, longitudinal sensor data. Two
complementary views have emerged in the literature to address this problem:
routinesand rhythms. Bothviewsunderscoretemporalaspectsofbehavioral
andphysiologicalregularity: routinesfocusonthefrequencyofevents;rhythms
emphasize temporal regularity and periodicity. Recently, stability metrics
havealso been proposedbasedonroutine or rhythms views. We highlighttheir
strengthsanddifferencesaswellasthecommonopenresearchchallengesahead.
Other reviews exist on the use of smartphones and wearable sensors in
healthcare. A part of these reviews focuses on the application areas and ev-
idence around the use of passive sensing for early diagnosis, management, or
prediction of disease [47]. Other focus on the technologies accelerating the rise
ofpassivesensinginhealthcare. Fewerreviewsfocusonthemodelingapproaches
forlongitudinalpatterns. Mohret.al.[55]focusesonmentalhealthapplications,
providing an overarching model of personal sensing, and reviewing the litera-
ture on using sensors to detect mental health conditions and relatedbehavioral
markers. ThereviewbyWittet.al.[80]describesalgorithmicapproachesusedto
generatefitness-andhealth-relatedindicatorsfromwearablesdata,allofwhich
focus on providing a current picture of the user instead of focusing on their
long-term patterns. They briefly review behavior change detection techniques
which focus on the analysis of longitudinal data.
Meyeret.al.[52]havereviewedtheimplicationsoflong-termtracking,clearly
differentiatingitfromshort-termtracking. Theirreviewfocusesonimplications
for the user collecting the self-track data. They define long-term ”in timescales
of years”. Here, we review existing models that may support the modeling of
such data for healthcare applications.
In this review, we focus on the modeling long-term patterns, their analysis,
quantification, and the main issues in making sense of the large amounts of
2data collected. We first provide a description of the rhythm (Section 2) and
routine (3) models and their evolutionovertime, and then provide anoverview
of common metrics used to quantify the regularity of patterns (Section 4). We
finalize the review with a discussion of open issues in both models (Section 5).
In an effort to unify the clinical and computational perspectives, this review
synthesizes the rhythmic and routine-based approaches to long-term pattern
modeling, as well as the growing focus on metrics. This review contributes to
the biomedical research by providing a comprehensive summary of the current
methods to model, analyse and process longitudinal wearable sensor data.
2 Rhythms
A rhythm is a cyclic pattern, repeated at regular temporal intervals. Human
behavior and physiology follow biological rhythms, the most common ones are
linkedto the day/nightcycle. These rhythms aregovernedby aninternalpace-
maker called the suprachiasmatic nucleus (SCN), an internal structure located
in the brain, and are affected by external factors like light, temperature, and
social factors, among others [59]. Research has found strong links between the
strengthand alignmentofthis centralclock with environmentalandbehavioral
cycles and our physical and mental well-being. For this reason, the characteri-
zation of the various behavioral and physiological rhythms from sensor data is
deemed as an important next step in understanding these rhythms in everyday
life conditions to design personalized diagnostics and interventions.
Longitudinalmeasuresofactivityandphysiologyobtainedwithpassivesens-
ing have been used to either model the SCN rhythm or rhythms of processes
such as activity, heart rate, or body temperature. While the latter may not
strongly correlate with the SCN rhythm, as they are affected by various other
factors,their characterizationcanstillprovideinformationabouthealthstatus.
Moreover, the study of multiple rhythms can shed light on how these rhythms
and their alignments affect our health. We now explain four rhythm models.
2.1 Template curves
Onesimplewayofmodelingtypicalrhythmsofthedataistomodela”template”
curve for the day. A template curve is created by averaging (or calculating the
median value) across all days for each time slot in the day (e.g., every minute,
hour). Activity curves [26] were proposed to model the probability of each
activityhappeningateachtimeslotwhenthemeasurementsarenotcontinuous
signals but rather, events.
These curves can be used for anomaly detection if values deviate more than
a certain amount from the template. The main issue is defining the time over
which to calculate the template. They have also been used to obtain deviation
from the template as a feature for classification purposes.
While calculating template curves is simple, one of the major drawbacks of
curves is the lack of context. A single template curve cannot accountfor differ-
ences due to day-to-day variations or monthly variations. Of course, template
curves could be created for each day of the week or every day of the year, as is
done with weather data, but it could lose representationalpower.
32.2 Cosine models
Rhythms are most commonly modeled as sinusoidal functions, characterized
by multiple parameters. The first parameter is its period. As such, circadian
rhythms are those with a 24-hour period ( the average circadian period in hu-
mansis24.2h),whileanultradian(infradian)rhythmisonewithaperiodofless
(more) than 24h [74]. While 24 hours is usually assumed for the period, due to
its relevance for the internal master clock, frequency analysis methods like the
Fourier Transform, wavelets, spectral analysis, and periodograms can be used
to extract personalized periods from the longitudinal sensor data. This period
analysis can help uncover individual variations, as well as various rhythms.
By modeling rhythms as a sinusoid, its amplitude, MESOR, and Phase de-
scribe the rhythm of behavioral or physiological signals. Phase measurements
areofparticularrelevanceastheyenablethedescriptionoftherelativetimingof
physiologicalrhythmswithenvironmentalandbehavioralcycles. Thesemetrics
are obtained by fitting the sensor data to a cosine wave of a predefined pe-
riodusing the leastsquaremethod— this is calledthe COSINORmethod [23].
Equation 1 shows a single component COSINOR, other models include addi-
tional components to consider, for instance, the effect of light in the rhythm.
Interested readers are referred to [36] for a complete discussion of circadian
rhythm models.
2π
Y(t)=M +Acos( +φ)+e(t) (1)
τ
While characterizing the rhythms of physiological and behavioral processes
is important, the importance of understanding the relation between multiple
rhythms should not be disregarded. Afsaneh et.al.[88] proposed a framework
thatcombinesperiodfindingwithCOSINORtoindependentlydescriberhythms
of various signals and then uses these descriptors to predict depression risk.
Runze et.al. [83] also models a cosine rhythm for each signal and finds that
rhyhtmic models are correlated with productivity. While these are preliminary
results in a specific population, they shows the potential of combining multiple
rhythms in the development of digital health services.
2.3 Models to predict SCN rhythm
Aspreviouslymentioned,onecommongoalofmodelingrhythmsthroughsensor
data is to model the SCN rhythm: predict its period, phase, and amplitude.
Thegoldstandardtomeasurethe SCNrhythmisbytakingmultiplesamplesof
melatonin,cortisol,orcorebodytemperatureunderhighlycontrolledconditions
like dim light or a constant routine protocol [29]. These procedures are costly
and invasive, so passive sensing provides a cost-effective and ecological way to
predict it.
TheCOSINORmethodhasbeenusedwithactigraphy(accelerometer-based)
and physiologicaldata to model the SCN rhythm with relative accuracyin am-
bulatory settings. To account for influences on the measurement other than
the circadianrhythm, variousmathematicalmodels of the clock havebeen pro-
posed [36].
In most cases, though, passive sensor data is used to predict the onset of
melatonin(timeofpeak),whichisagoldstandardmetricoftheSCNphase[29].
4Deeplearningandtraditionalmachinelearningtechniquesinvolvingsensormea-
surementsofactivity,skintemperature,heartrate,andotherphysiologicalpro-
cesses have been proposed for this purpose [76, 12]. While these methods are
promising, other studies have shown that the error could be higher in pop-
ulations who may benefit the most from precise metrics such as shift workers,
jet-laggedpeople,andpeoplewithsleepdisorders[82]. Novelmethodsstillneed
to be evaluated with more diverse and specific populations.
Characterizing the SCN rhythm is pivotal to further our understanding of
itsroleinhealthoutcomes,however,researchersalsoacknowledgethatdifferent
processes may exhibit different rhythms which need not have the same char-
acteristics as other markers such as the melatonin onset (DLMO). Their char-
acterization is useful for understanding underlying processes and might further
increaseourunderstandingofthe roleofthe alignmentofvariousrhythms with
health. The methods to analyze such rhythms are similar to those described
above,but models may consider the effects of confounder factors. For instance,
to analyze the circadian rhythm of heart rate, Bowman et.al.[10] first removes
the effects of activity, to uncover the underlying rhythm.
2.4 Rhythm Models excluding Cosine Regression
Since sensor data may not always follow a cosine waveform, non-parametric
metrics have also been used to describe the rhythmic properties of sensor data,
particularly activity data. These metrics are explained in Section 4. Non-
negativematrixfactorization(NMF) hasalsobeenproposedto discovertypical
daily rhythms [2] and multiday [13] rhythms without the need for a regression.
A dataset of the daily or multi-day sensor signals is created where each col-
umn represents an individual’s data, which can be daily, weekly, or monthly
data. NMF factorizes this dataset (a matrix) to find a small number of com-
mon patterns, such that each individual’s data can be represented as a linear
combination of the patterns. This method is also used for routine modeling
(Section 3) by creating a matrix of events.
3 Routines
One approachto modeling long-termpatterns is throughroutines. A routine is
generally thought of as a sequence or set of actions performed regularly. While
there is no agreed formal definition of a routine, the term is usually used to
describerecurringpatternsofdiscreteevents suchasdailylivingactivities,work
tasks, or visited locations. As such, two main dimensions encompass a routine:
co-occurring or sequences of events and their temporal recurrence. In contrast
torhythmsthatfocusontheperiodicityofsensormeasurements,routinesfocus
on the frequent repetition of events.
Interestincomputationallymodelingroutinesislongstanding. Theircompu-
tationalstudyfirstemergedasawaytosupporteverydaytasks: routinesenable
the prediction of the next event, which helps a system provide effective recom-
mendations, assistance, or information for that event. Understanding routines
fromsensordatahasbeenstudiedtoanalyzedailyliferoutines[34],familyrou-
tines[25,9],work-placeroutines[11,70,71],andtravelroutines[45,37]. Inthe
5contextofhealthcareapplications,routineshelpunderstandbehavioralpatterns
that can be associated with health outcomes either positively or negatively [4].
3.1 Models of routine
Routines are usually modeled as repetitive sequences of events. As such, to
discover routines from sensor data, it is first required to define and identify
events. What makes a sequence ”repetitive” is considered from multiple points
of view: the frequency of occurrence (frequentist approach), the likelihood of
occurrence (bayesian approach), and the periodicity of occurrence.
3.1.1 Defining events
In the contextof identifying routines fromsensor data, an eventcan be defined
as a significantoccurrence or activity that can be detected or inferred from the
data collected by sensors. It represents a specific action, behavior, or state of
the individual being monitored. An important characteristic of events is their
duration,thatis,theyarenotinstantaneouspointsintime,butratheranentity
withastartandendtime. Ingeneral,aneventcharacterizeswhatisbeingdone,
by whom, when, and where.
Events can vary widely depending on the context and the type of sensor
data being analyzed. For example, in the context of daily activities, events
couldincludeactionslikecooking,walking,driving,sleeping,orworkingout[20]
whileinthecontextoftravelroutines,eventscorrespondtolocationsvisited[37].
Commonly, an event is described by a set of sensor readings obtained during
a time window which may include changes in sensor readings, such as motion,
location, temperature, or other relevant parameters, which correspond to the
occurrence of the event and can be used to classify them [9].
Defining and identifying events can be a difficult task. Event definition de-
pends on the sensor technology used and the probable duration of events. In
somecases,eventsaredefineddirectlybythe sensorreadingsobtainedduringa
windowoftime. Insuchcases,thenumberofeventscanbeexplosive,andunsu-
pervisedlearningtechniquesareusedtogroupthemintoamoremanageableset
(seenextsubsection). Eventscanalsobeidentifiedbyalabel,requiringsuper-
vised learning to identify them. The activity recognition literature deals with
this problem and has been extensively reviewed elsewhere [43, 15, 77, 14, 28].
3.1.2 Routines as highly probable events
Initialconcepts ofroutine were basedondaily routine,that is, howthe dayun-
folds. Thebehaviorofaparticulardaycanbeexpressedasavectorb,describing
the eventthatoccurredateachparticulartime. This vectorcanbe categorical,
that is, each item bt identifies the event that occurred at time t as a category;
or binary,that is, the item b has the value of 1 if the eventj occurredat time
jt
t. A matrix of multiple days B =D×b describes the behavior over some time.
Fromthismatrix,routinescanbeextracted. Theconceptofeigen-behaviors,
representingthe eigenvectorsofthis matrix,wasusedby Eagleet.al.[31]to find
common behaviors in a day. An eigen-behavior represents an intrinsic behav-
ior pattern, eigenbehaviors, then, can be used to describe the overall routine
6of an individual as any particular day can be described as a linear combina-
tion of eigenbehaviors. While a predefined 24-hour period was assumed in this
work,differentbehaviorvectorswerefoundfordifferentsituationsshowingthat
“eigenbehaviors”describe both typical patterns and variations of them.
Similar to this approach,topic models, a technique ofnaturallanguagepro-
cessing to automatically discover topics in a document collection, were used to
find ”topics” of behaviors [41, 62]. In these models, an event is considered a
word, each day is a document and a set of days is a document collection. A
topic describes a group of behaviors that typically occur together in a day, and
each day can be described as a combination of topics.
One drawback of the previous methods is that they are based on individual
data, suffering potentially from a cold-start problem. Only when there is suffi-
cient data from a person, can we learn their routines and make inferences from
their behavior patterns. To overcome this drawback, a collaborative-filtering-
basedapproachwasproposedbyXu. etal[84],whichcombinespopulationdata
with personal data to find relevant behavioral features to infer depression.
Theideabehindthesetechniquesisthatthereisasetofbehaviorsoccurring
ataparticulartimewithinpredefineddurationbins thatoccurrepeatedly. While
a particular day exhibits a different combination of these typical patterns, the
emergingpatternsdescribetheroutinesofapersonandcanbeusedtorepresent
any particular day.
The problem with this view is the lack of sequence representation. Each
day is described as a “bag-of-events” with positional information. While this
representationcapturessomeofthesequentialcontext,itcannotcapturepartial
orders,such as events happening next to each other regardlessof the time. For
instance,“eigenbehaviors”canfindpatternssuchasalatewake-upleadingtoa
no-workday,itishardertofindsequencesofactivitiesthatcanhappentogether
at no particular time. For example, a routine might consist of gym and then
eating,butitcanoccuratdifferenttimesoftheday. Orifthereisasequenceof
office, gym, and then going home, always starting at 5 pm but having different
durations for each depending on traffic, day, and others, it might be hard to
discover due to the dependence on time and the predefined time bins.
3.1.3 Routines as highly probable sequences
Sequential models analyze data in the order of arrival, thus, capturing depen-
dencies among the events. Both probabilistic and frequentist approaches have
been used to model routines as sequences. From a frequentist perspective, rou-
tinesareeventsthatempiricallyoccurfrequentlywithinagiventimeframebased
on repeated observations, while from a Bayesian perspective, routines involve
incorporatingpriorbeliefsorknowledgeaboutthelikelihoodofeventsoccurring
and updating these beliefs with new evidence.
Frequent-sequential pattern mining and association rule mining [7, 34, 85]
algorithms work under the frequentist assumption to identify events occurring
repeatedly together in an event log. The extracted routine is then expressed
as rules [85], action maps [7], or as a grammar [44]. Frequent sequences can
represent typical sequences of events in the routine of a person but it is harder
to modelthe uncertaintyofmultiple possible sequences. Another approachwas
proposedto consider context-basedsequences[42], to modelfrequentsequences
7that depend on the context such as day of the week or the weather, indepen-
dently of the frequency of that context.
From a probabilistic perspective, Bayesian Networks, which include hidden
Markovmodels,havebeenusedtolearnandmodelthe sequentialdependencies
ofevents[45,33,16]. Thesenetworksmodelthetransitionprobabilitiesbetween
events, as well as the correlation between events and sensor readings. A com-
mon problem is defining the structure of the network to learn the parameters.
Banovicet.al.[9]proposedamodelbasedonreinforcementlearningtolearnthe
structure. The learned network of events describes the behavior of the person.
By considering the context, such as location or time, in the description of the
event, variations in behavior are modeled as well. However, the combinatorial
explosionofthenumberofeventsandtheneedtomanuallydescribethemmake
it a computationally expensive model.
Both models have been used extensively in research, their main strength
being the possibility of inspecting the routine and knowing exactly what is
the next event, making them appropriate for intervention design. Their other
strengthisthepossibilityofmodelingcontextualchanges. Thisisdoneeitherby
addingittotheeventdefinitionoraspartoftheminingprocessing. Insequential
patterns, modeling includes deciding the maximum length of the sequence and
whether gapsordifferentorderingscanbe included. These decisionsmayaffect
the final learned routine.
Deeplearningmodelshavealsobeenusedtomodellongitudinalsensordata.
For this, the events are defined by slices of data which can be a day of sensor
events. Due to their black-box nature, Deep learning models have mostly been
usedintaskstoassociatebehaviorwithhealthoutcomes. Recently,Xuet.al.[86]
proposeda1dConvolutionalnetworktodetectdepression,whichalsolearnsthe
continuity of behavior. This can help learn the behavioral patterns but with
the drawback of not being interpretable. While deep neural networks such as
LSTM and GRU have been used to model other sequential data, their use to
model routine from sensor data has been limited.
As mentioned before, models of routines are based on the definition and
identification of events. This includes multiple assumptions about the duration
of events, often left as predefined bins or windows, which may not accurately
representthedurationofallactivitiesleadingtoerrors,andabouttheaccuracy
of identification. The propagation of errors from the identification of events
to the modeling of routines can affect the usefulness of the model. While the
eventshavealsobeendefinedassensoreventcountsorstatisticsoverpredefined
windows of time, this can lead to a combinatorial explosion in the number of
possible states or require manual definition of thresholds to limit the possibili-
ties. This is still a major drawback for routine analysis.
4 Quantifying behavioral stability with longitu-
dinal sensor data
Both routines and rhythms model long-term sensor data, focusing on different
characteristicsofthe patterns (periodicity,frequency,sequentialdependencies).
Other approaches focus on quantifying the strength of repetitiveness without
modeling the specific patterns. A person with high strength (or stability) can
8bethoughtofashavingamoreregularorstrictroutinewhileapersonwithlower
strength will exhibit more variability in their day-to-day life. While these met-
ricscan’tdescribethepatterns,theycharacterizetherepetitivenessofbehavior.
The simplicity of a single metric makes metrics attractive to perform statisti-
cal analysis, as a tool for early screening, and because they can be more easily
interpretable than other models. For instance, less table and more fragmented
rhythms have been associated with depression, higher BMI and smoking [48].
Research focuses on finding the relation between metrics and physical, mental,
or cognitive health. These metrics can be classified as being uni-modal if they
consider a single sensor modality, or multi-modal if they consider multiple sen-
sormodalities atthe same time. A summaryof metrics is presentedinTable 1,
and they are discussed below.
4.1 Rhythm-based metrics
Rhythm-based metrics use a single sensor modality to obtain a measure of the
strength of the rhythmicity of behavior, that is, how similar the measurements
taken at the same over multiple days are. The interday stability, intraday vari-
ability, and relative amplitude (RA) metrics come from circadian rhythm re-
search,asnon-parametricmeasuresofthe strengthofthe circadianrhythmand
are most commonly calculated using activity counts from actigraphy devices.
They measure the strength, fragmentation, and amplitude of the rhythm, re-
spectively.
Theregularityandstabilityindexeshavebeenproposedto measurethe reg-
ularity from a variety of sensor modalities, but still consider only one modality
at a time. They focus on measuring the similarity of events happening at the
same time over multiple days. The regularity index measures how similar mea-
surementstakenatthesamehourovertwodifferentdaysare,whilethestability
index compares the normalizedcumulative distribution value at each hour over
two days and then offers a value for a period by comparing all days to each
other.
These metrics rely on having an aggregated measure, usually hourly, to
compare the value across multiple days. While the aggregation could be in
smaller segments, it is not clear how the aggregationmight affect the result.
4.2 Event based metrics
Instead of relying on the measurements directly, event-based metrics rely on
the detection of an event —i.e., an activity, a location— and then calculating
the regularity of occurrences of this event over some time. For instance, the
standarddeviationinstart/endtimeordurationoftheeventisameasureofhow
variable that event behavior is. The sleep regularity index focuses exclusively
on the regularity of sleep schedule by measuring if the individual is asleep at
thesametimesovertheperiodbeingexamined. Entropymeasurestheextentof
repetitionofevents,regardlessoftheirorder,consideringXasarandomvariable
representing the activities in a day. For a person with a more stable routine,
this random variable will have lower entropy, as the events are generated by a
more regular process. Entropy measure is chosen for event-based analysis as
theeventsareacategoricalvariable. Theflexibleregularityindex[79]measures
the edit distance between two days. By representing each event with a letter
9and considering the daily sequence of events as a character sequence, the edit
distance calculates
Metric Description Formula
Sensor value-based metrics
I Sn tt ar ba id lia tyy
[35]
A rhym thea msu ir se oo vf eh ro mw us lt ta ipb ll ee a dap ye sr ,so cn a’ ls
-
IS = n qP Pq h= n i=1 1( (x¯ xh i− −x¯ x¯)2 )2
culated from n samples of activity
levels x, aggregated hourly q hour-
bins. x¯ represents the average ac-
h
tivityduringhourh. ISscoresrange
from 0, indicative of a total lack of
rhythm, to 1, indicative of perfectly
stable rhythm
I Vn at re ir ad ba iy
l-
A actm ive ita ysu or re ho of wth ae ctf ir va ig tm ye len vt ea lti so hn ifo tsf IV = (n n−P 1)n i= P2( n ix =i 1− (x xi i− −1 x¯) )2 2
ity [35] between two consecutive time slots
calculatedfromnsamplesofactivity
levels x, aggregated hourly q hour-
bins. IV scores range of 0 to 2 with
highervaluesindicating higherfrag-
mentation
Rest-activity Measures the difference between a RA= M10−L5
M10+L5
Ampli- person’s daily activity (measured as
tude [81] themeanactivityleveloverthemost
active 10 consecutive hours (M10))
andnocturnalactivity(measuredas
the mean activity during the least
active 5 consecutive hours (L5))
Regularity Compares the uniformity of a per- RI a,b = PT t=1 xa t Txb t
Index [20, son’sschedule,comparinghourly(t)
79, 22] data from two days (a,b). Sensor
measurements (xt) are normalized
a
to (-0.5, 0.5)
Stability In- Measures the inverse of the median SI b(P)=1−median(D b(i,j)|i,j ∈P,i6=j
dex [38] across a period of multiple days P where D (d ,d )= 1 M |Cd1 −Cd2|
b 1 2 M Pi=1 b b
of the distances between the nor-
malized cumulative activity distri-
butions (Cd1) on twodifferent days.
b
It characterizes the degree to which
behavioral patterns varied across
the period. A higher index means
higher stability.
10Metric Description Formula
2π/24.5
psd(x)dx
Circadian Measures the strength with which a CR= R2π/23.5
2π/36
psd(x)dx
Rhythm [79] userfollowsa24-hourrhythminbe- R2π/12
haviors by calculating the ratio of
the energythatfallintothe 24±0.5
hperiodoverthetotalspectrumen-
ergy in the 24±12 h period. Here,
psd(x) denotes the power spectral
density at frequency bin x.
Event-based metrics
Standard Measuresthewithin-individualvari- s= 1 N (x −x)2
qN−1Pi=1 i
devia- ability inaderivedparameter(x)of
tion [78, 79] an event. For example, the start
time or duration of the event. A
higher value indicates more irregu-
lar behavior.
SRI =−100+ 200 ∗
Sleep reg- The probability of anindividual be-
M(N−1)
M N δ(s ,s )
ularity ing in the same state (s
i,j
= asleep Pj=1Pi=1 i,j i+1,j
index [58] orawake)atanytwo time points 24
hoursapart,averagedoverthenum-
ber of days being studied (M). SRI
valuesof0representarandomsleep
schedule and a score of 100 repre-
sentsaperiodicsleepschedule. N is
the number of time points in a day.
Flexible Edit-based distance to measure the
Regularity difference between two days by
Index [79] counting the number of operations
(insert, delete, substitute) to con-
vert one day’s events into the other
day’s events. Higher values indicate
more dissimilar days.
Entropy [37, Measures the repetition of isolated H(X)=− p(x)log p(x)
PxinE 2
65] events(i.e. travelevents,activities),
where E is the set of all possible
events. A value of zero indicates
no uncertainty (more stability) and
a value of 1 indicates all events are
equally possible
Multimodal metrics
11Metric Description Formula
H(X)=
E Rn at tr eo op fy
a Se-
M dee ra edsu sr ue bs seth qe uee nx ct ee sn ot
f
t eo venw th sic reh peo ar t- lim x→∞−
Pxn
1∈Enp n(xn 1)log 2pnpn (x(x
n
1n 1 −)
1)
quence [37] overtime. p denotesthejointprob-
n
abilitydistributionofasubsequence
of length n
Multiscale Measures the complexity of a time See reference.
Fuzzy En- series
tropy [60]
Table 1: Behavior stability/variability metrics
4.3 Multimodal metrics
Previous metrics measure the stability of behavior considering one measured
variable, but they can’t measure relations across various behavioral and phys-
iological measures such as sleep, steps, and heart rate. Amon et.al. [4] pro-
posedanapproachbasedonMultidimensionalRecurrenceQuantificationAnal-
ysis (MdRQA) to provide a metric of the stability of behavior from multiple
sensor signals. This method quantifies the interactions between multiple sig-
nals, thus offering a more holistic view of the repetition of patterns, which can
also be understood as contextualizing the signals and their regularity. Simi-
larly, the entropy rate [37] looks at the regularity of multiple events instead of
an isolated event by considering the sequence of events.
4.4 Metrics summary
Metrics are valuable because they provide a quantifiable marker whose correla-
tionwithahealthoutcomecanbemoreeasilymeasuredthanthewholedescrip-
tionoflongitudinaldata. Metricscanalsoprovidepersonalizedinsightsasthey
quantify the individual’s behavior over some time. Commonly, researchers use
metrics to evaluate their correlation with health conditions such as depression,
schizophrenia, or cognitive decline. The strength of that correlation measures
the usefulness of the metric.
As was discussed, most metrics rely on a single signal modality and a given
time frame, thereby restricting the analysis. It is common to calculate metrics
for all signalmodalities separately and to calculate them using different groups
of days. For instance, it is not uncommon to calculate the standard deviation
across all days, across weekdays and across weekends. A combination of these
metrics are usually used as input to a machine learning models to improve the
predictive power. Multimodal metrics can provide a more holistic or contextu-
alizedviewofthe stabilityorvariabilityofthe behavior. However,itis possible
that a single metric can hide some effects. For example, He-Yueya et.al. [38]
found differences in the meaning of stability. For some signals,greater stability
was desiredfor better outcomes but, for others, morevariability was associated
with better outcomes. An improved quantification of the relation between the
variability/stabilityofdifferentsignalscouldhelpimproveourunderstandingof
the influence of behavior in health.
125 Discussion
Having examined three approaches to analyzing longitudinal sensor data, we
now move on to discussing some open researchchallenges.
5.1 Choosing a model
The first key open question is how to choose a model for long-term sensor
data analysis. A key consideration is the goal of the patterns. Common uses
include (1) to find associationswith health outcomes,to which metrics have an
appeal due to their simplicity; (2) to provide assistance and predictions of the
next events to which routines may be more suited; and (3) to find change and
deviations, to which possibly all three models may help.
A combination of models is not uncommon, especially in conjunction with
machine learning and deep learning for all three tasks. For this, the following
open issues need to be solved as well.
5.2 Windows and window length
During the analysis of longitudinal sensor data, an important consideration is
the amount of time (window length) to analyze. It is important to recognize
two different types of windows, neither more important than the other: one
window to aggregate sensor data as features or events and another to analyze
the patterns in sensor data.
The first type of window, the event window, defines the length of time that
is used to recognizean event or a feature (such as the number of steps takenor
the averageheart rate)that will later be used to obtain patterns in the formof
routines, rhythm, or (ir)regularity metrics. This window is often defined in the
range of seconds, a few minutes, or one hour. Extensive reviews have lookedat
the impact of the size of this window, for example, in activity recognition [8,
39]. Automatic segmentation has also been studied for this problem, where the
windowsizeisautomaticallydeterminedbychangesinthedatadistribution[27].
The second type of window, the pattern window, considers how historical
data is usedto analyze the patterns, forinstance, 7 daysor1 month. Routines,
rhythm features, and metrics might change depending on this length. Very
little work has been done in the analysis of the impact of this length or how to
define it. Most commonly, multiple window lengths are evaluated to find the
one with the mostpredictive value for the problemathand [60,38]. In general,
shorter window lengths will have a narrow but current view of the person’s
patterns,whilelongerwindowswillhaveawiderviewbutitcouldbeinfluenced
by outdated patterns— the weight of history is heavy.
A lack of standards in the size of windows hinders the comparability of
results and efforts for data sharing. It is not uncommon to find datasets that
aggregate data in a too coarse way, making it harder for others to evaluate or
compare results that were obtained with smaller windows.
5.3 Baseline establishment and change analysis
Relatedtotheproblemofdeterminingthepatternwindowlengthistheissueof
changeanalysis. Ideally,whenanalyzinglongitudinaldata,oneisinterestednot
13onlyinthe patternsfoundindata butalsoinidentifying ifanypatternchanges
have occurred. It is, after all, changesthat may be more correlatedwith health
changes or health outcomes after an intervention [53, 19]. However, most of
the researchsofarfocusesonanalyzingthe currentbehavioralpatternsandthe
predictive power of these patterns for the health outcome being studied, and
there is less research on how to analyze changes in behavior across windows.
Routineanalysishasbeenusedtoidentify changesinroutineandanomalies
by comparing current behavior with the learned models [42, 32]. To analyze
changes in phase or amplitude of circadian rhythms over time, Bayesian spec-
tralanalysisanddetrendedfluctuationanalysishavebeenused[6]. Changesare
also detected statistically [51]. Some approaches based on distribution changes
evaluate whether behavior changed in two different windows of time by com-
paring the distribution of sensor data of one window to that of the other win-
dow[67,22]. TheworkbyCooket. al[22]determinesbehaviorchangeovertwo
time windows as a probability distance. By defining the average probability
that an activity occurs during a time interval (i.e. an hour of the day) over
the time window, it defines behavior as a probability distribution for each time
interval. It then calculates the distance between two time windows using the
KL divergence of the two distributions.
To quantify the change, [78] uses the slope of the data to quantify how
values are changing inside a given window, but it does not quantify if the
stability/rhythmicity is changing over various windows. Cook et.al. [22] use
a permutation-based test to determine the statistical significance of detected
changes.
The problem of detecting and quantifying behavior or rhythm change can
also be framed as a change point detection problem. While there are multiple
time series change point detection methods [3], these methods usually focus on
therawsensorvalues,whichcanbelessmeaningfulforwearablesensordata,as
the changes might be too granular or too fast. For instance, a changing heart
rate due to exercise. For longitudinal data, the relevant changes span weeks or
months of baseline pattern.
Other worksframe the problemas ananomaly detectionproblem[24, 89, 5,
61]. Anomaly detection algorithms analyze deviations from current patterns to
detectabnormalactivities,heartrate,orotherabnormalvalues,buttheydonot
focus onidentifying if the baseline patternsarechanging. Inother words,while
they detect a momentary deviation, they assume the overall pattern remains
constant.
Overalllongitudinal patternchange analysisremains elusive,due to the dif-
ficulties in obtaining enough data for the analysis, the difficulties in defining
time windows for the analysis, and the difficulties related to the evaluation of
any such approaches.
5.4 Model Evaluation
Evaluating how accurately the routine, rhythm, or behavioral stability of a
personis,isundoubtedly adifficulttask. Unlikeothertasks,suchassupervised
classification of activities, there is no ground truth data that can be used to
comparethemodel. Routineshavebeenevaluatedbylettingtheuserreviewthe
output and agree/disagree on it. However, this is still a subjective evaluation.
For rhythms, comparison with rhythm parameters of the melatonin or cortisol
14provides an error measure, but as was discussed, this can be misleading, as
different processes may have different rhythms.
Recently, the evaluation focus has shifted to predictive power, that is, how
wellthepatternsormetricscandetectorpredictahealthoutcome(hospitaliza-
tion, schizophrenia, depression, etc). These evaluations are important, as they
focus on the clinical importance instead of computationalmetrics, but they are
also elusive as they depend on the population in the sample, and have proven
difficult to generalize. Moreover, they are difficult to translate to other uses
of longitudinal pattern analysis, such as providing assistance with a task or
identifying abnormal patterns.
5.5 Data Heterogeneity and Data Quality
Relatedtotheevaluationandgeneralizationofresultsisthedata heterogene-
ityissue. Differentplatforms,vendors,formfactors,users,andsoftwarelibraries
result in significantdifferences in data [68]. These differences canresult in very
different pattern estimations, whether in routines or rhythms. While metrics
aredevelopedandhand-craftedtofindassociationswithhealthoutcomes,their
values can differ significantly due to the high heterogeneity, making it hard
to generalize across different domains (sensing platforms, population groups,
time) [75, 90].
For this reason,deep learning methods have been proposedas a way to find
more stable features in the sensor data to classify and predict health outcomes
that could have behavioral symptoms mainly with multi-task learning to learn
patterns in the different domains [40, 57, 64, 63]. However, the generalization
issue persists.
Asecondissuefordataqualityistheinevitabilityofmissingdata[72]. When
dataisbeingcollectedinnaturalsettings,missingdatamaycomeduetobattery
issues, non-wearing events, or due to platform restrictions [79].
Proposals to deal with missing data include interpolation techniques and
discarding data that contains missing data over a threshold percentage [88].
Therearenostandardssetforthisandthecorrectmanagementofmissingdata
is still an open research issue.
5.6 Context
Another issue in the current analysis methods is the lack of context in most of
them. Several contextual factors can affect routine, rhythms, and the different
metrics, including weekends, holidays, weather, or family visits. Not consid-
ering this can result in biased metrics, misunderstanding of the patterns, or a
lack of insights into what causes changes in stability. Some models of routine
consider contextual variations as a way to explain routine deviations and dif-
ferentiate them from changes in behavioral patterns [42]. Some metrics, such
as the regularity index, consider the day-to-day similarity, which may consider
differencesdue to day-of-weekchanges,butnotforothercontextualfactors. As
was mentioned, this is also considered in the calculation of other metrics, such
as the standard deviation, by filtering the set of days used as input. However,
efficient computation techniques to deal with multiple contextual variables, as
well as their possibly combinatorial explosion, are less often considered.
15Understanding the association with context might be critical for designing
interventions for health, and for providing more holistic insights, therefore, in-
cluding context in the modeling and analysis of behavioral and physiological
signals is critical.
5.7 Limitations of this study
Thisstudydoesnotadheretothemethodologyofasystematicliteraturereview,
and consequently, may be subject to a degree of bias in the selection of papers.
The myriad of terms and techniques employed in the field posed a significant
challenge to conducting a systematic review. Instead, the primary focus was
directed towards identifying and establishing commonalities and distinctions
among the various models, as well as their respective applications. The study
aimstoencompassawidearrayofliteraturetofurnishacomprehensiveoverview
of the models pertaining to long-term patterns.
6 Conclusion
In this state-of-the-art review, we explored computational models for making
sense of longitudinal wearable sensor data for healthcare applications. Our
examination of rhythms and routines revealed their distinct roles in capturing
temporal patterns. Additionally, we provide an overview of critical challenges
relatedtodataheterogeneity,quality,andtemporalgranularityfortheanalysis.
Both routines and rhythms are used to model typical recurring patterns.
While routines focus onthe definition of an event,rhythms focus more on peri-
odic patterns on the signal, overcoming the need for specific event recognition.
Bothmodelsdescribethedataandcanbeusedforpredictions(ofthenextevent
in the case of routines or the next peak in the case of rhythms). Nevertheless,
the evaluation of their accuracy and the results remains challenging as models
are often highly dependent on the sensors used. As a way to mitigate this,
researchers have focused on developing metrics focusing on the strength of the
routine or how typical any particular day can be.
Severalopenresearchchallengesexistincludingchoosingtherightmodelfor
data analysis, determining window lengths for analysis, and dealing with data
heterogeneityandquality. Thereisaneedforcontextinanalysisasasignificant
gap in current researchpertains to the exploration of the interrelationbetween
behavioralchangesandphysiologicalalterations. Futureresearchshouldexplore
the integration of wearable data with other health-related sources to create a
holistic view of individual well-being.
References
[1] Daniel A. Adler, Fei Wang, David C. Mohr, Deborah Estrin, Cecilia
Livesey, and Tanzeem Choudhury. A call for open data to develop mental
health digital biomarkers. BJPsych Open, 8, 3 2022.
[2] Talayeh Aledavood, Ilkka Kivim¨aki, Sune Lehmann, and Jari Sarama¨ki.
Quantifying daily rhythms with non-negative matrix factorization applied
to mobile phone data. Scientific Reports, 12(1):5544,Apr 2022.
16[3] Samaneh Aminikhanghahi and Diane J Cook. A survey of methods for
time series change point detection. Knowl. Inf. Syst., 51(2):339–367,May
2017.
[4] MaryJeanAmon, Stephen Mattingly, AaronNecaise,GloriaMark, Nitesh
Chawla, Anind Dey, and Sidney D’mello. Flexibility versus routineness in
multimodal health indicators: A sensor-basedlongitudinal in situ study of
information workers. ACM Trans. Comput. Healthcare, 3(3), jul 2022.
[5] Damla Arifoglu and Abdelhamid Bouchachia. Detection of abnormal be-
haviour for dementia sufferers using convolutionalneural networks. Artifi-
cial Intelligence in Medicine, 94:88–95,3 2019.
[6] AmenehAsgari-TarghiandElizabethB.Klerman. Mathematicalmodeling
of circadian rhythms. WIREs Systems Biology and Medicine, 11, 3 2019.
[7] AsierAztiria,JuanCarlosAugusto,RosaBasagoiti,AlbertoIzaguirre,and
DianeJ.Cook. Learningfrequentbehaviorsofthe usersinintelligentenvi-
ronments.IEEETransactionsonSystems,Man,andCybernetics: Systems,
43:1265–1278,11 2013.
[8] Oresti Banos, Juan-Manuel Galvez, Miguel Damas, Hector Pomares, and
IgnacioRojas. Windowsizeimpactinhumanactivityrecognition. Sensors
(Basel, Switzerland), 14:6474–99,1 2014.
[9] Nikola Banovic, Tofi Buzali, Fanny Chevalier, Jennifer Mankoff, and
Anind K. Dey. Modeling and understanding human routine behavior. In
Proceedings of the 2016 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing
Systems, pages 248–260.ACM, 5 2016.
[10] Clark Bowman, Yitong Huang, Olivia J Walch, Yu Fang, Elena Frank,
Jonathan Tyler, Caleb Mayer, Christopher Stockbridge, Cathy Goldstein,
Srijan Sen, and Daniel B Forger. A method for characterizingdaily physi-
ologyfromwidely usedwearables. Cell Rep. Methods, 1(4):100058,August
2021.
[11] Oliver Brdiczka and Victoria Bellotti. Identifying routine and telltale ac-
tivity patterns in knowledge work. In 2011 IEEE Fifth International Con-
ference on Semantic Computing, pages 95–101.IEEE, 9 2011.
[12] LindseyS.Brown,MelissaA.St.Hilaire,AndrewW.McHill, AndrewJ.K.
Phillips, Laura K. Barger, Akane Sano, Charles A. Czeisler, Francis J.
Doyle, and Elizabeth B. Klerman. A classification approach to estimat-
ing humancircadianphase under circadianalignmentfromactigraphyand
photometry data. Journal of Pineal Research, 71, 8 2021.
[13] EneaCeoliniandArkoGhosh. Commonmulti-dayrhythmsinsmartphone
behavior. npj Digital Medicine, 6(1):49, Mar 2023.
[14] Kaixuan Chen, Dalin Zhang, Lina Yao, Bin Guo, Zhiwen Yu, and Yunhao
Liu. Deep learning for sensor-based human activity recognition. ACM
Computing Surveys, 54:1–40,2022.
17[15] Liming Chen, Jesse Hoey, Chris D Nugent, Diane J Cook,and Zhiwen Yu.
Sensor-based activity recognition. IEEE Transactions on Systems, Man,
and Cybernetics, Part C (Applications and Reviews), 42:790–808,11 2012.
[16] Viorica Rozina Chifu, Cristina Bianca Pop, David Demjen, Radu Socaci,
Daniel Todea, Marcel Antal, Tudor Cioara, Ionut Anghel, and Claudia
Antal. Identifying and monitoring the daily routine of seniors living at
home. Sensors, 22:992,1 2022.
[17] Prerna Chikersal, Afsaneh Doryab, Michael Tumminia, Daniella K. Vil-
lalba,Janine M. Dutcher, XinwenLiu, Sheldon Cohen,Kasey G.Creswell,
Jennifer Mankoff, J. David Creswell, Mayank Goel, and Anind K. Dey.
Detecting depressionand predicting its onsetusing longitudinalsymptoms
capturedbypassivesensing: Amachinelearningapproachwithrobustfea-
ture selection. ACM Transactions on Computer-Human Interaction, 28:1–
41, 2021.
[18] Sylvia Cho, Ipek Ensari, Chunhua Weng, Michael G Kahn, and Karthik
Natarajan. Factors affecting the quality of person-generated wearable
device data and associated challenges: Rapid systematic review. JMIR
mHealth and uHealth, 9:e20738,3 2021.
[19] OliverY.Ch´en,FlorianLipsmeier,HuyPhan,FrankDondelinger,Andrew
Creagh,ChristianGossens,MichaelLindemann,andMaartendeVos. Per-
sonalized longitudinal assessment of multiple sclerosis using smartphones.
IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informatics, 27(7):3633–3644,
2023.
[20] Diane J. Cook and Maureen Schmitter-Edgecombe. Fusing ambient and
mobile sensor features into a behaviorome for predicting clinical health
scores. IEEE Access, 9:65033–65043,2021.
[21] DianeJ.Cook,MaureenSchmitter-Edgecombe,andPrafullaDawadi. Ana-
lyzing activitybehaviorand movementin a naturalisticenvironmentusing
smarthome techniques. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health Informat-
ics, 19:1882–1892,11 2015.
[22] Diane J. Cook, Miranda Strickland, and Maureen Schmitter-Edgecombe.
Detectingsmartwatch-basedbehaviorchangeinresponsetoamulti-domain
brainhealthintervention. ACMTrans.Comput.Healthcare,3(3),apr2022.
[23] Germaine Cornelissen. Cosinor-basedrhythmometry, 4 2014.
[24] Jessamyn Dahmen and Diane J. Cook. Indirectly supervised anomaly de-
tectionofclinically meaningfulhealtheventsfromsmarthome data. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 12, 3 2021.
[25] ScottDavidoff,JohnZimmerman,andAnindK.Dey. Howroutinelearners
cansupportfamilycoordination. InProceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
on Human Factors in Computing Systems,pages2461–2470.ACM,42010.
[26] Prafulla N. Dawadi, Diane J. Cook, and Maureen Schmitter-Edgecombe.
Modelingpatternsofactivities usingactivitycurves. Pervasive and Mobile
Computing, 28:51–68,2015.
18[27] ShohrehDeldari,DanielV.Smith,AminSadri,andFloraSalim. Espresso:
Entropyandshapeawaretime-seriessegmentationforprocessingheteroge-
neous sensor data. Proceedings of the ACM on Interactive, Mobile, Wear-
able and Ubiquitous Technologies, 4, 9 2020.
[28] Vincenzo Dentamaro, Vincenzo Gattulli, Donato Impedovo, and Fabio
Manca. Human activity recognition with smartphone-integrated sensors:
A survey. Expert Systems with Applications, 246:123143,7 2024.
[29] Derk Jan Dijk and Jeanne F. Duffy. Novel approaches for assessing circa-
dian rhythmicity in humans: A review, 10 2020.
[30] Elizabeth Donner, Orrin Devinsky, and Daniel Friedman. Wearable dig-
ital health technology for epilepsy. New England Journal of Medicine,
390(8):736–745,2024.
[31] NathanEagleandAlexSandyPentland. Eigenbehaviors: identifyingstruc-
tureinroutine. Behavioral EcologyandSociobiology, 63(7):1057–1066,May
2009.
[32] Samih Eisa and Adriano Moreira. A behaviour monitoring system (bms)
for ambient assisted living. Sensors (Switzerland), 17, 2017.
[33] Shirin Enshaeifar, Ahmed Zoha, Andreas Markides, Severin Skillman,
Sahr Thomas Acton, Tarek Elsaleh, Masoud Hassanpour, Alireza Ahra-
bian, Mark Kenny, Stuart Klein, Helen Rostill, Ramin Nilforooshan, and
Payam Barnaghi. Health management and pattern analysis of daily liv-
ing activities of people with dementia using in-home sensors and machine
learning techniques. PLoS ONE, 13, 5 2018.
[34] Jean eudes Ranvier. Routinesense : A mobile sensing framework for the
reconstruction of user routines. Mobiquitous, 2015.
[35] DorotheeFischer,ElizabethBKlerman,andAndrewJKPhillips. Measur-
ing sleep regularity: theoretical properties and practical usage of existing
metrics. Sleep, 44(10):zsab103,04 2021.
[36] DanielBForger. Biological Clocks, Rhythms, andOscillations: TheTheory
of Biological Timekeeping. MIT Press, 2017.
[37] Gabriel Goulet-Langlois, Haris N. Koutsopoulos, Zhan Zhao, and Jinhua
Zhao. Measuring regularity of individual travel patterns. IEEE Transac-
tions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 19:1583–1592,5 2018.
[38] Joy He-Yueya, Benjamin Buck, Andrew Campbell, Tanzeem Choudhury,
John M. Kane, Dror Ben-Zeev, and Tim Althoff. Assessing the relation-
ship between routine and schizophrenia symptoms with passively sensed
measures of behavioralstability. npj Schizophrenia, 6:35, 12 2020.
[39] Shruthi Kashinath Hiremath and Thomas Ploetz. On the role of con-
textlengthforfeatureextractionandsequencemodelinginhumanactivity
recognition. In 2021 International Symposium on Wearable Computers,
pages 13–17.ACM, 9 2021.
19[40] Zhiqing Hong, Zelong Li, Shuxin Zhong, Wenjun Lyu, Haotian Wang,
Yi Ding, Tian He, and Desheng Zhang. Crosshar: Generalizing cross-
datasethumanactivityrecognitionviahierarchicalself-supervisedpretrain-
ing. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 8(2), may
2024.
[41] TˆamHuynh,MarioFritz,andBerntSchiele. Discoveryofactivitypatterns
usingtopicmodels. InProceedings of the 10th International Conference on
Ubiquitous Computing, UbiComp ’08, page 10–19, New York, NY, USA,
2008.Association for Computing Machinery.
[42] Paula Lago, Claudia Roncancio, and Claudia Jim´enez-Guar´ın. Learning
and managing context enriched behavior patterns in smart homes. Future
Generation Computer Systems, 91:191–205,2 2019.
[43] OscarD.LaraandMiguelA.Labrador. Asurveyonhumanactivityrecog-
nitionusingwearablesensors. IEEE Communications Surveys & Tutorials,
15:1192–1209,2013.
[44] Siyu Li and Der-Horng Lee. Learning daily activity patterns with prob-
abilistic grammars. Transportation, 2015. A pattern is expressed as a
grammar ruleIf an observation corresponds to the grammar it is ”well”.
Context-freegrammar!!symbolscorrespondtoactivitytypeLatentvariables
as context features??
[45] Lin Liao, Donald J. Patterson, Dieter Fox, and Henry Kautz. Learning
and inferring transportation routines. Artificial Intelligence, 171:311–331,
4 2007.
[46] Huinan Liu, Tiffany Junchen Tao, Selina Kit Yi Chan, Jeremy Chi Him
Ma,AbbyYanTungLau,ErnestTsunFungYeung,StevanE.Hobfoll,and
Wai Kai Hou. Daily routine disruptions and psychiatric symptoms amid
covid-19: a systematic review and meta-analysis of data from 0.9 million
individuals in 32 countries. BMC Medicine, 22:49, 2 2024.
[47] LinLu,JiayaoZhang,YiXie,FeiGao,SongXu, XinghuoWu, andZhewei
Ye. Wearable health devices in health care: Narrative systematic review.
JMIR mHealth and uHealth, 8:e18907,11 2020.
[48] Annemarie I Luik, Lisette A Zuurbier, Albert Hofman, Eus J W
VanSomeren,andHenningTiemeier.Stabilityandfragmentationoftheac-
tivity rhythm across the sleep-wake cycle: the importance of age, lifestyle,
and mental health. Chronobiol. Int., 30(10):1223–1230,December 2013.
[49] JessicaR.Lunsford-Avery,Matthew M.Engelhard,AnnMarieNavar,and
Scott H. Kollins. Validation of the sleep regularity index in older adults
and associations with cardiometabolic risk. Scientific Reports, 8:14158, 9
2018.
[50] Maxime Lussier, Monica Lavoie, Sylvain Giroux, Charles Consel, Manon
Guay, J¨oel Macoir, Carol Hudon, Dominique Lorrain, Lise Talbot, Francis
Langlois,H´el`enePigot,andNathalieBier.Earlydetectionofmildcognitive
impairment with in-home monitoring sensor technologies using functional
20measures: A systematic review. IEEE Journal of Biomedical and Health
Informatics, 23:838–847,3 2019.
[51] JuhoMerilahti,PetteriViramo,andIlkkaKorhonen. Wearablemonitoring
ofphysicalfunctioninganddisabilitychanges,circadianrhythmsandsleep
patternsinnursinghomeresidents.IEEEJournalofBiomedical andHealth
Informatics, 20(3):856–864,2016.
[52] Jochen Meyer, Judy Kay, Daniel A. Epstein, Parisa Eslambolchilar, and
Lie Ming Tang. A life of data: Characteristics and challenges of very long
term self-tracking for health and wellness. ACM Trans. Comput. Health-
care, 1(2), mar 2020.
[53] Sidra Minhas, Aasia Khanum, Farhan Riaz, Atif Alvi, and Shoab Ahmed
Khan. Anonparametricapproachformildcognitiveimpairmenttoadcon-
versionprediction: Resultsonlongitudinaldata. IEEE Journalof Biomed-
ical and Health Informatics, 21(5):1403–1410,2017.
[54] TejaswiniMishra,MengWang,AhmedA.Metwally,GireeshK.Bogu,An-
drew W. Brooks, Amir Bahmani, Arash Alavi, Alessandra Celli, Emily
Higgs, Orit Dagan-Rosenfeld, Bethany Fay, Susan Kirkpatrick, Ryan Kel-
logg,MichelleGibson,TaoWang,ErikaM.Hunting,PetraMamic,ArielB.
Ganz,BenjaminRolnik,XiaoLi,andMichaelP.Snyder. Pre-symptomatic
detection of covid-19 from smartwatch data. Nature Biomedical Engineer-
ing, 4:1208–1220,11 2020.
[55] David C. Mohr, Mi Zhang, and Stephen M. Schueller. Personal sensing:
Understanding mental health using ubiquitous sensors and machine learn-
ing. Annual Review of Clinical Psychology, 13:23–47,2017.
[56] NatashaMorales-GhinagliaandJulioFernandez-Mendoza.Sleepvariability
and regularity as contributors to obesity and cardiometabolic health in
adolescence. Obesity, 31(3):597–614,2023.
[57] Liangying Peng, Ling Chen, Zhenan Ye, and Yi Zhang. Aroma: A deep
multi-task learning based simple and complex human activity recognition
methodusingwearablesensors. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiq-
uitous Technol. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol,
2, 2018.
[58] Andrew J.K. Phillips, William M. Clerx, Conor S. O’Brien, Akane Sano,
Laura K. Barger, Rosalind W. Picard, Steven W. Lockley, Elizabeth B.
Klerman, and Charles A. Czeisler. Irregular sleep/wake patterns are as-
sociated with poorer academic performance and delayed circadian and
sleep/wake timing. Scientific Reports, 7:3216, 12 2017.
[59] Kathryn J. Reid. Assessment of circadian rhythms, 8 2019.
[60] Erik Reinertsen, Maxim Osipov, Chengyu Liu, John M. Kane, Georgios
Petrides,andGariD.Clifford. Continuousassessmentofschizophreniaus-
ingheartrateandaccelerometerdata.PhysiologicalMeasurement,38:1456–
1471,6 2017.
21[61] DanieleRiboni,GabrieleCivitarese,andClaudioBettini. Analysisoflong-
term abnormal behaviors for early detection of cognitive decline. In 2016
IEEE International Conference on Pervasive Computing and Communica-
tion Workshops (PerCom Workshops), pages 1–6. IEEE, 3 2016.
[62] KristinRieping, Gwenn Englebienne,and Ben Kr¨ose. Behavioranalysisof
elderly using topic models. Pervasive and Mobile Computing, 15:181–199,
12 2014.
[63] Aaqib Saeed, Tanir Ozcelebi, and Johan Lukkien. Multi-task self-
supervised learning for human activity detection. Proc. ACM Interact.
Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 3(2), jun 2019.
[64] SSamyoun,MMIslam,TIqbal,andJStankovic.M3sense: Affect-agnostic
multitask representationlearningusing multimodalwearablesensors. Pro-
ceedingsoftheACMonInteractive,Mobile, WearableandUbiquitousTech-
nologies, 6, 2022. cited By 0.
[65] Keqin Shi, Zhen Chen, Weiqiang Sun, and Weisheng Hu. Measuring reg-
ularity of human physical activities with entropy models. Journal of Big
Data, 11:37,2 2024.
[66] MatthewSmuck,CharlesA.Odonkor,JonathanK.Wilt, NicolasSchmidt,
and Michael A. Swiernik. The emerging clinical role of wearables: factors
for successful implementation in healthcare. npj Digital Medicine, 4:45, 3
2021.
[67] Gina Sprint, Diane J. Cook, and Maureen Schmitter-Edgecombe. Unsu-
pervised Detection and Analysis of Changes in Everyday Physical Activity
Data, pages 97–122. Springer International Publishing, 2018.
[68] Allan Stisen, Henrik Blunck, Sourav Bhattacharya, Thor Siiger Prentow,
Mikkel Baun Kjærgaard, Anind Dey, Tobias Sonne, and Mads Møller
Jensen. Smart devices are different: Assessing and mitigating mobile sens-
ingheterogeneitiesforactivityrecognition.InProceedings ofthe13thACM
Conference on Embedded Networked Sensor Systems - SenSys ’15, pages
127–140.ACM Press, 2015.
[69] AaronStupple,DavidSingerman,andLeoAnthonyCeli. Thereproducibil-
ity crisis in the age of digital medicine. npj Digital Medicine, 2:2, 1 2019.
[70] Norman Makoto Su, Oliver Brdiczka, and Bo Begole. The routineness
of routines: Measuring rhythms of media interaction. Human–Computer
Interaction, 28:287–334,7 2013.
[71] VedantDasSwain,ManikantaD.Reddy,KariAnneNies,LouisTay,Mun-
mun De Choudhury, and Gregory D. Abowd. Birds of a feather clock to-
gether: Astudyofperson–organizationfitthroughlatentactivityroutines.
Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, 3, 11 2019.
[72] Brian L. Thomas, Lawrence B. Holder, and Diane J. Cook. Automated
cognitivehealthassessmentusingpartiallycompletetimeseriessensordata.
Methods of Information in Medicine, 61:99–110,1 2022.
22[73] JuliaTomasi,ClementC.Zai,GwynethZai,DeannaHerbert,MargaretA.
Richter, Ayeshah G. Mohiuddin, Arun K. Tiwari, and James L. Kennedy.
Investigatingtheassociationofanxietydisorderswithheartratevariability
measuredusingawearabledevice. Journalof AffectiveDisorders,351:569–
578, 4 2024.
[74] GilsonLuizVolpatoandEleonoraTrajano. Biologicalrhythms. Fish phys-
iology, 21:101–153,2005.
[75] Gideon Vos, Kelly Trinh, Zoltan Sarnyai, and Mostafa Rahimi Azghadi.
Generalizable machine learning for stress monitoring from wearable de-
vices: A systematic literature review. International Journal of Medical
Informatics, 173:105026,2023.
[76] Cheng Wan, Andrew W. McHill, Elizabeth B. Klerman, and Akane Sano.
Sensor-basedestimationof dim light melatonin onsetusing features of two
time scales. ACM Transactions on Computing for Healthcare, 2, 7 2021.
[77] Jindong Wang, Yiqiang Chen, Shuji Hao, Xiaohui Peng, and Lisha Hu.
Deep learning for sensor-based activity recognition: A survey. Pattern
Recognition Letters, 2019.
[78] Rui Wang, Weichen Wang, Alex daSilva, Jeremy F. Huckins, William M.
Kelley,ToddF.Heatherton,andAndrewT.Campbell.Trackingdepression
dynamics in college students using mobile phone and wearable sensing.
Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 2(1), mar 2018.
[79] Weichen Wang, Gabriella M. Harari, Rui Wang, Sandrine R. Mu¨ller,
Shayan Mirjafari, Kizito Masaba, and Andrew T. Campbell. Sensing be-
havioral change over time: Using within-person variability features from
mobile sensing to predict personality traits. Proceedings of the ACM on
Interactive, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 2:1–21,9 2018.
[80] Daniel R. Witt, Ryan A. Kellogg, Michael P. Snyder, and Jessilyn Dunn.
Windows into human health through wearables data analytics, 3 2019.
[81] W. Witting, I.H. Kwa, P. Eikelenboom, M. Mirmiran, and D.F. Swaab.
Alterations in the circadian rest-activity rhythm in aging and alzheimer’s
disease. Biological Psychiatry, 27(6):563–572,1990.
[82] CongyuWu, MeganMcMahon,HagenFritz, andDavidM.Schnyer. circa-
dianrhythmsarenotcapturedequal: Exploringcircadianmetricsextracted
by different computational methods from smartphone accelerometer and
gps sensors in daily life tracking. Digital Health, 8, 2022.
[83] Xinwen,Dutcher JanineM,Tumminia MichaelJ,VillalbaDaniella,Cohen
Sheldon,CreswellJohnD,CreswellKasey,MankoffJennifer,DeyAnindK,
DoryabAfsanehYanRunze, andLiu. Identifying links betweenproductiv-
ity and biobehavioral rhythms modeled from multimodal sensor streams:
Exploratory quantitative study. JMIR AI, 3:e47194,4 2024.
[84] Xuhai Xu, Prerna Chikersal, Janine M Dutcher, Yasaman S Sefidgar,
Woosuk Seo, Michael J Tumminia, Daniella K Villalba, Sheldon Cohen,
Kasey G Creswell, J David Creswell, Afsaneh Doryab, Paula S Nurius,
23EveRiskin, AnindKDey, andJennifer Mankoff. Leveragingcollaborative-
filtering for personalized behavior modeling: A case study of depression
detection among college students. Proc. ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable
Ubiquitous Technol., 5:1–27,2021.
[85] Xuhai Xu, J. David Creswell, Jennifer Mankoff, Anind K. Dey, Pre-
rna Chikersal, Afsaneh Doryab, Daniella K. Villalba, Janine M. Dutcher,
MichaelJ.Tumminia,TimAlthoff,SheldonCohen,andKaseyG.Creswell.
Leveraging routine behavior and contextually-filtered features for depres-
sion detection among college students. Proceedings of the ACM on Inter-
active, Mobile, Wearable and Ubiquitous Technologies, 3:1–33, 9 2019.
[86] Xuhai Xu, Xin Liu, Han Zhang, Weichen Wang, Subigya Nepal, Yasaman
Sefidgar, Woosuk Seo, Kevin S. Kuehn, Jeremy F. Huckins, Margaret E.
Morris, Paula S. Nurius, Eve A. Riskin, Shwetak Patel, Tim Althoff, An-
drew Campbell, Anind K. Dey, and Jennifer Mankoff. Globem: Cross-
dataset generalization of longitudinal human behavior modeling. Proc.
ACM Interact. Mob. Wearable Ubiquitous Technol., 6(4), jan 2023.
[87] Xuhai Xu, Jennifer Mankoff, and Anind K. Dey. Understanding practices
andneedsofresearchersinhumanstatemodelingbypassivemobilesensing.
CCF Transactions on Pervasive Computing and Interaction, 3:344–366,12
2021.
[88] Runze Yan,XinwenLiu, JanineDutcher,MichaelTumminia, DaniellaVil-
lalba, Sheldon Cohen, David Creswell, Kasey Creswell, Jennifer Mankoff,
Anind Dey, and Afsaneh Doryab. A computational framework for model-
ing biobehavioral rhythms from mobile and wearable data streams. ACM
Transactions on Intelligent Systems and Technology, 13:1–27,2022.
[89] Juan Ye, Graeme Stevenson, and Simon Dobson. Detecting abnormal
events on binary sensors in smart home environments. Pervasive and Mo-
bile Computing, 2015.
[90] Bing Zhai, Greg J Elder, and Alan Godfrey. Challenges and opportunities
ofdeep learningfor wearable-basedobjective sleep assessment. NPJ Digit.
Med., 7(1):85, April 2024.
24