Deep learning-based approach for tomato classification in
complex scenes
Mikael A. Mousse1,*, Bethel C. A. R. K. Atohoun2, and Cina Motamed3
1Institut Universitaire de Technologie, Université de Parakou, Parakou, Bénin
2Ecole Supérieure de Gestion d’Informatique et des Sciences, Cotonou, Bénin
3Université d’Orléans, Orléans, France
Email: mikael.mousse @univ-parakou.bjbj
*Correspo Manuscript received Month date, 2023; revised Month date, 2023; accepted Month date, 2023
nding author
Manuscript received Month date, 2023; revised Month date, 2023; accepted Month date, 2023
Abstract—Tracking ripening tomatoes is time consuming The third section shows the proposed approach. The fourth
and labor intensive. Artificial intelligence technologies section presents the experiment setup. In this section, we
combined with those of computer vision can help users describe the dataset and the experimentation environment.
optimize the process of monitoring the ripening status of
The fifth section discusses the performance of the proposed
plants. To this end, we have proposed a tomato ripening
system. Finally, we end the paper with a conclusion.
monitoring approach based on deep learning in complex
scenes. The objective is to detect mature tomatoes and harvest
them in a timely manner. The proposed approach is declined in II. RELATED WORKS
two parts. Firstly, the images of the scene are transmitted to
This work is focused on the third category of algorithm.
the pre-processing layer. This process allows the detection of
Zhu et al. [2] presented an automated multi-class
areas of interest (area of the image containing tomatoes). Then,
these images are used as input to the maturity detection layer. classification approach for measuring and evaluating the
This layer, based on a deep neural network learning algorithm, maturity of tomatoes through the study and classification of
classifies the tomato thumbnails provided to it in one of the the different stages of maturity of both optical parameters
following five categories: green, brittle, pink, pale red, mature and their combinations to classify the tomatoes into different
red. The experiments are based on images collected from the
ripeness grades. The specific objectives of their work are to :
internet gathered through searches using tomato state across
• Measure the optical absorption and scattering
diverse languages including English, German, French, and
Spanish. The experimental results of the maturity detection coefficients of ‘Sun Bright’ tomatoes with different
layer on a dataset composed of images of tomatoes taken under ripeness grades over 500–950 nm, using a
the extreme conditions, gave a good classification rate. hyperspectral imaging-based spatially-resolved
Keywords—tomato detection, tomato state classification,
instrument, and evaluate their relationship with the
image processing, deep learning, superpixel segmentation
ripeness of tomatoes;
• Develop discriminant models for classification of
I. INTRODUCTION
tomatoes into either six or three ripeness grades,
One of the most important aspects for consumers in the
using the absorption and scattering coefficients and
agricultural industry is product quality. Traditionally, the
their combinations.
inspection process is done manually, which is time-
Luna et al. developed a convolutional neural network-
consuming, subjective and unreliable. For this reason, a
based solution that allows disease detection in tomato plants.
great effort is made by the scientific community to develop
A motorized image capture box was designed to capture all
automatic systems that help to improve the inspection
four sides of each tomato plant to detect and recognize leaf
process, from time consumption and consistency points of
diseases. A specific breed of tomato which is Diamante Max
view. Since quality control influences the viability of
was used as the test subject. The system was designed to
products, countries producing agricultural raw materials
identify diseases such as Phoma rot, leaf miner and target
have invested significant research efforts in the automated
spot. Using a dataset of 4,923 leaf images from diseased and
monitoring and control of crop growth [1]. Tomato maturity
healthy tomato plants collected under controlled conditions,
classification is crucial for optimizing harvesting and post-
they trained a deep convolutional neural network to identify
harvest processes in the agricultural industry.
three diseases or lack thereof [3]. Hu et al. [4], proposed a
Tomato classification, a key task in agricultural
method for detecting ripe tomatoes using a vision system.
automation, has witnessed remarkable advancements with
The purpose of this method is to evaluate the feasibility of
the integration of machine learning techniques. In recent
combining deep learning with edge segmentation to detect
years, researchers have employed various methodologies to
individual tomatoes in complex environments with a view to
enhance the accuracy and efficiency of tomato classification
avoiding confusions of overlapping tomatoes. Castro et al.
systems. All approaches can be classified into three
combined four supervised machine learning algorithms
categories : Traditional approaches, advanced approaches
namely ANN, DT, SVM and KNN as well as three color
and hybrid approaches. The traditional approaches regroup
spaces (RGB, HSV and L*a*b*) for Cape gooseberry
visual inspection-based methods and physical properties-
classification according to their level of maturity. The
based methods. The advanced approaches are based on
objective was to find the best combination of supervised
image processing, computer vision spectroscopy and
learning technique and color space for classification. To do
hyperspectral imaging processing. The hybrid approaches
this, they collected 925 Cape gooseberry fruit samples and
combine at least two of the previous approaches.
categorized them into seven classes according to the level of
The next section of this paper presents the related works.
ripeness after extracting information about the colorparameters of the three-color spaces from each fruit sample from the open fields using Nikon D3500 CCD camera.
[5]. Filoteo-Razo et al. presented a non-invasive and low-cost
To overcome the difficulties of detection by artificial optoelectronic system for detecting color changes in oranges
vision in such cases, some studies such as the work [6] to predict the ripening stage [24]. Deepkiran et al. [25]
proposed a detection method based on color and shape developed detection system for plant-disease using
characteristics. Haggag et al. applied supervised and convolution neural network (CNN) model. A more
unsupervised neural learning and deep learning algorithms comprehensive review on detection and classification of
to three different sets of tomato images with hundreds of plant diseases using machine learning is presented in [26].
iterations to identify the best techniques and network Some research works [13]-[16] suggest to generate
configurations. more efficient. These are the convolutional candidate regions. These regions are classified to detect the
neural network, the artificial neural network, the self- fruit.
organizing map (SOM), the learning vector quantization and The main contribution of this work is to propose a
the support vector machine [7]. To automatically identify strategy for tomato state recognition in the complex scenes.
the maturity of tomatoes, Huang et al. [8] proposed a Mask By comparing our work to state-of-the-art algorithms, we
R-CNN fuzzy model. The aim of their study is to enable note that after the tomato detection phase, we classify the
farmers to avoid losses due to late and early harvests. They state of maturity of the tomato. The first part of our work
used the fuzzy c-means model for identification and consists in proposing a new competitive strategy for tomato
segmentation of acquired tomato images to maintain image detection. The proposed approach uses a preprocessing layer
foreground and background spatial information. In their to segment the image into regions. The objective of this
work, Xie et al. [9] constructed a dataset of 20 categories of segmentation is to extract the thumbnails containing the
fruits and vegetables in 11 different states ranging from parts of interest for the study. Once the tomatoes are
solid, sliced to creamy paste. This dataset was constructed detected, we use an algorithm based on deep neural
with 11943 images uploaded using the Google search networks for classification. Five classes have been identified
engine, manually reviewed and then categorized based on for this work.
food identity and then condition. The convolutional neural
network architectures allowed them to perform the category, III. PROPOSED METHOD
state and category recognition and food state tasks. To
The system that we propose is composed of two main
overcome the lack of labeled data, they exploited artisanal
layers. The first layer is image segmentation. The objective
features as well as deep features extracted from CNNs
of this layer is to isolate the parts of the image which
combined with support vector machines as an alternative to
contain tomatoes. This first step is very important because if
end-to-end classification. Ni et al. [10] proposed a system
the contours of the tomato are not well insulated, the final
for monitoring the process of changing banana freshness
system will not be efficient. After the segmentation of the
using transfer learning. To build the dataset, they selected
tomato image, the result obtained is inserted into the
103 bananas from two varieties. In order to meet the data set
maturity status recognition system. This system, based on
size requirements of transfer learning, they amplified the
deep learning, is responsible for classifying tomatoes in one
data following the data amplification techniques such as
of the classes of our study.
rotation, translation and mirroring to increase the number of
datasets. The dataset was then split into a training and A. Image segmentation
validation set. Most of these algorithms failed in the case of Image segmentation is also important for tomato state
complex scenes. Indeed actually, there are two principal recognition as it allows for the precise delineation and
challenges with automatic fruit detection or recognition. extraction of various tomato regions or components from an
One is that complex scenes. In these scenes we need to image. By segmenting the tomato, different aspects such as
address the problems such as backlighting, direct sunlight, color, shape, texture, and defects can be analyzed, leading to
overlapping fruit and branches, blocking leaves, etc. All effective state recognition. The flowchart of the proposed
these phenomena represent obstacles to the detection and tomato segmentation is illustrated by Figure 1.
recognition of fruits.
To avoid this problem, Faisal et al. [11] proposed a
decision system using computer vision and deep learning
techniques to detect seven different maturity stages/levels of
date fruit. These stages are Immature stage 1, Immature
stage 2, Pre-Khalal, Khalal, Khalal with Rutab, Pre-Tamar,
and Tamar. Working in this direction too and focusing on
automatic tomato recognition, Xu et al. [12] proposed a fast
method of detecting tomatoes in a complex scene for
picking robots. They used an image enhancement algorithm
to improve the detection ability of the algorithm in complex
scenes. Finally, they designed several groups of comparative
experiments to prove the rationality and feasibility of this
method. Das et al. [23] introduced machine learning based
algorithm for tomato maturity grading. The performance of
their system is assessed on the real tomato datasets collected Figure 1. Flowchart of proposed tomato image segmentationneighboring pixels or regions that have similar
According to Figure 1, we have three important steps. The characteristics. In this work, we use the CSP regional
objective of the first step is to divide the image into compact growth method proposed by Tao et al. [19]. This approach
and perceptually homogeneous superpixels. The second step was inspired by the metabolic ecology theory. Experimental
allows us to iteratively grow the region by incorporating results have shown that this approach has good accuracy in
neighboring superpixels based on predefined similarity forests. The CSP regional growth method is declined in
criteria. Finally, we evaluate each detected region in order three important parts: points normalization, trunk detection
to find the regions which contain tomatoes. and diameter at breast height estimation, and finally
1) Superpixel subdivision segmentation.
The use of superpixels is topical in the realization of 3) Segmentation validation
computer vision-based systems. Superpixel segmentation is The segmentation validation is important in order to
the simplification of the image into a number of identify the parts which contain a tomato. In this work, our
homogeneous regions. Each region is a superpixel and the strategy for segmentation validation is inspired by the work
pixels of each region have very similar characteristics. The of Xu et al. [12]. This strategy is presented by Figure 2.
number of superpixels is quite large but significantly lower
than the number of pixels. Of our many superpixel grouping
strategies exist. But we chose the one proposed by Schick et
al. [17]. The performance of this superpixel segmentation is As shown in Figure 2, the tomato recognition process is
shown on some computer vision-based applications [18]. performed in two steps. The first step is model training. This
The pseudo code of their strategy is given by algorithm 1. step requires the tomato dataset and the boundary box labels
to be fed into the convolutional neural network; iterative
Algorithm 1 : superpixels segmentation training is then conducted, and a fully trained model is
1 Initialize cluster centers by sampling pixels at obtained. The second step is model inference. At this stage,
regular grid steps. the potential regions detected after the region growth
2 Perturb cluster centers in a neighborhood, to the process are input into the trained model. The goal is to find
lowest gradient position using expression. if these regions are tomatoes or not.
3 repeat
4 for each cluster center do
B. Tomato state classification
5 Assign the best matching pixels from an n*n
In our research endeavor, we have constructed a
neighborhood around cluster center
classification framework by harnessing the capabilities of
according to the distance measure.
recurrent neural networks (RNN) integrated with an
6 Compute new cluster centers and residual error
attention mechanism. We have meticulously compared the
{distance between previous centers and
performance of this approach with traditional and Bayesian-
recomputed centers}.
type methodologies. Our innovative system comprises three
7 until <= threshold
interconnected modules. These modules encompass the
8 Enforce connectivity.
preprocessing of inputs, enabling the extraction of vital
2) _Region growth
features, the establishment of feature embeddings to
optimize the preparation of model inputs, and, lastly, the
Region growth is an image segmentation technique used classifier itself. Our classifier is composed of a flexible and
to partition an image into meaningful regions or regions of trainable features layer meticulously crafted with LSTM
interest based on certain similarity criteria. The basic idea
Figure 2. The training and detecting process of the tomato detection
method.
cells. In addition, we have diligently employed the layers
of a stacked single head attention recurrent neural network,
behind region growth is to start with seed points or regions
seamlessly integrating the Boom layer and culminating in a
and iteratively grow these regions by incorporatingsoftmax classifier. light, sunlight, day, evening, night).
Diverging from the established norms of transformer-
based approaches as documented in previous literature [20], After the collection of the image, the dataset was
our final model gracefully adapts a distinctive strategy with augmented with additional images. The primary objective of
the use of a single attention head. This novel simplification, this step is to obtain consequent images in order to train the
inspired by the pioneering work of [21], has convincingly network in discerning distinctive features that differentiate
demonstrated superior performance in terms of effectively between various classes. By incorporating a larger set of
capturing and harnessing crucial informational aspects. augmented images, the network's ability to grasp pertinent
Consequently, we have judiciously opted against cluttering features has been amplified. As a culmination, a database
our model with a multitude of attention heads, as their true comprising 50910 images for training and 3000 images for
efficacy remains uncertain within the context of the less validation was established. The additional images are
intricate signals that we meticulously manipulate throughout obtained using the strategy proposed by Stearns and
the course of this research. It is essential to underscore that Kannapan [22]. The experiments are performed using a
our attention mechanism showcases exemplary machine with an Intel Core™i7 CPU and NVIDIA GTX
computational efficiency, largely due to the judicious 1050ti GPU. The operating system is Windows 10. This
application of matrix multiplication, which exclusively machine is used to build a TensorFlow deep learning
operates on the query as elegantly described in [21]. framework. The training and detection of the tomato object
The incorporation of the boom layer, which has proved to detection network model was programmed in Python.
be remarkably advantageous within our framework, offers
an effective means to regulate the exponential expansion of To prove the efficacy of the proposed approach, we use
vector dimensions emanating from the attention layers. To some metrics. These metrics are precision, f1-score and
achieve this, we employ a projection strategy that elevates execution time. The calculation of precision (P) and f1-score
the vectors to a higher dimensionality before gracefully (F1) are presented in formula (1).
reverting them back to their original dimensions. To best
capture the intrinsic characteristics of tomato image sounds, Suitable datasets are indispensable throughout all
our model is thoughtfully imbued with large feed-forward phases of computer vision-based research, spanning from
layer steps at various strategic points, allowing us to the initial training phase to the subsequent evaluation of
dynamically encode the multifaceted features across each recognition algorithm effectiveness. For this work, the
distinct feature dimension. This astute encoding process images compiled for the dataset were sourced from the
results in the generation of dynamic vectors embedded Internet, gathered through searches using tomato state across
diverse languages including English, German, French, and
within hidden states, further enhancing the model's capacity
Spanish. These images, categorized into five distinct classes.
to extract meaningful representations. The model is
These images are taken in different conditions (side light,
presented by Figure 3.
back light, sunlight, day, evening, night).
After the collection of the image, the dataset was
augmented with additional images. The primary objective of
this step is to obtain consequent images in order to train the
network in discerning distinctive features that differentiate
between various classes. By incorporating a larger set of
augmented images, the network's ability to grasp pertinent
features has been amplified. As a culmination, a database
comprising 50910 images for training and 3000 images for
validation was established. The additional images are
obtained using the strategy proposed by Stearns and
Kannapan [22]. The experiments are performed using a
machine with an Intel Core™i7 CPU and NVIDIA GTX
1050ti GPU. The operating system is Windows 10. This
machine is used to build a TensorFlow deep learning
Figure 3. Classification model architecture. framework. The training and detection of the tomato object
detection network model was programmed in Python. Figure
4 presents three images of the dataset and the tomato
IV. RESULTS AND DISCUSSION classification results.
Suitable datasets are indispensable throughout all phases
of computer vision-based research, spanning from the initial
training phase to the subsequent evaluation of recognition
algorithm effectiveness. For this work, the images compiled
for the dataset were sourced from the Internet, gathered
through searches using tomato state across diverse
languages including English, German, French, and Spanish.
These images, categorized into five distinct classes. These
images are taken in different conditions (side light, backFigure 4. Tomato classification results.
the proposed approach.
To prove the efficacy of the proposed approach, we After this step, we can test the efficiency of the
use some metrics. These metrics are precision, f1-score and classification algorithm. Upon refining the network's
execution time. The calculation of precision (P) and f1-score
parameters, a comprehensive accuracy level of 97.06% was
(F1) are presented in formula (1).
attained by the 100th training iteration (as opposed to 94.9%
prior to fine-tuning). Remarkably high accuracy results were
(1)
already obtained, accompanied by notably diminished loss,
P = TP / (TP + FP)
(1) even as early as the 30th training iteration. However, a
R = TP / (TP + FN)
compelling equilibrium between accuracy and loss was
F1 = 2*P*R / (P + R)
consistently maintained for high accuracy outcomes beyond
the 60th iteration. Taking into account the distribution by
class, we obtain Table 2.
In formula (1), P is the precision rate, R is the recall rate,
Table 2. Result of tomato state classification
TP is the number of true positive samples, FP is the number
of false positive samples, and FN is the number of false
Classes
negative samples. Using these metrics, we compare our
Class1 All images 800
proposed method to other algorithms of state of the art
Accurately 787
These algorithms are Xu et al. [12], Ren et al. [13], He et al.
predicted
[14] and Dai et al. [15]. The results of comparison are
Class2 All images 760
consigned in Table 1.
Accurately 735
Table 1. Comparison of test results. predicted
Class3 All images 425
Method Precision F1 score Accurately 413
Xu et al. [12] 91.60 92.32 predicted
Ren et al. [13] 94.15 96.83 Class4 All images 390
He et al. [14] 90.22 91.33 Accurately 375
Dai et al. [15] 88.16 90.15 predicted
Our Method 93.38 95.77 Class5 All images 625
Accurately 602
According to Table 1, we show that using the proposed predicted
approach we achieve an acceptable precision for the tomato Total All images 3000
detection process. The F1 score also proves the efficiency of Accurately 2912
predictedREFERENCES
According to the table 2, we obtain a percentage of good
[1] G. Gyarmati et T. Mizik, ''The present and future of precision
classification pf each class. These percentages are reported agriculture'', in Proc. IEEE 15e Int. Conf. Syst. Syst. Ing. (SoSE), p.
in the Figure 5. 593–596, 2020.
[2] Q. Zhu, C. He, R. Lu, F. Mendoza, H. Cen, "Ripeness evaluation of
‘Sun Bright’ tomato using optical absorption and scattering
properties", Postharvest Biology and Technology, Volume 103, Pages
27-34, 2015.
[3] R. G. de Luna, E. P. Dadios et A. A. Bandala,"Automated image
capturing system for deep learning-based tomato plant leaf disease
detection and recognition", IEEE Region 10 Conference, 2018, pp.
1414-1419.
[4] C. Hu, X. Liu, Z. Pan and P. Li,"Automatic Detection of Single Ripe
Tomato on Plant Combining Faster R-CNN and Intuitionistic Fuzzy
Set," in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 154683-154696, 2019, doi:
10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2949343.
[5] W. Castro, J. Oblitas, M. De-La-Torre, C. Cotrina, K. Bazán and H.
Avila-George, "Classification of Cape Gooseberry Fruit According to
its Level of Ripeness Using Machine Learning Techniques and
Different Color Spaces," in IEEE Access, vol. 7, pp. 27389-27400,
2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2898223.
[6] X. Liu, D. Zhao, W. Jia, W. Ji and Y. Sun,"A Detection Method for
Apple Fruits Based on Color and Shape Features," in IEEE Access,
vol. 7, pp. 67923-67933, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2918313.
[7] M. Haggag, S. Abdelhay, A. Mecheter, S. Gowid, F. Musharavati and
S. Ghani, "An Intelligent Hybrid Experimental-Based Deep Learning
Algorithm for Tomato-Sorting Controllers," in IEEE Access, vol. 7,
pp. 106890-106898, 2019, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2019.2932730.
[8] Y. P. Huang, T. H. Wang and H. Basanta, "Using Fuzzy Mask R-
Figure 5: Percentage of good classification
CNN Model to Automatically Identify Tomato Ripeness," in IEEE
Access, vol. 8, pp. 207672-207682, 2020, doi:
Using Figure 5, we can observe that the lowest rate of 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3038184.
good classification is 96.15% and this is obtained with [9] X. Xie, Y. Ma, B. Liu, J. He, S. Li, H. Wang, “A Deep-Learning-
Based Real-Time Detector for Grape Leaf Diseases Using Improved
images of class 4. These values have increased reaching up
Convolutional Neural Networks”, Front Plant Sci. 2020 Jun 3;11:751.
to 98.38% for class 1 images. doi: 10.3389/fpls.2020.00751.
According to these values, we can conclude that our [10] J. Ni, J. Gao, L. Deng and Z. Han, "Monitoring the Change Process of
Banana Freshness by GoogLeNet," in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp.
proposed strategy has competitive results for tomato
228369-228376, 2020, doi: 10.1109/ACCESS.2020.3045394.
classification. [11] M. Faisal, M. Alsulaiman, M. Arafah et MA Mekhtiche, "IHDS :
Intelligent Harvest Decision System for Dates Based on Maturity
Stage using Deep Learning and Computer Vision", dans IEEE
V. CONCLUSION
Access, vol. 8, pages 167985-167997, 2020.
There are many automated or computer vision tomato [12] Z. -F. Xu, R. -S. Jia, Y. -B. Liu, C. -Y. Zhao and H. -M. Sun, "Fast
detection and classification methods, but this area of Method of Detecting Tomatoes in a Complex Scene for Picking
Robots," in IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 55289-55299, 2020, doi:
research is still lacking. In this paper, we proposed a deep
10.1109/ACCESS.2020.2981823.
learning-based approach for tomato classification in a [13] S. Ren, K. He, R. Girshick, and J. Sun, ‘‘Faster R-CNN: Towards
complex environment. The proposed approach takes place at real-time object detection with region proposal networks,’’ in Proc.
two levels. The first level segments tomatoes from images 28th Int. Conf. Neural Inf. Process. Syst., 2015, pp. 91–99
[14] K. He, G. Gkioxari, P. Dollár, and R. Girshick, ‘‘Mask R-CNN,’’ in
presenting significant challenges (lack of light, changing
Proc. IEEE Conf. Comput. Vis. Pattern Recognit. (CVPR), Oct. 2017,
weather, etc.). This segmentation is done using a pre- pp. 2961–2969.
processing algorithm whose role is to remove noise and put [15] J. Dai, Y. Li, K. He, and J. Sun, ‘‘R-FCN: Object detection via region
homogeneous pixels together. The second level makes it based fully convolutional networks,’’ in Proc. Adv. Neural Inf.
Process. Syst., 2016, pp. 379–387.
possible to classify the state of the tomato according to its
[16] Q.-C. Mao, H.-M. Sun, Y.-B. Liu, and R.-S. Jia, ‘‘Mini-YOLOv3:
maturity. In this study we made a classification in five Real Time object detector for embedded applications,’’ IEEE Access,
classes: green, brittle, pink, pale red, mature red. The results vol. 7, pp. 133529–133538, 2019.
of the experiment showed the competitiveness of the [17] A. Schick, M. Fischer, and R. Stiefelhagen, "Measuring and
evaluating the compactness of superpixels", In Proceedings of
proposed strategy.
International Conference on Pattern Recognition, pp. 930-934, 2012.
[18] M. A. Mousse, B. Atohoun, "Saliency based human fall detection in
Moreover, forthcoming endeavors will encompass smart home environments using posture recognition", Health
expanding the model's application by training it to recognize Informatics Journal, vol 27, pp 14604582211030954, 2021.
[19] S. Tao., F. Wu,, Q. Guo,, Y. Wang, W. Li, B. Xue, et al.,
the state of tomatoes across broader expanses of land. This
"Segmenting tree crowns from terrestrial and mobile LiDAR data by
will involve amalgamating aerial photographs taken by exploring ecological theories", ISPRS J. Photogramm. Remote Sens.
drones from orchards and vineyards with convolutional 110, 66–76, 2015.
neural networks for precise object detection. Through the [20] A. Vaswani, N. Shazeer,N. Parmar, J. Uszkoreit, L. Jones, A.N.
Gomez, L. Kaiser, I. Polosukhin, "Attention is all you need", Curran
extension of this research, the authors aspire to make a
Associates Inc., Red Hook, NY, USA. p. 6000–6010, 2017.
meaningful contribution to sustainable development, [21] S. Merity, "Single headed attention RNN: stop thinking with your
influencing crop quality to benefit generations to come. head", CoRR abs/1911.11423, 2019.
[22] C. C. Stearns and K. Kannappan, "Method for 2-D affine
transformation of images," US Patent No. 5,475,803, 1995.
CONFLICT OF INTEREST [23] P. Das, J. K. Yadav, and L.Singh, Deep Learning-Based Tomato's
The authors declare no conflict of interest.utions Ripe and Unripe Classification System. International Journal ofSoftware Innovation (IJSI), 10(1), 1-20. Noida, India, 2022, pp. 487-492, doi:
http://doi.org/10.4018/IJSI.292023, 2022 10.1109/CISES54857.2022.9844338.
[24] J. D. Filoteo-Razo et al., "Non-Invasive Optoelectronic System for [26] M. Deepkiran, L. Singh, M. Pandey and S. Lakra, " A Systematic
Color-Change Detection in Oranges to Predict Ripening by Using Review on the Detection and Classification of Plant Diseases Using
Artificial Neural Networks," in IEEE Photonics Journal, vol. 15, no. Machine Learning." IJSI vol.11, no.1 2023: pp.1-25.
5, pp. 1-10, Oct. 2023, Art no. 8500810, doi: http://doi.org/10.4018/IJSI.315657
10.1109/JPHOT.2023.3312212.
[25] M. Deepkiran, L. Singh, M. Pandey and S. Lakra, "Automated Copyright © 20XX by the authors. This is an open access article distributed
Disease Detection in Plant Images using Convolution Neural under the Creative Commons Attribution License which permits
Network," 2022 International Conference on Computational unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium, provided
Intelligence and Sustainable Engineering Solutions (CISES), Greater the original work is properly cited (CC BY 4.0).