Innovation Resistance Theory in Action: Unveiling Barriers to Open Government
Data Adoption by Public Organizations to Unlock Open Data Innovation
Anastasija Nikiforova1, University of Tartu, Estonia
Antoine Clarinval, University of Namur, Belgium
Anneke Zuiderwijk, Delft University of Technology, the Netherlands
Daniel Rudmark, The Swedish National Road and Transport Research Institute, Sweden
Petar Milic, University of Priština - Kosovska Mitrovica, Serbia
Charalampos Alexopoulos, University of the Aegean, Greece
Katrin Rajamäe-Soosaar, the Association of Estonian Cities and Rural Municipalities, Estonia
Abstract: Open Government Data (OGD) plays a pivotal role in fostering data-driven innovation and
sustainability across various sectors. Despite its potential, many public organizations are reluctant to share their
data openly. While existing research has explored factors impacting the public organizations’ intention to share
OGD, there is a paucity of research applying theoretical models to investigate the resistance by public
organizations to making government data publicly available. This study addresses the gap by developing an
Innovation Resistance Theory (IRT) model tailored to OGD that allows identifying predictors of resistance among
public agencies. We develop an initial model based on literature and refine it through interviews with 21 public
agencies across six countries. The final model describes 39 barriers related to usage, value, risks, tradition, and
image. The findings contribute to the literature by adapting IRT to the context of OGD, an area where its
application has been notably limited. As such, this study addresses the growing demand for novel theoretical
frameworks to examine OGD adoption barriers. Practical insights are provided to support policymakers in
creating data ecosystems that encourage data openness and address challenges in OGD adoption.
Keywords: Barrier, Innovation Resistance Theory, Open Government Data, Open data, OGD, open data
ecosystem; technology adoption
1 Introduction
Open Government Data (OGD)2 stands as a cornerstone for fostering sustainability-oriented and data-
driven innovation across diverse stakeholders including citizens, business, academia / researchers, and
public organizations (Jetzek, Avital & Bjorn-Andersen, 2014; Ruijer et al., 2020; Susha et al., 2015;
Zhenbin et al., 2020). The significance of OGD is amplified in the era of Artificial Intelligence (AI)
democratization3, where the availability and accessibility of data are pivotal for the success of AI
initiatives. Leveraging public government data, companies are poised to pioneer new, innovative
products and services (Susha, Schiele & Frenken, 2022; Zhenbin et al., 2020), while researchers can
1 Corresponding author: Anastasija Nikiforova, Nikiforova.Anastasija@gmail.com
2 Throughout the entire paper, we use the terms OGD, openly sharing government data, government data openness, and
government data sharing interchangeably.
3 AI democratization is the spread of artificial intelligence development to a wider user base that includes those without
specialized knowledge of A (source: https://www.techtarget.com/whatis/definition/AI-democratization).combine various datasets to test hypotheses, develop models (e.g., SARS-CoV-2 virus transmission
model by (López & Čukić, 2021)) and derive groundbreaking insights (Dell’Acqua & de Vecchi, 2017;
Yiannakoulias et al., 2020; Benning et al., 2021). Public organizations can repurpose data from other
agencies, fostering collaboration and knowledge exchange dynamics (Linåker & Runeson, 2021; Toots
et al., 2017).
Over the past two decades, research on OGD has grown significantly, with many studies exploring the
drivers and barriers to OGD adoption (e.g., Susha et al., 2022; Purwanto, Sjarief & Anwar, 2021;
Zhenbin et al., 2020), both from the data providers’ and data users’ perspective, employing various
theoretical models. These models are based on the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) (Wirtz et al.,
2016), the Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) (Talukder et al., 2019;
Lnenicka et al., 2022, Zuiderwijk et al., 2015; Shao, 2024), UTAUT integrated with Information System
continuance model (Islam et al., 2023) or the DeLone and McLean model of Information Systems
Success (Yang & Wu, 2021), Diffusion Of Innovations theory (DOI) (Weerakkody et al., 2017), and the
Technology–Organization–Environment (TOE) theory (Wang & Lo, 2016; Hossain et al., 2021).
However, a notable gap exists in research applying theoretical frameworks to investigate the provision
of OGD. Existing research predominantly applies theories that emphasize motivators and factors
influencing the intention to open data, with limited attention directed towards understanding the
resistance factors. This gap aligns with observations by Leong et al. (2020) on the prevailing "pro-
innovation bias" in scholarly discourse, where the focus is primarily on technology adoption rather than
resistance to innovation. Thus, there is a pressing need for theoretical frameworks that delve deeper into
the resistance faced by public organizations in providing OGD, thereby providing a more comprehensive
understanding of the dynamics surrounding open data initiatives. Moreover, the e-government
community has recently advocated for the development of new theories instead of solely reusing existing
technology adoption models based on TAM, UTAUT, and other popular technology adoption models,
which today provide limited additional value.
We respond to these calls by referring to Innovation Resistance Theory (IRT) (Ram & Sheth, 1989).
This theory posits that resistance to innovation stems from functional (e.g., usage patterns and risks) and
psychological (e.g., image and conflicts with beliefs) barriers. Despite its demonstrated effectiveness in
business and marketing (Agarwal et al., 2023; Dwivedi et al., 2023; Leong et al., 2020; Talwar et al.,
2020; Chakraborty, 2023; Prakash and Das, 2022), IRT remains underexplored within the realm of e-
government. Viewing OGD initiatives through the lens of innovation allows IRT to offer valuable
insights into the barriers and challenges in the implementation and adoption of OGD.
The objective of the study is to develop an Innovation Resistance Theory-based model tailored to OGD
to empirically identify predictors of public agencies’ resistance to OGD sharing. To attain this objective,
we construct a theoretical model informed by a literature review of IRT and barriers (a foundation of
which is laid in a short conference paper (Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk, 2022)) and validate it through
exploratory interviews with representatives from 21 public agencies across 6 countries. Then, a
consensus on the refined final version of the model is obtained among 7 experts. The final model
describes 39 barriers related to usage, value, risks, tradition, and image.
This paper is structured as follows. First, in Section 2, we give an overview of the IRT and of existing
studies employing this model. We then discuss the typical barriers to openly sharing government data
faced by the public agencies. Section 3 provides the research method of our study, while Section 4
presents the model. Section 5 establishes discussion, whereas the last section draws conclusions.
2 Background and Related Work
In this section, we provide a background on the IRT and barriers to openly sharing government data.
This constitutes the input to our IRT model tailored to OGD.
2.1 Innovation Resistance Theory
Resistance to change was defined by Zaltman and Wallendorf (1979) as “any conduct that serves to
maintain status quo in the face of pressure to alter the status quo.” According to Ram (1987), it is
associated with the degree to which individuals feel threatened because of the need to make changes to
2the typical process of doing something. Innovation Resistance, in turn, was defined in (Ram & Sheth,
1989) as a special version of resistance to change widely discussed in social psychology in behavioral
science by worldwide known researchers such as Newcomb (1953), Osgood & Tannenbaum (1955),
and Heider (1958).
A common opinion of both behaviorists and psychologists is that consumers have an inherent / intrinsic
desire for psychological balance, which they call “psychological equilibrium”. This is because any
change made to the customer’s behavior can disturb this balance, so the customers often choose to resist
change rather than go through the most likely disturbing and challenging process of readjustment.
Therefore, it is believed that resistance is a normal response of consumers when faced with innovation
(Ram, 1987). More precisely, it is a resistance posited by consumers to adapt to changes brought about
by innovations, potentially disrupting conventional processes of acquiring information, making
purchases, utilizing products, or disposing of them.
At the core of IRT lies the claim that resistance to innovation depends on three sets of factors that
influence whether the innovation is ultimately adopted, rejected, or modified to accommodate changes
if it is amenable to changes. These factors are:
(1) perceived innovation resistance, divided into (a) consumer dependent, such as relative
advantage, compatibility, perceived risk, complexity, effect on adoption of other innovations,
and (b) consumer independent, such as trialability, divisibility, reversibility, realization,
communicability, and form of innovation;
(2) consumer characteristics referring to (a) psychological variables such as perception,
motivation, personality, value orientation, beliefs, attitude, previous innovative experience, and
(b) demographics variables, referring to age, education, and income;
(3) propagation mechanisms, divided into (a) type, e.g., marketer controlled vs. non-marketer
controlled, personal vs. impersonal, and (b) characteristics described by clarity, credibility,
source similarity, and informativeness.
In summary, the decision regarding innovation adoption is informed by an assessment of both functional
and psychological barriers. Ram and Sheth (1989) delineate functional barriers into three categories: (1)
usage patterns, (2) value, and (3) risks associated with product usage. These barriers typically arise from
the significant changes consumers encounter when adopting an innovation. On the other hand,
psychological barriers stem from (1) the traditions and norms of consumers / customers and (2) the
perceived product image, often resulting from conflicts with customers' prior beliefs (Table 1). In light
of these considerations and recognizing the unique characteristics of OGD, we posit that not only end-
users but also data publishers are OGD customers to some extent.
Table 1: The Innovation Resistance Theory (IRT) model and its elements (Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk, 2022)
Resistance Resistance Definition Source
factors sub-factors
Functional The degree to which an innovation is perceived as Ram and Sheth (1989), Claudy
Barriers Usage Barrier requiring changes in consumers’ routines et al. (2015)
The degree to which an innovation’s value-to-price
ratio is perceived in relation to other product Molesworth and Suortti
Value Barrier substitutes (2002), Claudy et al. (2015)
The degree of uncertainty regarding financial, Herzenstein, Posavac &
functional, and social consequences of using an Brakus (2007), Claudy et al.
Risk Barrier innovation (2015)
Psychological Tradition The degree to which an innovation forces Herbig & Day (1992), Claudy
Barriers Barrier consumers to accept cultural changes et al. (2015)
The degree to which an innovation is perceived as Ram and Sheth (1989), Claudy
Image Barrier having an unfavorable image et al. (2015)
Although the IRT was developed over 30 years ago, it remains popular and has become even more
popular in the last 5 years (see Supplementary Materials), which is compliant with its original purpose
of studying resistance to innovation. In recent years, IRT has gained prominence in areas such as
Business and Management and Computer Science areas.
3A vast majority of scholars used the IRT as the basis for the empirical evaluation of consumer resistance
to innovations (also compliant with (Talwar et al., 2020)). Huang, Jin & Coghlan (2021) found that
digital financial services such as mobile payments, mobile banking, and e-commerce, including mobile
social commerce, mobile website shopping, online shopping, are the main research contexts for IRT
applications. Our search results confirm these findings. Moreover, our analysis allows us to classify
existing research utilizing IRT into 5 high-level groups depending on their application domain, i.e.,
innovation to which they study the resistance: (1) digital financial services, e-commerce and online
services; (2) sustainable consumption, green innovations and organic food; (3) cutting-edge
technologies and emerging trends; (4) education and MOOCs; (5) e-government and open government
data sharing (see shortened version in Table 2 and extended in Supplementary materials). The latter,
i.e., the use of IRT in the e-government domain, is rather limited. We identified only two studies utilizing
IRT in e-government. Prakash and Das (2022) explored citizens’ resistance to use digital contact tracing
apps that governments worldwide used as a critical element in their COVID-19 pandemic lockdown exit
strategy. Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk (2022) presented the initial version of the IRT model tailored to OGD
that we extend in this study.
Table 2: The Innovation Resistance Theory use in the literature
Category / group Description References
Digital Financial Focuses on consumer resistance within digital financial Leong et al., 2021; Talwar et
Services, E- services, online commerce platforms, and various online al., 2020; Lian & Yen, 2014;
Commerce and services. Encompasses research on digital payment systems, Agarwal et al., 2023;
Online Services e-commerce platforms and contexts, including mobile Chakraborty, 2023; Prakash
payments, mobile banking, and online shopping, fintech and Das, 2022
innovations, and the adoption of digital solutions in various
sectors
Sustainable Encompasses studies that focus on sustainable consumption Anshu et al., 2022; Kumari et
Consumption, patterns, innovations aimed at promoting environmental al., 2024; Kushwah, Dhir &
Green Innovations, sustainability, and consumer behavior related to organic Sagar, 2019; Verma,
and Organic Food food products. It includes research on green technologies, Chakraborty & Verma, 2023;
eco-friendly products, and consumer attitudes towards Sadiq et al., 2021
organic and sustainable food choices
Cutting-Edge explore cutting-edge technologies and emerging trends Khanra et al., 2021; Leong et
Technologies and across different industries. It includes research on innovative al., 2020; Alharbi McAvoy &
Emerging Trends technologies such as artificial intelligence, robotics, Woodworth, 2019; Dwivedi et
blockchain, smart services, Internet of Things, Augmented al., 2023; Kumar et al., 2023;
Reality (AR) and Virtual Reality (VR), Metaverse and other Cham et al., 2023
disruptive innovations. The focus is on understanding the
adoption, implementation, and implications of these
technologies in various domains.
Education and Investigates resistance to innovations in online education, Ma & Lee, 2019; Ma & Lam,
MOOCs particularly Massive Open Online Courses (MOOCs) 2019; Dang, Khanra, & Kagzi,
2022
E-Government and Focuses on resistance to innovations in e-government Prakash & Das, 2022;
Open Government initiatives and OGD sharing Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk, 2022
Data Sharing
42.2 Barriers to Openly Sharing Government Data
Previous studies on OGD have already identified various types of resistance to openly sharing
government data, often referred to as barriers4, which we assume can lead to resistance in OGD adoption.
We classify these barriers according to the five IRT resistance sub-factors: (1) usage barriers, (2) value
barriers, (3) risk barriers, (4) tradition barriers, (5) image barriers (see Table 1, Table 3).
Table 3: Examples of barriers to openly sharing government data that can lead to resistance (revisited (Nikiforova &
Zuiderwijk, 2022))
Resistance Examples of barriers to openly sharing government data, leading to resistance
sub-factors
Usage OGD often suffer from quality issues (Yiannakoulias et al, 2020; Nikiforova, 2020, 2021; Shepherd et al.,
barriers 2019)
Openly sharing government data is a complicated process (Barry and Bannister, 2014)
Open government data portals suffer from low ease of use (Zuiderwijk, 2015, Nikiforova & McBride,
2020)
Insufficient user-friendliness of the data (Ma and Lam, 2019)
Value Open government data do not always provide value to users (Van Loenen et al., 2021; Crusoe et al., 2019,
barriers Kucera et al., 2015; Quarati and De Martino, 2019; Nikiforova et al, 2023; Utamachant and Anutariya,
2018; López Reyes and Magnussen, 2022)
Datasets may be incomplete (Lněnička et al., 2022, Zuiderwijk et al., 2012; Albano and Reinhard, 2014)
There may be concerns about the quality of open data (Yiannakoulias et al., 2020; Lněnička et al., 2022,
Ma and Lam, 2019; Beno et al., 2017, Eckartz et al., 2014; Martin, 2014; Quarati, 2023; Nikiforova, 2020;
Yi, 2019)
Openly sharing government data requires resources, including time and costs (Toots et al., 2017; Albano
and Reinhard, 2014; Dawes et al., 2016)
Impossible to sell the data when it is openly available (Ma and Lam, 2019; Conradie and Choenni; 2014)
Data providers are usually the ones who invest the most effort and time in publishing data, while
businesses and citizens as data users profit the most (Van Loenen et al., 2021; Lnenicka et al., 2024)
Risk barriers Organizations’ fear that openly shared government data will be misused (Van Loenen et al., 2021)
Organizations’ fear of open data users drawing false conclusions (Barry and Bannister, 2014; Conradie
and Choenni, 2014)
Organizations fear that (privacy) sensitive data will be shared openly (Barry and Bannister, 2014; Ma and
Lam, 2019; Albano and Reinhard, 2014; Eckartz et al., 2014; Martin et al., 2014; Cranefield et al., 2014;
Shepherd et al., 2019; Ruijer et al, 2020)
Organizations fear making mistakes when preparing data for publication (Kubler et al., 2018; Zuiderwijk
et al., 2012)
Organizations fear being liable for data quality (Barry and Bannister, 2014; Albano and Reinhard, 2014)
Tradition The risk-averse culture of governmental organizations avoids openly sharing the data (Martin, 2014, Wirtz
barriers et al., 2016)
Organizations are reluctant to change their processes (Toots et al., 2017; Conradie and Choenni, 2014)
Incompatible routines and processes of organizations (Martin et al., 2013)
Civil servants may lack the skills required for openly sharing government data (Toots et al., 2017; Martin
et al., 2013)
Image Organizations’ fear that their reputation will be damaged due to the publication of low-quality data
barriers (Zuiderwijk et al., 2012; Chokki, 2023; de Souza et al., 2022)
Organizations’ fear that they will be associated with incorrect conclusions drawn from OGD analysis /
misinterpreted (Martin et al., 2013; Garcia, 2022; Zuiderwijk et al., 2012)
3 Methodology
3.1 Research Design
To attain the set objective - to develop an Innovation Resistance Theory-based model tailored to OGD
to empirically identify predictors of public agencies’ resistance to OGD sharing, we followed the
methodological steps presented in Figure 1. We first conducted a literature review on both Innovation
Resistance Theory-related research, and research on the barriers that prevent public administrations and
public agencies from sharing their data as open data. The barriers were categorized in (1) usage barrier,
(2) value barrier, (3) risk barrier, (4) tradition barrier, and (5) image barrier (Section 2). This allowed us
4 Throughout the entire paper, we use the terms “resistance factor” and “barrier” interchangeably
5to develop an initial version of the model that has been done by two researchers (authors) (Section 4),
which was further refined in a two-round Delphi process in which seven experts participated (Section
5). This was done following a qualitative approach. Such approaches provide depth, context, and rich
insights into the subjective experiences of individuals understanding and identifying context-specific
causes, allowing identifying unforeseen factors (Bryman, 2016), thereby contributing to the theory
building.
Figure 1: Methodological steps of the study
More precisely, a qualitative cross-country case study methodology was used, for which we have
adapted the approach of Breaugh et al. (2023). Following the authors recommendations, a cross-country
case study methodology has been developed to dive deeper into individual cases (Yin, 2018; Mergel et
al., 2019) without losing sight of the bigger picture (Lijphart, 1971). Exploratory case studies are
especially useful when there is a need to develop new hypotheses and propositions, particularly when
the issue of study is contemporary with limited empirical information available (Chopard and
Przybylski, 2021; Eisenhardt, 1989; Yin, 2018).
3.2 Interviewee Sampling and Selection of Experts
In total, six representative countries were selected based on several criteria. First, the countries were
selected to reflect different administrative traditions (Painter & Peters, 2010), geographical areas, and
unitary and federal states. Second, countries that demonstrate different development speeds and results
in terms of the maturity of their open data initiatives were selected. For this, we referred to Open Data
Maturity Report 2022 (ODMR - the most recent report at the moment of sampling countries)5 that
clusters OGD maturity scores of the participating European countries in four categories, namely: trend-
setters, fast-trackers, followers, and beginners. Considering that IRT supposes consideration of non-
adopters of technology as those that potentially face actual barriers associated with the adoption of
technology, we were interested in followers and beginners.
In addition, we combined these results with The Digital Economy and Society Index 2023 (DESI)6,
referring to the Digital Skills category and “Above basic Digital Skills” indicators, which stands for
individuals with “above basic” digital skills in each of five dimensions, namely (1) information, and
5 https://data.europa.eu/sites/default/files/data.europa.eu_landscaping_insight_report_n8_2022_1_1.pdf
6 https://digital-decade-desi.digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/datasets/desi/charts/desi-
indicators?indicator=desi_1a3&breakdown=ind_total&period=desi_2023&unit=pc_ind&country=AT,BE,BG,HR,CY,CZ,
DK,EE,EU,FI,FR,DE,EL,HU,IE,IT,LV,LT,LU,MT,NL,PL,PT,RO,SK,SI,ES,SE
6data literacy, (2) communication and collaboration, (3) problem solving, (4) digital content creation and
(5) safety. To diversify the sample, we were interested in countries that score above and below the EU
average, which is 26.46% of individuals in the country having above average digital skills. This resulted
in 2 countries with above digital skills compared to the EU average, namely the Netherlands (51.77%)
and Sweden (35.68%), and 3 below the average, namely Belgium (26.34%), Latvia (23.79%), and
Greece (21.7%). Serbia is not part of the EU and is not rated on this index.
We then established an expert panel representing each country in the sample. By the term “expert” we
mean a person possessing both in-depth knowledge of the subject and the context associated with the
specifics of a particular country that might affect the results. It could be the country of origin of the
expert or the country where the expert is employed or involved in open data initiatives (in line with
Lnenicka et al. (2024)). This means that the person must have at least a master's degree in the field
related to at least some OGD aspects, familiar with other fields at the same time (e.g., business and
management, political sciences, law, computer science, etc.), with at least five years of research and
practical experience related to OGD projects and/or OGD initiatives in public administrations of the
country in question. In our case, seven experts who satisfy these conditions, but also hold a PhD degree
in a field related to some OGD aspects and have at least seven years of experience in OGD research,
were involved.
A purposive sampling strategy was then used to identify interview candidates (Palys, 2008). Every
expert was responsible for selecting public agencies from their respective country and their
representatives to approach and interview.
3.3 Interview Protocol
IRT suggests categorizing individual barriers into five barrier categories. This was done by drawing
from existing IRT models and the corresponding measurement items found in the literature, combined
with the insights on OGD-specific barriers (Section 2). This resulted in the initial IRT model tailored to
OGD that describes 36 individual barriers identified in multiple rounds by two researchers (authors)
(Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk, 2022). Considering that this is the initial version of the model to be validated
and refined, if one researcher considered a measurement item to be valid, it was kept in the list, since its
exclusion can be then done after discussing their relevance with the government agencies. The initial
model can be found in Appendix A.
The interview instrument was developed by transforming the developed model and its individual barriers
(i.e., items) into an interview protocol (interview questions found in Appendix B and the full interview
protocol in Supplementary Materials). To ensure the reliability and validity, the items selected as
constructs in our model were pre-tested by two researchers. Before the interviews took place, the items
were checked for content validity and unambiguous wording.
Each interview included two major sections. The first section consists of 9 questions about the general
profile of the organization that the respondent represents and his/her experience of working with OGD:
(1) the government organization in which the interviewee works (name, domain), (2) the main tasks of
the organization, (3) the role of the respondent in it, (4) the type of data the organization collects, (5)
whether the organization has ever openly shared its own data or the data it collected from other sources,
(6) what were the drivers for the organization to do this or what the reasons were for not sharing them
openly, (7) what type of data the organization shared openly and how often, (8) what is the process of
openly sharing data and who within the organization is or are involved, (9) what challenges the
organization faced in openly sharing data.
The second section contained IRT model-related questions. Considering the explorative nature of the
study and our intention to refine the model, each individual barrier was transformed into an open-ended
question of the form “To what extent do the following situations form a barrier to openly sharing your
organization’s data: …” where each barrier was then addressed. Open-ended question, and thus long
responses, were given preference over closed-ended questions (yes/no) due to the exploratory nature of
our study, where we were interested in expanded answers and understanding of respondents’
experiences that would allow us to improve understanding of both the suitability of the individual barrier
under consideration for model refinement, and the actual barriers faced by government agencies. Before
the specific barriers within a category were addressed, the respondent was introduced with a definition
7of the category and asked whether there were any situations that would pose a challenge complying with
the definition for the organization. Then, after going through each specific barrier within the category,
the respondent was asked whether they could think of any relevant barrier we missed in the category.
This was repeated for the five barrier categories. Once all the barriers and their associated questions
have been asked, another general question about whether there are any other barriers not mandatorily
related to the above categories that form a challenge for openly sharing the organization’s data. The idea
behind these additional questions was to verify whether all potentially relevant barriers were captured
by the model. That is, while structured questions related to individual barriers (measurement items) were
intended to filter out irrelevant barriers in case all respondents find them irrelevant, additional questions
were intended to enrich the model if some were missed.
To avoid language barriers, each expert was responsible for the interview protocol and the translation
into the respondent’s native language. Before asking the interview questions to the respondent, the
purpose of the study was introduced, and informed consent was obtained for audio recording of the
interview and further use of the collected data. Afterward, the respondent was asked to confirm that the
transcription of the interview accurately reflects the discussion with the interviewer. The full interview
protocol is provided in Appendix B (and the version with the informed consent and other information
available in Supplementary Materials).
A total of 21 interviews were conducted. 17 interviews involved 1 respondent and 4 were done with 2
respondents. Within each country, 2 to 5 public agencies were interviewed (Table 5).
Table 5: Overview of interviewees
ID Interviewee role Number of
respondents
I1 Project Manager (information Technology) 1
I2 Director of Data Services 2
Advisor (Public Relations)
I3 Data analyst / researcher (Public Health) 2
Director (Health Statistics)
I4 Project Manager (Data Management and Protection) 1
I5 Project Manager (Open Data and Regulation) 2
Data Scientist (Interoperability)
I6 Manager (Knowledge Management) 2
Manager (Open Data Projects)
I7 Advisor (Public Policy) 1
I8 Project Manager (Health Services) 1
I9 Director (Financial Stability) 1
I10 Director (Regional Governance) 1
I11 Project Manager (Agricultural Development) 1
I12 Project Manager (Local Government IT) 1
I13 Project Manager (Open Data Projects) 2
I14 Advisor (Public Policy) 1
I15 Unit Manager (Regional Governance) 1
I16 Manager (Energy Management) 1
8I17 Director (Project Management) 1
I18 Project Manager (Organization and Planning) 1
I19 Legal Advisor (Open Data) 1
I20 Director (Data Strategy) 1
I21 Policy Director (AI and Open Data) 1
3.4 Data Analysis
The thematic analysis of the collected data and interpretation of the responses was carried out by the
authors, according to the suggestions by Eriksson, Gökhan & Stenius (2021) and Ose (2016), using MS
Word and Excel to iteratively structure the data. This is to say, we first reviewed the transcribed data
documented in Word. The transcribed data were then transferred to Excel and inductively assessed by
researchers (the authors), identifying those items that were identified as relevant barriers, partly
relevant, and irrelevant. That is, three codes were used to score each response based on the conducted
interviews.
Each barrier was ranked from low to very high (low/moderate/high/very high) based on the number of
respondents who acknowledged it as relevant or partly relevant for them. If the number of respondents
who consider the barrier relevant for them is below 10%, we consider the relevance of the individual
barrier to be low, between 11 and 20% - medium, between 21 and 50% - high, and over 50% - very
high.
The same coding schema was used to evaluate the model, which is done then by experts, assessing the
relevance of barriers, i.e., relevant, partly relevant, irrelevant. An additional option of irrelevant for the
given context but of potential relevance for other data governance models was suggested for the
researchers, to ensure that those items that can be of value for other data governance models, such as
B2G, for instance, are not excluded. Considering that the level of relevance for one of the respondents
is not necessarily decisive, the seven experts assessed every individual barrier of the model considering
their experience gained through the interviews, as well as the prior experience with the OGD in the
country in question. In addition to evaluation of each item, each researcher was asked to suggest any
changes in existing items - clarification, modification, splitting into multiple items, merging of several
items into one, as well as suggesting their complete deletion, and adding new ones.
4 IRT Model Tailored to OGD
4.1. Experience with Open Data and Barriers to Publication
The interviewees demonstrated diverse experiences with open data sharing, driven by legal obligations,
mission mandates, or societal demands. These experiences highlighted various challenges, including
technical difficulties, legal constraints, resource limitations, and resistance to change within the
organization.
4.1.1. Respondents' Overall Experience with Open Data – Stimuli and Challenges
While the majority of organizations have embraced open data practices, there are differences in how
they approach data sharing and ownership. For instance, some organizations primarily aggregate data
from third-party sources (I2, I3, I5), while others actively collect and share their own data. However,
one organization stands out for its reluctance to openly share data (I8), instead opting to periodically
post statistics on an internal platform. Yet another interviewee (I20) who operates across various
organizations striving for greater openness, disclosed that despite the prevalence of data-sharing
practices within organizations, there remains a notable divide. Even after fifteen years of embracing
open data principles, a spectrum persists: some professional governmental bodies readily share their
data, while others require further persuasion regarding the inherent value of open data initiatives. This
9divide is particularly evident among provincial organizations, which tend to be more cautious and share
less data compared to their counterparts at the national level. The motivations behind open data
initiatives among the interviewees also varied, reflecting a combination of external pressures,
organizational objectives, legal obligations, financial considerations, and societal needs (Table 7).
Table 7: Stimuli for data opening
Stimuli group Stimuli Interviewees
External Pressures, State activity and invitations: External encouragement or mandates from I4
Societal Needs, and government entities to publish open data
Legal and
Regulatory Interest from partner institutions: External demand for data from I13
Obligations collaborating organizations or research centers
COVID-19 pandemic: Response to urgent societal needs for data during I3, I21
crises
Legal obligations: Requirements imposed by legislation or regulatory I4, I7, I11, I12,
frameworks to publish certain datasets as open data I19
Inspiration from external sources: Influence from transparent governance I1, I5, I19
policies or practices observed in other countries
Compliance with legal requirements, transparency principles, and I18, I21
personal convictions influenced by broader movements advocating for
openness.
Mission and Mission mandate: Organizational missions or mandates emphasizing the I4, I15, I19, I21
Organizational importance of producing and publishing data
Objectives
Management request: Direct requests from management or leadership to I5, I6, I7, I8
prioritize open data initiatives
Efficiency and Efficiency reasons: Strategic decisions to improve efficiency by pushing I6, I19, I21
Improvement data onto online platforms
Goals
Desire to establish standards: Efforts to set standards in government I16, I21
functioning and improve decision-making processes
Willingness to pioneer digital transformation: Motivation to lead in I1, I19
ongoing processes and digital transformation within the organization
Social Impact and Impact on citizen needs: Focus on fulfilling citizen needs, incl. citizen I3, I7, I8, I9,
Public Service autonomy, and improving public service delivery through open data I13, I19, I21
Delivery initiatives
Access for societal benefit: Opening data to reduce unemployment, facilitate I9, I13, I14, I19,
job matching, and provide opportunities for societal benefit I21
All respondents faced challenges when publishing data that range from technical difficulties and
resistance to innovation to legislative constraints and uncertainty about what data to publish or lack of
understanding of data existing in the organization. Moreover, the lack of a mandate from relevant
authorities, coupled with staffing and infrastructure limitations, poses significant hurdles. Despite these
challenges, there is a growing acknowledgment of the importance of open data, with organizations
striving to overcome barriers and improve their data sharing practices to meet societal needs and enhance
transparency. Frequent mentions of resistance to change and innovation (I5, I7, I11, I12, I14, I15, I16,
I17, I18, I19, I21), in turn, supports our assumption that employing the IRT could provide valuable
insights on the barriers the organizations face within this process. In summary, the landscape of open
data sharing is multifaceted, with organizations navigating a complex interplay of motivations,
challenges, and attitudes toward data openness.
10We will now present the insights obtained during the interviews across the five barrier groups,
presenting the severity of individual barriers within the five groups.
4.1.2. Usage Barrier
Our interviews revealed that usage barriers are relevant for data publishers, where the relevance of
individual barriers vary from high (UB1, UB3, UB4, UB5, UB8) to very high (UB2, UB7) with UB5
and UB6 of moderate relevance.
Eight out of 21 respondents view attaining the appropriate quality level for openly sharing data
(UB1) as a barrier, ranging from moderate (partly relevant for their organization) to major (relevant) in
relevance. Interestingly, the explanations provided by respondents to support their views often conflict.
While data quality by some agencies was considered a barrier towards sharing data, some respondents
contrarily indicated that they rather see data opening as an opportunity for improving the quality of
their data (I6, I2). As was stressed by I1 and I2, the source of data quality issues may lay not only in
the process surrounding data collection and processing, or data nature, but to be related to the
system design.
Twelve out of 21 respondents acknowledge that it is difficult to prepare data for publication so that
they comply with OGD principles (UB2), although, as stated by I2 “The complexity does not mean
that the government does not open the data.” The process tends to be recognized as complicated due to
several reasons that include a lack of practice (I2, I8), the size of the organization (i.e., for smaller
organizations it could be trickier, especially in the lack of expertise) (I3), the need for additional
human resources (I3, I16, I21), and the type of data being opened (i.e., because opening of data such
as geospatial data can require programming, while personal data containing data - additional security
and data protection measures such as masking and anonymization) (I14, I18).
Nine respondents find it difficult to prepare data for publication so that they become appropriate
for reuse (UB3). The key reasons cited for making this process difficult were: (1) infrastructure and
processes that were tailored for data exchange between administrations and partners, but not for making
the data public on the website (I5), (2) heterogeneity of data and their collection, processing
procedures and technologies used, which hinder the interoperability of collected data, especially in cases
where several data sources are first combined (I6), (3) resources such as time- and human-resources
(I7, I10, I14), (4) the expertise required to manage the process (I14), (5) the nature of the data, where
the less structured the data is being subjected for its opening, the more complex the data opening process
can become (I14).
Similarly, there are different views on the difficulties associated with publishing data on the OGD
portal due to the complexity of the process, lack of clarity, or limitations of portal functionality
(UB4-UB6), with half of the respondents not seeing this as a barrier not to publish their data, but most
respondents experienced issues at some point of time. These issues and the reasons behind them
predominantly echo the above with some that are more portal specific. It was found that most
inconveniences are associated with (1) learning to perform respective actions and performing them
for the first time (I2, I6), and (2) limitations - insufficient functionality, lack of user-friendliness -
and the lack of a portal support (I2, I17). Process clarity sees less issues compared to the complexity,
since for many portals the process is well-defined and accompanied by documentation (I3, I4). However,
some organizations face challenges due to the lack of this documentation and definitions (I8), whereas
I5 emphasized that although this is not an issue for their organization, it is for the organizations from
which they aggregate the data they publish.
Process automation (UB7) is something that is not often observed on OGD portals, but is expected by
organizations (I1, I9, I14, I16, I17, I18). Like I5, which provided this themselves, I3 developed “the
internal scripts that are responsible for this semi-automation.” Although automation is often perceived
as a technical barrier, the lack of a dedicated system to manage open data processes is not a functional
barrier, but rather a cultural and motivational barrier (I14). Furthermore, I6 noted that they do not fully
automate the process although they could, because publication would be too fast for the data validation
process.
Finally, according to the open data lifecycle, published data have to be maintained to ensure that
they are current / data up-to-date (UB8), which, although not generally considered a major barrier, is
11recognized as a challenge for reasons similar to previous barriers. I4 and I13 further emphasize the
importance of automation, with I13 acknowledging that “many organizations are struggling with
metadata due to poor automation.” The lack of definition of the procedure to be followed is another
challenge echoed by I8, and the amount of resources to be spent is echoed by I1. I5 and I6 suggest that
“not everyone understands the importance of having up-to-date open data” and explain that “it is more
[about] continuously raising awareness” (I6).
Last, but not least, respondent I5 mentioned two more barriers that relate to the lack of willingness (low
sense of priority) to open data, seen as the main barrier to a resilient and sustainable open data
ecosystem, and the difficulty of data prioritization process, especially when an organization deals with
(a) large volumes of data, (b) data providers from whom data can be obtained, or (c) data providers
collecting similar data with implied difficulty to select the most appropriate data provider with which to
collaborate.
4.1.3. Value barrier
Most value barriers were confirmed as challenges that organizations face, where the aggregated
relevance of individual barriers vary from high (VB1, VB3, VB4, VB5, VB9) to very high (VB2, VB6)
with two barriers (VB7 and VB8) of moderate relevance.
Most respondents (14) express a belief that openly sharing government data is valuable for the public
(VB1), citing past successful usage (e.g., in the private sector), compliance with legal requirements, and
organizational recognition of their value. Some respondents highlight the barrier stemming from the
perceived impracticality or lack of value of sharing data due to a lack of understanding of its potential
uses (I9, I12, I13, I16, I17), even despite legal obligations and dedicated initiatives. However, some
respondents, on the contrary, indicated that they open even more data than required by the law (I2, I4).
It is also a popular belief among respondents that many open government datasets are appropriate
for reuse (VB2), highlighting the readiness of their data for reuse, the potential for improving data
quality through feedback mechanisms, and the recognition of the value of open data. However, some
organizations express opposing opinions that originate from (1) skills that users are expected to possess
to use data as perceived by public agencies, referring to both (open) data literacy and domain-knowledge
for data interpretation (I3, I5, I10). I5 highlights that while their organization does not believe that many
datasets are inappropriate for reuse, “some administrations think that people cannot reuse properly some
datasets (such as health data) because specific skills are needed,” and I16 mentions that these skills are
critical for publishers and decision makers (I16). It can also originate from (2) misconception about
what data can be legally opened (I14). I14 believes that most of their data is confidential and not
suitable for open sharing, despite having a vast amount of data that could potentially be published.
While there is a belief that data in their organizations and OGD are valuable per se, several respondents
express concerns about the quality of open government datasets (VB3) (I3, I6, I7, I10, I15). Reasons
given include (1) a lack of trust in the data, (2) reluctance to publish data if it is not up to date (I5),
and (3) internal and external doubts about data accuracy (I6, I15). I15 admits that they “are making
mistakes since results are pushed out as soon as possible”. Interestingly, some organizations that do not
express concerns about the quality of their data seem to have limited understanding of the root causes
of data quality issues. According to I16, “If data are automatically transferred and published, there will
be no problems with quality”, which seeks greater automation of publishing processes as a “cure” for
data quality. Whether it is perceived as a barrier or not, for most organizations the quality of their data
does not lead to a decision not to open data but is a challenge they are dealing with.
13 organizations interviewed do not see the fact that the public gains of openly sharing government
data are often lower than the costs (VB4) as a barrier preventing them from openly publishing their
data. And while some respondents do express the view that the public gains of openly sharing
government data outweigh the costs (I2, I3, I4, I5, I7, I12, I14), some mention the benefits they
experience as a byproduct of data opening, which include optimizing processes, improving data quality
(I2), saving money for administrations (I5), and creating social benefits for SMEs (I7). However, this
requires an actual understanding of the value of data, which is not always the case, as indicated by
respondents who admitted to experiencing limited understanding of the open data value and lack of
evidence of this value (I6, I8, I10, I13, I14), lack of financial support and lack of human and
12financial resources (I8, I13). I7 also suggested that the motivation to change the organization’s business
processes and data opening itself depends on the beneficiary, i.e., “If big companies like Google or Apple
make profit on the data instead of buying it from the [organization], that is not so motivating. But if
hundreds of SMEs thrive from the open data, and create social benefits, then it is really motivating”
(I7).
Regarding the belief that the organization’s gains of openly sharing government data are often lower
than the costs (VB5) and the belief that open government data does not provide any value to the
organization (VB7), the responses are largely the same with the above. Several organizations highlight
the complex nature of assessing benefits and benefits to an organization, similar to costs (I5, I7), where
I7 suggests that “the benefits for the organizations will mainly be intangible, such as improved visibility
and image, that could lead to more budget from the government”. Respondents reiterate factors
influencing this, such as (1) lack of understanding of value - the value of open data to the user and the
value of data opening to the organization (I10, I12, I14, I16), (2) complexity of the process, and (3) the
amount of resources to be spent on opening the data (I4, I17, I18). Some organizations, however,
consider this a barrier, e.g., according to I6, the popular opinion within their organization is that “open
data is a gift made without counterpart.” Most organizations, however, consider that open government
data do provide value to an organization (VB7), at least to some extent, with only a few (I3, I6, and
I7) having doubts for the above reasons.
Eleven respondents consider tasks associated with data preparation to be resource-consuming (VB6)
to some extent, with ten respondents, however, not considering this a major barrier that will prevent
them from publishing data, rather mentioning delays in publication, manual processes, or legal
obligations, manageable with the right means or expertise. Some respondents consider data preparation
to be a major obstacle due to the need for significant financial and human resources (I4, I8, I10, I16,
I17, I18), which tends to change over time, either by adapting the process (I13), gaining relevant
experience, or understanding the actual benefits of opening data.
Twelve respondents do not believe that the amount of resources spent on these tasks outweighs the
benefits (VB9), mentioning various benefits such as the digitization of data (I3), the dedication and
professionalism of the organization (I6), and the value recognized in statistics that balances the
investment resources (I14), whereas for nine respondents this is a barrier to some extent (I5, I7, I10, I12,
I14, I17, I18). One of the most common factors that negatively affects the intention to publish the data
is the lack of understanding among employees about the importance and benefits of data openness (I10,
I12, I17).
4.1.4. Risk barrier
Risk barriers form an important group, with the relevance of individual barriers of this category spanning
form very high (RB1, RB2, RB4, RB5) to low (RB7, RB9), with three more barriers assessed as highly
relevant (RB6) and of moderate relevance (RB3 and RB8).
Ten (10) respondents consider misuse of open government data (RB1) to be a risk. According to I5,
some administrations of which they are aware are, for this reason, reluctant to publish their data in an
open format, even if the data is already available in PDF format, considering that “PDF is not dangerous
but an Excel table is.” This is especially expressive for organizations dealing with geospatial data,
especially if that data may be a subject for national security, since, according to I7, “you need a good
map to win a war.” I1, for whom this was a barrier at the beginning of data opening, explained that there
was a lot of discussion about whether it is possible to open data about entrepreneurs, because there were
fears that this data could then be used for extortion.
Ten (10) respondents also fear misinterpretation of openly shared government data (RB2), as some
data “could result in misconceptions, influencing erroneous political decisions or the creation of
incorrect services” (I14, also in line with I15, I18, I19). However, this rarely prevents data opening
being more of a risk that publishers coexist with. I1 indicates that they do not experience the barrier
because they “accompany datasets with the well-developed documentation.”
Few organizations believe that concerns about open government data not being reused (RB3) are a
barrier to data opening (I13, I14, I16, I20). This issue is directly related to whether the organization is
13aware of data reuse, which ranges from actual reuse (I18, I1, I2, I3, I19) to usage statistics of datasets
from OGD portals such as download frequency (I4). However, “while it can be motivating for the
statisticians working on popular datasets, it can be demotivating for those working on less popular
ones” (I4). Thus, for those organizations that are not aware of reuse, this fear becomes a barrier.
According to I20, “It is very hard for data providers to gain an understanding of whom is using their
data and for what purposes” (also consistent with I16), implying “fear of open data non-reuse to cost-
benefit considerations and the organization's commitment to efficiently fulfilling its mission” (I14).
An overwhelming majority of the interviewed organizations (13 out of 18 respondents that were able to
comment on this) are concerned about violating data protection legislation when openly sharing
government data (RB4). For some organizations “this is the decisive factor to understand whether the
data will be published” (I1) “because it entails unwanted responsibilities” (I11, as well as I12). For
others, this does not prevent them from publishing data, but is a problem that they “try to combat” (I3,
I14), by turning to relevant bodies (usually special committees) (I1, I2, I3, I4, I21) to discuss issues
arising from unclear laws (I4, I6, I10), including “lack of basic knowledge such as GDPR” (I10) or lack
of clarity regarding “what anonymous data really are” (I4). Some organizations do not consider this a
barrier, which they justify by the nature of the data, which either does not contain personal data (I9, I18)
or is provided only anonymously or in an aggregated manner (I9). For some organizations, the data to
be protected is only available to selected organizations (I7) without the data being made available to a
wider audience.
Most organizations (11 out of 18 respondents, who were able to comment on this) fear that sensitive
data will be exposed as a result of opening its data (RB5). The reasons largely overlap with those
associated with RB4. Some organizations face this challenge because they do not have such advisory
bodies and lack knowledge of the GDPR (I10), while organizations that do not consider this a barrier
highlight the nature of the data that is not subject to sensitive data and related data fear (I2).
Less than a half of respondents (every third respondent) fear making mistakes when preparing data
for publication (RB6). Some organizations express minimal fear, noting that errors are rare, swiftly
rectified (I4), or perceived as a greater concern within the database itself rather than during data opening
(I5). Others admitted to partial fear initially, though improvements have since been implemented (I6).
For certain respondents, fear stemmed from a lack of education (I10). One respondent acknowledged
fear, particularly concerning data nature that requires an exceptional accuracy (I15), while another
attributed apprehension to a pervasive “judgmental culture” within the government, where
accountability heightens sensitivity to potential errors (I19).
Even less interviewees (one in six respondents) fear that users will find existing errors in the data
(RB7). Most respondents dismissed this fear, viewing users as valuable testers who can identify and
report issues (I1, I5, I6, I7), thereby aiding in data quality improvement (I6), generally agreeing that
errors, if identified, are promptly addressed through data correction publications (I4). Some respondents
attributed the lack of fear to citizens' limited knowledge or the absence of thorough analysis by the
scientific community (I18). Others acknowledged a partial fear, primarily driven by political
sensitivities surrounding data and the need to “to “protect” the minister” (I19). However, concerns
about data misuse by conflicting actors were raised, where emotional considerations and organizational
dynamics may influence data-sharing decisions (I20).
Less than a quarter of respondents (one in five respondents) fear that openly sharing its data will
reduce its gains (RB8). Several respondents dismissed this fear, stating that their organization does not
profit from data sales, being primarily government-funded (I1, I4). Some respondents acknowledged
the fear but noted limited alternatives, stressing that this might be the case for administrations reliant on
data sales for funding, which was stressed by interviewees representing such an administration (I7). The
notion of data monetization, fueled by the prominence of big tech giants like GAFAM, created fantasies
that large amounts of money can be made from data (I6). Additionally, concerns varied across
government departments, with some historically seeking revenue from data sales (I19), while others,
like provincial administrations, prioritized considerations around potential misuse and political
sensitivities over financial gains (I20).
Finally, the fewest number of respondents (one out of 18 who were able to comment on this) fear that
openly sharing its data will allow its competitors to benefit from this data (RB9). Several
14respondents dismissed this fear, citing the absence of direct competitors or the belief that open data
initiatives primarily benefit the public (I1, I6, I12, I10). Others highlighted the potential threat posed by
competitors leveraging shared data against national interests (I11). Conversely, some interviewees
perceived reluctance from other administrations to share data due to apprehensions about tech giants
profiting from it (I5), which is conflicting with others, where, according to I7, “if a company makes a
profit from open data, it does not mean that the [organization] will get poorer because of that.”
4.1.5. Tradition barrier
Tradition barrier was found to be generally relevant with two individual barriers found as of very high
relevance (TB2, TB3), two highly relevant (TB4, TB5) and one of moderate relevance (TB1).
Respondents' opinions regarding whether Freedom of Information (FOI) requests suffice for the
public to obtain government data (TB1) vary. For example, I1 acknowledges that while FOI requests
may be relevant in certain cases, they do not believe they are universally sufficient and are sufficient for
their organization. Instead, they advocate for a default of open access to data, with exceptions requiring
authorization. I7 recognizes that people may need to pay a fee to request data, indicating a barrier to
accessing information.
Similarly, the responses vary regarding the reluctance of organizations to implement the cultural
change required for openly sharing government data (TB2). While many organizations (15) express
no strong reluctance, indicating an openness-driven approach or an established culture of publication to
some extent (e.g., I2, I3, I4, I9), others highlight challenges and barriers to implementing this change.
Organizations like I8 and I10 see it as a barrier, predominantly because “it is time-consuming, requires
training, financial and human resources” (I8) and “there is a lack of appropriate training/information”
(I10). I16 and I17 see it as a significant barrier due to a lack of understanding the value of open data.
Half of respondents indicate that the lack of skills required for openly sharing government data for
employees in their organization (TB3) is not a barrier, although it may be a challenge. Obstacles are
attributed to factors such as (1) resource constraints (including human resources and the fear of losing
skilled staff) (I1, I2) or (2) specific format requirements.
Similar views were expressed regarding the lack of skills required to maintain open government data
(TB4), largely repeating the responses related to skill shortages for the first-time publishing, with only
a few new elements. I13 indicated that this tends to be an issue, but only in relation to metadata
maintenance, while for I8 it appears to be a challenge due to the perceived secondary importance of
open data compared to other organizational priorities.
Finally, opinions vary regarding whether organizations are reluctant to radically change
organizational processes to enable openly sharing government data (TB5). Some respondents (I6,
I7) note that while there may be challenges or barriers to change, at least at the beginning (I6), there is
no inherent reluctance. Overall, while most organizations demonstrate a commitment to open data and
a willingness to adapt, some acknowledge challenges in implementing radical changes to organizational
processes, albeit with varying degrees of reluctance. There are organizations that acknowledge moderate
to high levels of reluctance or barriers due to the need for radical organizational change (I5, I15, I17).
I5 explains that “open data requires a shift from the silo structure, which is hard to achieve and creates
unclear responsibilities (i.e., who has to answer which question).” There was less reluctance for
organizations with flexible processes such as I3.
Overall, while some organizations embrace a culture of openness, many acknowledge the challenges of
transitioning from traditional approaches to a more sharing-oriented culture, especially since most
public sector organizations’ system development traditions prioritize internal use (“long tradition of
developing in-house, and being self-contained” (I14)), “making it challenging to adapt these systems
for broader information access and sharing” (I13). However, the necessary changes affect not only the
system design, but also business processes within the organization and their flexibility for change,
sometimes associated with a lack of financial resources, especially if the organizations do not have
financial support and do not participate in the OGD movement on a voluntary basis, along with cultural
changes where there still tends to be lack of understanding of the value of open data.
154.1.6. Image barrier
Finally, the image barrier with all individual barriers found relevant. However, some organizations do
not see an image barrier, rather having an opposite opinion finding “open data important to increase the
image” (I15).
The majority of respondents (14 out of 18 respondents who were able to express an opinion) indicate
that their organization does not have a negative image of open government data (IB1). They either
explicitly state no negativity or express positive attitudes toward open data initiatives, emphasizing its
importance and potential benefits. I10 mentions a partial belief that some executives may prefer to avoid
open data disclosure due to unfamiliarity and time constraints, but overall, there is no negative image of
open data. I7 expresses a partial cautiousness of having all data to be opened, whereas they are “not
against the principle of open data, but opening all the data would threaten the existence of the
organization” as they sustain the organization by selling their data.
The majority of respondents (14 out of 18 respondents) also indicate that their organization does not
believe open government data is not valuable for users (IB2). They either explicitly state no
negativity or express positive attitudes toward the value of open data, citing usage statistics (I4),
importance of openness to citizens (I1, I2, I3, I16), or the absence of negative beliefs (I1, I3, I18). Some
respondents (I6, I8, I10, I12), however, mention ignorance or lack of awareness within the organization
about the potential value of open data for users, but they do not outright state a belief that open
government data is not valuable.
Ten respondents indicate that their organization does not fear that openly sharing government data
will damage their reputation (IB3), emphasizing a positive stance towards openness and transparency,
with some highlighting that not publishing open data could actually harm their reputation, especially for
an organization of their type (I4). Some respondents (I12, I16) express a partial fear or concern,
particularly dependent on the type of data being shared or potential errors in publication.
Some respondents (I1, I3, I14, I16, I18) express a fear that the accidental publication of low-quality
data could indeed damage their organization's reputation (IB4), although it is not necessarily a
barrier to publish. Instead, publication may be delayed until identified issues are fixed, except if data is
expected to be published on a daily basis and thus cannot be delayed (I3). In the case of I3, this tends to
affect reputation but does not affect their decision not to publish. Some respondents, however, indicate
that their organization does not fear such damage to reputation, mentioning various validation processes
in place to ensure data quality and the ability to easily revert to previous versions in case of errors (I4,
I5, I6, I7), and the overall control over data publication to prevent random or low-quality releases (I9,
I11, I12).
Fear of associating published data to incorrect conclusions drawn from OGD analysis by OGD
users with consequent damage to the reputation of an organization (IB5) sees higher severity,
although also does not become a decisive factor not to publish data. However, organizations dealing
with more sensitive data or data on a topical issue concerning users (e.g., mobility or crisis-related data)
tend to experience criticism (I3, I6). As such, I3 strongly agree that associating with incorrect
conclusions from OGD analysis could damage their reputation, citing examples of crises and increased
interest to stay informed regarding their management (I15).
4.2. Revised IRT Model Tailored to OGD
An assessment of the relevance of the constructs in the developed IRT model revealed general agreement
on its form, suggesting that most constructs, especially within the image, tradition, value, and risk
barriers, are relevant as they contribute to the understanding of barriers to openly sharing government
data (Figure 2). 9 barriers were recognized relevant by more than half interviewed organizations, 4 of
which are risk barriers (namely, RB4, RB5, RB1, RB2 in order of relevance), 2 refer to tradition barriers
(TB2, TB3), and one barrier refers to usage, value, and image barriers, respectively (UB2, VB6, IB5).
16Figure 2: Barrier’s relevance assessment
While all categories of barriers were found to be relevant by the experts, the relevance of all individual
measurement items of usage and image barriers were confirmed with some instances where certain
constructs were considered “somehow relevant” (or “irrelevant but can be relevant for other governance
models, such as B2C or B2G”, but only according to a single expert), leading to several discussions
regarding possible changes to the model. As a result of the reevaluation of the model in two rounds,
consensus on the final version of the model, consisting of 39 items, was obtained (Table 8). During the
rounds of evaluation, four main changes were discussed among the experts.
Relevance of VB3 and RB9. VB3 and RB9 were assessed as potentially irrelevant for this model, but
potentially relevant for other governance models, such as B2C or B2G, due to the fact that many public
agencies are the only owners of respective data and, as such, have no competitors, which is more likely
relevant for business. VB3, however, was assessed as highly relevant by all other experts and therefore
remained in the model. RB9 was brought to the next round of evaluation (iteration) and experts agreed
to retain it in the model.
Addition of new barriers. Usage barriers were suggested to be expanded to include three additional
measurement items, namely: (1) lack of resources (human), (2) lack of resources to publish in the
required formats, and (3) difficulty in prioritizing data for publication, which emerged during the
interviews as frequently encountered challenges by the organizations interviewed. The tradition barrier,
in turn, was proposed to be extended with “Data opening is not part of the culture from the very
beginning.” After the reevaluation, these four new barriers were added in the model and labeled UB9,
UB10, UB11, and TB6, respectively.
Merging of barriers. At the same time, several proposals have been made for aggregating/combining
several individual barriers into one, since for some experts they lead to similar responses from
interviewees. This was the case with (1) IB2 and VB8; (2) VB5 and VB7; (3) UB4 and UB5; (4) UB8
concerning data maintenance and UB4, UB5, and UB6 concerning data publishing. A deliberate
decision was made to retain these barriers within the model. However, it was recognized that further
clarity needed to be provided to interviewees during the interview process. For example, complexities
surrounding the data opening process (VB5 and VB7) were determined to necessitate explicit
definitions. Here, “data opening process complexity” was clarified to encompass the intricacies of
activities to be carried out involved in preparing and publishing data as open data. Lastly, efforts were
made to distinctly delineate between items pertaining to initial data publication and the ongoing
maintenance required to keep data and metadata current (UB8, UB4, UB5, and UB6). This
differentiation aimed to underscore the dual nature of data management: the initial publication and the
continuous upkeep of data and metadata necessary for maintaining relevance and accuracy. Finally,
based on the insights gained from expert interviews, a decision was made to retain both items IB2 and
17VB8 within the protocol. While both items were recognized as significant, interviewees perceived them
as somewhat duplicative in nature. To streamline the identification of barriers within organizations and
the subsequent definition of corrective actions, it was determined that IB2 would be retained in the
protocol. However, during the analysis phase, IB2 would be considered within both the Image and Value
Barriers. This approach ensures that the assessment captures the nuances of organizational perceptions
regarding the value of open data while avoiding unnecessary redundancy in the protocol.
Revision of UB2. Finally, UB2 was suggested to be deleted or modified as one expert highlighted that
this caused difficulties for interviewees due to limited understanding of what these principles are, with
other experts suggesting keeping it but ensuring that the interviewees are first introduced to open data
principles. Moreover, one expert emphasized the importance of clearly defining what the term OGD
means, as organizations tend to perceive it differently, and some believe that publicly available but non-
machine-readable data is still OGD. After the reevaluation, it was decided to keep it in the model but to
carefully introduce respondents to what OGD is and to OGD principles at the beginning of the
interviews.
The final version of the model, consisting of 39 items, is presented in Table 8.
Table 8: Revisited Innovation Resistance Theory model and its elements
Barrier Measurement item
Usage Barrier UB1: It is difficult to attain the appropriate quality level for open government data to be shared openly
(UB) UB2: It is difficult to prepare data for publication so that they comply with OGD principles
UB3: It is difficult to prepare data for publication so that they become appropriate for reuse
UB4: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to the complexity of the process
UB5: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to the unclear (poorly defined) process
UB6: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to their limited functionality
UB7: Open government data portals often do not allow for semi-automation of the publishing process
UB8: It is difficult to maintain openly shared government data (keep data and metadata made openly
available on the OGD portal updated)
UB9: It is difficult to prepare data for publication, publish and/or maintain data due to lack of human
resources
UB10: It is difficult to prepare and publish data in required formats (i.e. those that differ from those
stored in the organization, as well as in “advanced” formats, incl. GIS data or RDF)
UB11: It is difficult to prioritize data for publication (i.e., understand what data to publish, as well as
what data can or cannot be published)
Value Barrier VB1: My organization believes that openly sharing government data is often not valuable for the public
(VB) VB2: Many open government datasets are not appropriate for reuse
VB3: Many open government datasets suffer from data quality issues (completeness, accuracy,
uniqueness, consistency etc.)
VB4: The public gains of openly sharing government data are often lower than the costs
VB5: My organizations’ gains of openly sharing government data are often lower than the costs
VB6: Data preparation is too resource-consuming for my organization
VB7: Open government data do not provide any value to my organization
[VB8: Open data that my organization can openly share will not provide value to users is covered as
part of IB2]
VB9: The amount of resources to be spent to prepare, publish and maintain open government data
outweigh the benefit my organization gains from it
Risk Barrier RB1: My organization fears the misuse of openly shared government data
(RB) RB2: My organization fears the misinterpretation of openly shared government data
RB3: My organization fears that openly shared government data will not be reused
RB4: My organization fears violating data protection legislation when openly sharing government data
RB5: My organization fears that sensitive data will be exposed as a result of opening its data
RB6: My organization fears making mistakes when preparing data for publication
RB7: My organization fears that users will find existing errors in the data
RB8: My organization fears that openly sharing its data will reduce its gains (otherwise the organization
could sell the data or use it in another beneficial way)
RB9: My organization fears that openly sharing its data will allow its competitors to benefit from this
data
Tradition TB1: Freedom of information requests are sufficient for the public to obtain government data
Barrier (TB) TB2: My organization is reluctant to implement the culture change required for openly sharing
government data
TB3: Employees in my organization lack the skills required for openly sharing government data
18TB4: Employees in my organization lack the skills required for maintaining openly shared government
data
TB5: My organization is reluctant to radically change the organizational processes that would enable
openly sharing government data
TB6: My organization is not actively participating in the OGD movement by openly sharing government
data due to the fact that data opening is not part of the culture from the very beginning
Image Barrier IB1: My organization has a negative image of open government data
(IB) IB2: My organization believes that open government data is not valuable for users
IB3: My organization fears that openly sharing government data will damage the reputation of my
organization
IB4: My organization fears that the accidental publication of low-quality data will damage the reputation
of my organization
IB5: My organization fears that associating them to incorrect conclusions drawn from OGD analysis by
OGD users will damage the reputation of my organization
italics are used for barriers that were added or modified during reevaluation of the model
5 Discussion
In this study, we introduce a novel theoretical model that shifts the focus from factors surrounding
acceptance of OGD (Talukder et al., 2019; Lnenicka et al., 2021; Zuiderwijk et al., 2015; Shao, 2023;
Weerakkody et al., 2017) to identifying barriers that prevent public agencies from opening government
data. By examining obstacles organizations face in sharing data, this model provides a more detailed
and context-specific understanding of the challenges and resistance factors that hinder the adoption of
OGD practices. By focusing on the reasons behind resistance, IRT differentiates from theories such as
UTAUT and TAM, and helps in developing targeted strategies to overcome these barriers.
The findings reveal that the category with the most frequently encountered barriers is the risk barrier
category. Risks of violating data protection legislation, sensitive data exposure, data misuse, and
misinterpretation are barriers faced by more than half of the organizations interviewed, which is also in
line with some previous research (Heijlen & Crompvoets, 2021; Kleiman et al., 2020; Shepherd et al.,
2020; Wang et al., 2019; Zhao & Fan, 2021). In addition, complexity of data preparation for their
publication so that they comply with OGD principles and the amount of resources to be spent on this
(Kleiman et al., 2020) were the most frequent barriers, indicating significant challenges that need to be
addressed.
On the other hand, the least common barrier is the fear that competitors will benefit from shared data
(RB9), which is for two reasons. First, some organizations have no competitors, rendering this barrier
irrelevant. Secondly, some do have competitors, yet still do not view this as a significant barrier. They
instead recognize that the benefits of OGD, such as increased transparency, public trust, and the public
value that can be generated from or with it (Benmohamed et al., 2024; Schwoerer, 2022), outweigh any
potential competitive disadvantages.
During the interviews, especially when explaining how the interviewees addressed or prevented a
barrier, they mentioned a variety of countermeasures that can contribute to solving barriers.
Countermeasures can be taken within the organization (internal) or can depend on other open data
ecosystem actors (external). The countermeasures collected from the interviews relate to infrastructure
(e.g., improvement of the user-friendliness, redesign and automation of processes and individual
activities within the data publication process), policy and governance (e.g., development of standards
and of incentivization policies for data publishers, including implementing data protection technologies
and protocols to prevent the exposure of sensitive data, regular audits and monitoring), awareness raising
(e.g., campaigns within public organizations to promote OGD benefits, campaigns promoting OGD to
users), training and capacity building for public agencies, and collaboration (e.g., support from experts
when specific skills are needed, feedback of users on data quality).
5.1 Limitations and future work
This study does not come without limitations, most of which constitute the future research agenda. The
study uses a qualitative approach, which is sometimes criticized as being too subjective and less likely
19to produce generalizable results. However, this choice is justified by the fact that our primary intent was
to validate and refine the theoretical model we developed based on a review of literature. At the same
time, qualitative methods are known to provide insights into understanding and identifying context-
specific causes compared to quantitative methods (Bryman, 2016). This is also in line with findings of
systematic review of studies using IRT (Huang, Jin & Coghlan, 2021), according to which, as factors
influencing resistance towards innovation adoption are context- and innovation- specific, research
should employ qualitative methods to gain a validated understanding of the research context and then
apply quantitative methods to verify results. In our case, the identification of the barriers faced by public
agencies when deciding to open government data was a secondary objective, a by-product. As such, in
future work, we expect to employ a quantitative approach to examine barriers and verify the results,
which can be achieved using the developed IRT model proposed in this study.
This study uses IRT, while some existing studies suggest that the use of a combination of several
technology adoption theories can lead to some valuable insights as integrated models allow for a broader
view of the phenomenon in a single study, studying more intricate relationships between elements of
multiple models. In the OGD domain, this typically concerned UTAUT combined with other theories
(Wang et al., 2020; Lnenicka et al., 2022; Islam et al., 2023), however, in a broader technology adoption
research, there are several studies that experimented with IRT combination with other models such as
Distrust theory (Prakash & Das, 2022), TAM (Lin, 2019), and UTAUT (Purwanto, Sjarief & Anwar,
2021; Oh et al., 2019; Soh et al., 2020; Migliore et al., 2022). In future work, the IRT model tailored to
OGD we developed could be extended by combining it with other models.
Another limitation lies in the belief that the greatest value of IRT as a theory is demonstrated in studies
that involve parties who are actually reluctant to adopt the innovation in question, thereby providing a
more complete picture of the real-life barriers that hinder the adoption (Kaur et al., 2020), although it is
not a general rule followed by the research utilizing IRT. Nonetheless, in this study, we aimed to
overcome this problem by selecting countries that are considered less competitive in the OGD landscape
according to the ODM report, selecting countries that are belonging to beginners and followers.
However, although this is done at the country level, it is possible that respondents who agreed to take
part in this study are not low performers, while those who have problems may be reluctant to share their
experiences. As a result, it could be that regardless of the sampling approach with which we attempted
to address this issue, we still obtained representatives that are relatively mature within a less performing
country. This is partly supported by our data on both the experience of openly publishing government
data, in which most respondents have done this at least once, and the relevance of barriers they face.
Many respondents indicated that a lot of barriers were either partially relevant or irrelevant, although
for other organizations in the country, they are likely to be barriers.
The findings are based on the current state of OGD practices and barriers and technological
developments, thereby constituting a snapshot of the current state of affairs. As policies, technologies,
and organizational practices evolve, the relevance and applicability of the identified barriers may
change. Moreover, there can be other external factors, such as crises. E.g., based on our interview results,
we observed that the COVID-19 pandemic has significantly influenced public agencies' readiness to
open data, underscoring the need for transparency and accelerating digital transformation (also in line
with (Viseur, 2021; Nikiforova, 2020)). At the same time, for some organizations, particularly within
the healthcare domain, the pandemic also led to increased resistance or concerns (Yiannakoulias, 2020).
These concerns centered around data privacy and security, as well as the potential for data misuse and
misinterpretation. This cultural shift towards more open datasets as implied from an increased readiness
towards data opening, suggests the change of the open data ecosystem landscape and a new era in open
data. As such, continuous updates and longitudinal studies would be necessary to maintain the validity
of the model.
Another avenue for future work lies in the set of countermeasures identified from the interview. A
systematic mapping between these and the individual barriers would provide valuable insights on how
to overcome barriers to OGD adoption but also on the multifaceted impact of countermeasures that may
contribute to several individual barriers simultaneously.
205.2 Implications
The study contributes to existing literature by adapting the Innovation Resistance Theory to the context
of Open Government Data, a field in which the application of this theory has been limited. It thus
answers the call for novel theoretical models focusing on barriers to adoption. The empirical study
identifies key barriers that public agencies face when sharing government data. These findings provide
a theoretical basis for understanding resistance to OGD and can inform future research and theoretical
developments in the field.
As a practical contribution, in this paper, the developed OGD-adapted IRT model has been validated
through interviews with representatives from 21 public agencies across six countries. This practical
validation process highlights specific barriers encountered by these agencies and suggests immediate
corrective actions for national OGD initiatives. Although the study covered a limited number of
countries and organizations, the use of a well-defined sampling approach ensures a diverse set of
opinions. This makes the results more generalizable and provides a foundation for expanding the scope
to cover all EU countries, enhancing the applicability of the findings on a broader scale. As such, with
this study we respond to a recent call to stop a sharp decrease in access to data commonly termed as
“data winter” (Verhulst, 2024), increasingly acknowledged as one of the most troubling trends in the
digital landscape.
The model serves as a reference for analyzing predictors affecting resistance to data sharing, especially
relevant in the context of the European Commission's regulatory actions and the Data Act. While it is
tailored for the European context, its applicability extends beyond this region. This model can also find
its application in the B2G domain. Considering the rise in popularity of B2G data sharing and the
European Commission's regulatory efforts to shift from a voluntary to a mandatory data sharing model
(Susha et al., 2022), the proposed model can be instrumental in analyzing predictors of resistance to data
sharing in this subdomain. Finally, while we have applied it in the context of the national OGD it can
serve as a reference model to study barriers local governments are facing in sharing their data, thereby
contributing to the maturation of the local data ecosystem. The model's insights can facilitate effective
policymaking and the development of governance frameworks that foster open data ecosystems.
6 Conclusions
This study presents an IRT model adapted to OGD to empirically identify factors that contribute to
resistance against sharing government data. Based on the literature review concerning both IRT research
and barriers associated with data sharing by public agencies, we develop an initial conceptual model.
Drawing upon insights gleaned from interviews with 21 representatives from public agencies across 6
European countries, we iteratively refined the theoretical model to its final version. The refinement
process was guided by an informed consensus among 7 experts. The final model describes 39 barriers
across 5 categories, namely usage, value, risks, tradition, and image.
Through empirical study, by systematically analyzing various barriers within organizations, we identify
critical predictors of resistance and provide insights into how these can be addressed to promote a more
open and transparent data sharing culture.
The study demonstrates varying degrees of relevance of the five barriers. Usage barriers, particularly
difficulties in preparing, maintaining, and publishing data, underscore the need for streamlined
processes and enhanced functionality on OGD platforms, wherever possible leveraging from automation
or augmentation. Value barriers, including perceived low value of shared data and resource constraints,
highlight the necessity for clear business cases and integrating open data into routine operations. Risk
barriers, encompassing data privacy, security concerns, and fears of misuse, call for robust legal
compliance frameworks and resource investment to mitigate risks. Tradition barriers, such as resistance
to change and established practices, remain significant, emphasizing the need for cultural shifts and
educational initiatives. Image barriers, including fears of reputational damage and data
misinterpretation, emphasize the importance of accurate data management and effective communication
strategies.
21Finally, while we have applied it in the context of the national OGD, it can serve as a reference model
to study barriers local governments are facing in sharing their data, thereby contributing to the
maturation of the local data ecosystem. The model's insights can facilitate effective policymaking and
the development of governance frameworks that foster open data ecosystems. Organizations can
leverage the proposed model to diagnose and mitigate resistance within their own contexts. By focusing
on specific barriers and identifying countermeasures, organizations can foster a more open data sharing
environment. The model's adaptability also allows for its application across different regions and sectors
(e.g., B2G), making it a versatile tool for promoting OGD.
In conclusion, this study contributes both theoretically and practically to the understanding of resistance
to government data sharing. By identifying key barriers and providing a robust model for analysis, it
paves the way for more informed and effective strategies to promote transparency and openness in the
digital age.
REFERENCES
Agarwal, R., Mehrotra, A., Sharma, V., Papa, A. and Malibari, A., 2023. Over-the-top (OTT) retailing
in the post pandemic world. Unveiling consumer drivers and barriers using a qualitative study. Journal
of Retailing and Consumer Services, 75, p.103529.
Albano, C. S., & Reinhard, N. (2014). Open government data: Facilitating and motivating factors for
coping with potential barriers in the Brazilian context. In 13th IFIP WG 8.5 International Conference,
EGOV 2014, Dublin, Ireland, September 1-3, 2014. (pp. 181-193). Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Alharbi, F., McAvoy, J., & Woodworth, S. (2019). An examination of barriers to the adoption of smart
living services: A case study of the al-Madinah region development authority. In ICEB 2019
Proceedings (Newcastle Upon Tyne, UK).
Barry, E., & Bannister, F. (2014). Barriers to open data release: A view from the top. Information Polity,
19(1-2), 129-152.
Beno, M., Figl, K., Umbrich, J., & Polleres, A. (2017). Perception of key barriers in using and publishing
open data. JeDEM-eJournal of eDemocracy and Open Government, 9(2), 134-165.
Benmohamed, N., Shen, J., & Vlahu-Gjorgievska, E. (2024). Public value creation through the use of
open government data in Australian public sector: A quantitative study from employees' perspective.
Government Information Quarterly, 41(2), 101930.
Benning, O., Calles, J., Kantarci, B. B., and Khan, S. (2021). Transit Networks, Social Contacts, and
Open Data Meet Public Transportation Plans for Post-COVID-19: A Canadian Case Study. IEEE
Engineering Management Review, 49(3), 30-41.
Breaugh, J., Rackwitz, M., & Hammerschmid, G. (2023). Leadership and institutional design in
collaborative government digitalisation: Evidence from Belgium, Denmark, Estonia, Germany, and the
UK. Government Information Quarterly, 40(2), 101788.
Bryman, A. (2016). Social research methods. Oxford university press. New York, USA.
Chakraborty, D. (2023). Purchase behavior of consumers toward GSAs: A longitudinal assessment.
Journal of Computer Information Systems, 63(5), 1031-1056.
Chopard, K., & Przybylski, R. (2021). Methods Brief: Case Studies. JRSA. Available from:
https://www.jrsa.org/pubs/factsheets/jrsa-research-methods-brief-case-studies.pdf. (accessed 10
August, 2023).
Chokki, A. P. (2023). Open Government Data: Empowering Reuse through Collaboration, Data
Quality, and Data Storytelling (Doctoral dissertation, University of Namur).
Claudy, M. C., Garcia, R., & O’Driscoll, A. (2015). Consumer resistance to innovation—a behavioral
reasoning perspective. Journal of the Academy of Marketing Science, 43, 528-544.
Conradie, P., & Choenni, S. (2014). On the barriers for local government releasing open data.
Government information quarterly, 31, S10-S17.
Cranefield, J., Robertson, O., & Oliver, G. (2014). Value in the mash: Exploring the benefits, barriers
and enablers of open data apps. In Proceedings of the European Conference on Information Systems
(ECIS) 2014, Tel Aviv, Israel, June 9-11.
22Crusoe, J., Simonofski, A., Clarinval, A., & Gebka, E. (2019). The impact of impediments on open
government data use: insights from users. In Proceedings 13th International Conference on Research
Challenges in Information Science (RCIS) (pp. 1-12). IEEE.
Dang, A., Khanra, S., & Kagzi, M. (2022). Barriers towards the continued usage of massive open online
courses: A case study in India. The International Journal of Management Education, 20(1), 100562.
Dawes, S. S., Vidiasova, L., & Parkhimovich, O. (2016). Planning and designing open government data
programs: An ecosystem approach. Government Information Quarterly, 33(1), 15-27.
Dell’Acqua, F., & De Vecchi, D. (2017). Potentials of active and passive geospatial crowdsourcing in
complementing sentinel data and supporting copernicus service portfolio. Proceedings of the IEEE,
105(10), 1913-1925.
de Souza, A. A. C., d'Angelo, M. J., & Lima Filho, R. N. (2022). Effects of predictors of citizens'
attitudes and intention to use open government data and government 2.0. Government Information
Quarterly, 39(2), 101663.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Balakrishnan, J., Das, R., & Dutot, V. (2023). Resistance to innovation: A dynamic
capability model based enquiry into retailers’ resistance to blockchain adaptation. Journal of Business
Research, 157, 113-632.
Eckartz, S. M., Hofman, W. J., & Van Veenstra, A. F. (2014). A decision model for data sharing. In
13th IFIP WG 8.5 International Conference, EGOV 2014, Dublin, Ireland, September 1-3, 2014.
Springer Berlin Heidelberg.
Eisenhardt, K. M. (1989). Building theories from case study research. Academy of management review,
14(4), 532-550.
Eriksson, N., Gökhan, A., & Stenius, M. (2021). A qualitative study of consumer resistance to mobile
payments for in-store purchases. Procedia Computer Science, 181, 634-641.
Garcia, L. V. (2022). Civil servants on open data: perceptions of Azorean civil servants before an
imminent open government data initiative. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance, Guimarães, Portugal, October 4 - 7, 2022 (pp. 591-593).
ACM.
Herzenstein, M., Posavac, S. S., & Brakus, J. J. (2007). Adoption of new and really new products: The
effects of self-regulation systems and risk salience. Journal of marketing research, 44(2), 251-260.
Hossain, M. A., Rahman, S., Quaddus, M., Hooi, E., & Olanrewaju, A. S. (2021). Factors affecting
performance of open government data initiatives: a multi-method approach using sem and FSQCA.
Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Commerce, 31(4), 300-319.
Heijlen, R., & Crompvoets, J. (2021). Open health data: Mapping the ecosystem. Digital Health, 7,
20552076211050167.
Herbig, P. A., & Day, R. L. (1992). Customer Acceptance: The Key to Successful Introductions of
Innovations. Marketing Intelligence & Planning, 10(1), 4-15.
Huang, D., Jin, X., & Coghlan, A. (2021). Advances in consumer innovation resistance research: A
review and research agenda. Technological Forecasting and Social Change, 166, 120594.
Islam, M. T., Talukder, M. S., Khayer, A., & Islam, A. N. (2023). Exploring continuance usage intention
toward open government data technologies: An integrated approach. VINE Journal of Information and
Knowledge Management Systems, 53(4), 785-807.
Jetzek, T., Avital, M., & Bjorn-Andersen, N. (2014). Data-driven innovation through open government
data. Journal of theoretical and applied electronic commerce research, 9(2), 100-120.
Kaur, P., Dhir, A., Singh, N., Sahu, G., & Almotairi, M. (2020). An innovation resistance theory
perspective on mobile payment solutions. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 55, 102059.
Khurshid, M. M., Zakaria, N. H., Arfeen, M. I., Rashid, A., Nasir, S. U., & Shehzad, H. M. F. (2022).
Factors influencing citizens’ intention to use open government data - A case study of Pakistan. Big Data
and Cognitive Computing, 6(1), 31.
Khanra, S., Dhir, A., Kaur, P., & Joseph, R. P. (2021). Factors influencing the adoption postponement
of mobile payment services in the hospitality sector during a pandemic. Journal of Hospitality and
Tourism Management, 46, 26-39.
23Kleiman, F., Meijer, S., & Janssen, M. (2020, September). Behavioral factors influencing the opening
of government data by civil servants: initial findings from the literature. In Proceedings of the 13th
International Conference on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance (pp. 529-534).
Kushwah, S., Dhir, A., & Sagar, M. (2019). Understanding consumer resistance to the consumption of
organic food. A study of ethical consumption, purchasing, and choice behaviour. Food Quality and
Preference, 77, 1-14.
Kubler, S., Robert, J., Neumaier, S., Umbrich, J., & Le Traon, Y. (2018). Comparison of metadata
quality in open data portals using the Analytic Hierarchy Process. Government Information Quarterly,
35(1), 13-29.
Kucera, J., Chlapek, D., Klímek, J., & Necaský, M. (2015). Methodologies and Best Practices for Open
Data Publication. In DATESO (pp. 52-64).
Leong, L. Y., Hew, T. S., Ooi, K. B., & Wei, J. (2020). Predicting mobile wallet resistance: A two-
staged structural equation modeling-artificial neural network approach. International Journal of
Information Management, 51, 102047.
Linåker, J., & Runeson, P. (2021). How to enable collaboration in open government data ecosystems:
A public platform provider’s perspective. JeDEM-eJournal of eDemocracy and Open Government,
13(1), 1-30.
Lian, J. W., & Yen, D. C. (2014). Online shopping drivers and barriers for older adults: Age and gender
differences. Computers in human behavior, 37, 133-143.
Lijphart, A. (1971). Comparative politics and the comparative method. American political science
review, 65(3), 682-693.
Lnenicka, M., Nikiforova, A., Luterek, M., Milic, P., Rudmark, D., Neumaier, S., Santoro, C., Flores,
C. C., Janssen, M. & Bolívar, M. P. R. (2024). Identifying patterns and recommendations of and for
sustainable open data initiatives: A benchmarking-driven analysis of open government data initiatives
among European countries. Government Information Quarterly, 41(1), 101898.
Lněnička, M., Nikiforova, A., Saxena, S., & Singh, P. (2022). Investigation into the adoption of open
government data among students: The biehavioural intention-based comparative analysis of three
countries. Aslib Journal of Information Management, 74(3), 549-567.
López, V., & Čukić, M. (2021). A dynamical model of SARS-CoV-2 based on people flow networks.
Safety Science, 134, 105034.
López Reyes, M. E., & Magnussen, R. (2022). The use of open government data to create social value.
In Proceedings 21st IFIP WG 8.5 International Conference, EGOV 2022, Linköping, Sweden,
September 6-8, 2022, (pp. 244-257). Springer International Publishing.
Martin, C. (2014). Barriers to the open government data agenda: Taking a multi‐level perspective. Policy
& Internet, 6(3), 217-240.
Martin, S., Foulonneau, M., Turki, S., & Ihadjadene, M. (2013). Open data: Barriers, risks and
opportunities. In Proceedings of the 13th European Conference on eGovernment: ECEG, Como, Italy,
June 13-14, 2013, (pp. 301-309). ACPI.
Ma, L., & Lee, C. S. (2019). Understanding the barriers to the use of MOOCs in a developing country:
An innovation resistance perspective. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 57(3), 571-590.
Ma, R., & Lam, P. T. (2019). Investigating the barriers faced by stakeholders in open data development:
A study on Hong Kong as a “smart city”. Cities, 92, 36-46.
Mergel, I., Edelmann, N., & Haug, N. (2019). Defining digital transformation: Results from expert
interviews. Government Information Quarterly, 36(4), 101385.
Migliore, G., Wagner, R., Cechella, F. S., & Liébana-Cabanillas, F. (2022). Antecedents to the adoption
of mobile payment in China and Italy: An integration of UTAUT2 and innovation resistance theory.
Information Systems Frontiers, 24(6), 2099-2122.
Molesworth, M., & Suortti, J. P. (2002). Buying cars online: the adoption of the web for high‐
involvement, high‐cost purchases. Journal of Consumer Behaviour: An International Research Review,
2(2), 155-168.
Nikiforova, A. (2020a). Definition and Evaluation of Data Quality: User-Oriented Data Object-Driven
Approach to Data Quality Assessment. Baltic Journal of Modern Computing, 8(3), 391-432
24Nikiforova, A. (2020b). Timeliness of open data in open government data portals through pandemic-
related data: a long data way from the publisher to the user. In Proceedings of the 4th International
Conference on Multimedia Computing, Networking and Applications (MCNA), Valencia, Spain,
October 19-22, 2020, (pp. 131-138). IEEE.
Nikiforova, A., & Zuiderwijk, A. (2022). Barriers to openly sharing government data: towards an open
data-adapted innovation resistance theory. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on
Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance (pp. 215-220).
Oh, Y. J., Park, H. S., & Min, Y. (2019). Understanding location-based service application
connectedness: Model development and cross-validation. Computers in human behavior, 94, 82-91, 82-
91.
Ose, S. O. (2016). Using Excel and Word to structure qualitative data. Journal of Applied Social Science,
10(2), 147-162.
Painter, M., & Peters, B. G. (2010). Administrative traditions in comparative perspective: Families,
groups and hybrids. In: Painter, M., Peters, B.G. (eds) Tradition and Public Administration. Palgrave
Macmillan, London. 19-30.
Palys, T. (2008). Purposive sampling. The Sage encyclopedia of qualitative research methods, 2(1),
697-698.
Prakash, A. V., & Das, S. (2022). Explaining citizens’ resistance to use digital contact tracing apps: A
mixed-methods study. International Journal of Information Management, 63, 102468.
Purwanto, E., Sjarief, R., & Anwar, C. (2021). Driving and Restricting Factors of the Behavior Intention
of the Digital Fishery Platform Adoption in New Normal: Combine UTAUT-IRT Model. Review of
International Geographical Education Online, 11(8), 1089-1103.
Quarati, A. (2023). Open government data: usage trends and metadata quality. Journal of Information
Science, 49(4), 887-910.
Quarati, A., & De Martino, M. (2019). Open government data usage: a brief overview. In Proceedings
of the 23rd International Database Applications & Engineering Symposium, Athens, Greece, June 10-
12, 2019, (pp. 1-8). ACM.
Ram, S. (1987). A model of innovation resistance. Advances in consumer research, 14(1).
Ram, S., & Sheth, J. N. (1989). Consumer resistance to innovations: the marketing problem and its
solutions. Journal of consumer marketing, 6(2), 5-14.
Ruijer, E., Détienne, F., Baker, M., Groff, J., & Meijer, A. J. (2020). The politics of open government
data: Understanding organizational responses to pressure for more transparency. The American review
of public administration, 50(3), 260-274.
Sadiq, M., Adil, M., & Paul, J. (2021). An innovation resistance theory perspective on purchase of eco-
friendly cosmetics. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services, 59, 102369.
Schwoerer, K. (2022). Whose open data is it anyway? An exploratory study of open government data
relevance and implications for democratic inclusion. Information Polity, 27(4), 491-515.
Shao, D. (2024). Empirical analysis of open government data usage in Tanzania. Information Discovery
and Delivery, 52(1), 73-84.
Shepherd, E., Bunn, J., Flinn, A., Lomas, E., Sexton, A., Brimble, S., Chorley, K., Harrison, E., Lowry,
J. & Page, J. (2019). Open government data: critical information management perspectives. Records
Management Journal, 29(1/2), 152-167.
Shepherd, E., Sexton, A., Duke-Williams, O., & Eveleigh, A. (2020). Risk identification and
management for the research use of government administrative data. Records Management Journal,
30(1), 101-123.
Soh, P. Y., Heng, H. B., Selvachandran, G., Anh, L. Q., Chau, H. T. M., Son, L. H., ... & Varatharajan,
R. (2020). Perception, acceptance and willingness of older adults in Malaysia towards online shopping:
a study using the UTAUT and IRT models. Journal of ambient intelligence and humanized computing,
1-13.
Susha, I., Grönlund, Å., & Janssen, M. (2015). Driving factors of service innovation using open
government data: An exploratory study of entrepreneurs in two countries. Information polity, 20(1), 19-
34.
25Susha, I., Schiele, J., & Frenken, K. (2022, August). Business-to-government data sharing for public
interests in the European union: results of a public consultation. In Proceedings of the 15th IFIP WG
8.5 International Conference, EGOV 2016, Guimarães, Portugal, September 5-8, 2016, (pp. 515-529).
Springer International Publishing.
Talwar, S., Talwar, M., Kaur, P., & Dhir, A. (2020). Consumers’ resistance to digital innovations: A
systematic review and framework development. Australasian Marketing Journal, 28(4), 286-299.
Talukder, M. S., Shen, L., Talukder, M. F. H., & Bao, Y. (2019). Determinants of user acceptance and
use of open government data (OGD): An empirical investigation in Bangladesh. Technology in Society,
56, 147-156.
Toots, M., Mcbride, K., Kalvet, T., & Krimmer, R. (2017). Open data as enabler of public service co-
creation: Exploring the drivers and barriers. In 2017 Conference for E-Democracy and Open
Government (CeDEM) (pp. 102-112). IEEE.
Utamachant, P., & Anutariya, C. (2018). An analysis of high-value datasets: a case study of Thailand’s
open government data. In Proceedings of the 15th International Joint Conference on Computer Science
and Software Engineering (JCSSE), Nakhonpathom, Thailand, July 11-13, 2018, (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
Van Loenen, B., Zuiderwijk, A., Vancauwenberghe, G., Lopez-Pellicer, F. J., Mulder, I., Alexopoulos,
C., Magnussen, R., Saddiqa, M., de Rosnay, M. D., Crompvoets, J., Polini, A., Re, B., & Casiano Flores,
C. (2021). Towards value-creating and sustainable open data ecosystems: A comparative case study and
a research agenda. JeDEM-eJournal of eDemocracy and Open Government, 13(2), 1-27.
Van Veenstra, A. F., & Van Den Broek, T. A. (2013). Opening moves–drivers, enablers and barriers of
open data in a semi-public organization. In Proceedings of the 12th IFIP WG 8.5 International
Conference, EGOV 2013, Koblenz, Germany, September 16-19, 2013, (pp. 50 - 61), Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
Verhulst, S. (2024). Are we entering a “Data Winter”? https://sverhulst. medium.com/are-we-entering-
a-data-winter-f654eb8e8663
Verma, A., Chakraborty, D., & Verma, M. (2023). Barriers of food delivery applications: A perspective
from innovation resistance theory using mixed method. Journal of Retailing and Consumer Services,
73, 103369.
Vetrò, A., Canova, L., Torchiano, M., Minotas, C. O., Iemma, R., & Morando, F. (2016). Open data
quality measurement framework: Definition and application to Open Government Data. Government
Information Quarterly, 33(2), 325-337.
Viseur, R. (2021). Open data in digital strategies against COVID-19: the case of Belgium. In
Proceedings of the 17th International Symposium on Open Collaboration (pp. 1-10).
Wang, D., Richards, D., Bilgin, A. A., & Chen, C. (2020). A predictive model for citizens’ utilization
of open government data portals. In Proceedings of the 22nd International Conference on Asia-Pacific
Digital Libraries, ICADL 2020, Kyoto, Japan, November 30–December 1, 2020, (pp. 159-175). Springer
International Publishing.
Wang, H. J., & Lo, J. (2016). Adoption of open government data among government agencies.
Government Information Quarterly, 33(1), 80-88.
Wang, V., Shepherd, D., & Button, M. (2019). The barriers to the opening of government data in the
UK: A view from the bottom. Information Polity, 24(1), 59-74.
Weerakkody, V., Irani, Z., Kapoor, K., Sivarajah, U., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2017). Open data and its
usability: an empirical view from the Citizen’s perspective. Information Systems Frontiers, 19, 285-300.
Wirtz, B. W., Piehler, R., Thomas, M. J., & Daiser, P. (2016). Resistance of public personnel to open
government: A cognitive theory view of implementation barriers towards open government data. Public
Management Review, 18(9), 1335-1364.
Yang, T. M., & Wu, Y. J. (2021). Looking for datasets to open: An exploration of government officials'
information behaviors in open data policy implementation. Government Information Quarterly, 38(2),
101574.
Yiannakoulias, N., Slavik, C. E., Sturrock, S. L., & Darlington, J. C. (2020). Open government data,
uncertainty and coronavirus: An infodemiological case study. Social Science & Medicine, 265, 113549.
Yin, R. K. (2018). Case study research and applications. Sage.
26Yi, M. (2019). Exploring the quality of government open data: Comparison study of the UK, the USA
and Korea. The Electronic Library, 37(1), 35-48.
Zaltman, G., & Wallendorf, M. (1979). Consumer behavior, basic findings and management
implications. Wiley.
Zhao, Y., & Fan, B. (2021). Effect of an agency’s resources on the implementation of open government
data. Information & management, 58(4), 103465.
Zhenbin, Y., Kankanhalli, A., Ha, S., & Tayic, G. K. (2020). What drives public agencies to participate
in open government data initiatives? an innovation resource perspective. Information & Management,
57(3), 103179.
Zuiderwijk, A. (2015). Open data infrastructures: The design of an infrastructure to enhance the
coordination of open data use. Doctoral dissertation, TU Delft, Netherland.
Zuiderwijk, A., Janssen, M. and Dwivedi, Y.K., 2015. Acceptance and use predictors of open data
technologies: Drawing upon the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology. Government
information quarterly, 32(4), pp.429-440.
Zuiderwijk, A., Janssen, M., Meijer, R., Choenni, S., Charalabidis, Y., & Jeffery, K. (2012). Issues and
guiding principles for opening governmental judicial research data. In 11th IFIP WG 8.5 International
Conference, EGOV 2012, Kristiansand, Norway, September 3-6, 2012. (pp. 90-101). Springer Berlin
Heidelberg.
Appendix A
Table 1: The proposed Innovation Resistance Theory model and its elements (Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk, 2022)
Barrier Measurement item
Usage UB1: It is difficult to attain the appropriate quality level for open government data to be shared openly
Barrier (UB) UB2: It is difficult to prepare data for publication so that they comply with OGD principles
UB3: It is difficult to prepare data for publication so that they become appropriate for reuse
UB4: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to the complexity of the process
UB5: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to the unclear process
UB6: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to their limited functionality
UB7: Open government data portals often do not allow for semi-automation of the publishing process
UB8: It is difficult to maintain openly shared government data
Value VB1: My organization believes that openly sharing government data is often not valuable for the public
Barrier (VB) VB2: Many open government datasets are not appropriate for reuse
VB3: Many open government datasets suffer from data quality issues (completeness, accuracy, uniqueness, consistency
etc.)
VB4: The public gains of openly sharing government data are often lower than the costs
VB5: My organizations’ gains of openly sharing government data are often lower than the costs
VB6: Data preparation is too resource-consuming for my organization
VB7: Open government data do not provide any value to my organization
VB8: Open data that my organization can openly share will not provide value to users
VB9: The amount of resources to be spent to prepare, publish and maintain open government data outweigh the benefit my
organization gains from it
Risk Barrier RB1: My organization fears the misuse of openly shared government data
(RB) RB2: My organization fears the misinterpretation of openly shared government data
RB3: My organization fears that openly shared government data will not be reused
RB4: My organization fears violating data protection legislation when openly sharing government data
RB5: My organization fears that sensitive data will be exposed as a result of opening its data
RB6: My organization fears making mistakes when preparing data for publication
RB7: My organization fears that users will find existing errors in the data
RB8: My organization fears that openly sharing its data will reduce its gains (otherwise the organization could sell the data
or use it in another beneficial way)
RB9: My organization fears that openly sharing its data will allow its competitors to benefit from this data
Tradition TB1: Freedom of information requests are sufficient for the public to obtain government data
Barrier (TB) TB2: My organization is reluctant to implement the culture change required for openly sharing government data
TB3: Employees in my organization lack the skills required for openly sharing government data
TB4: Employees in my organization lack the skills required for maintaining openly shared government data
TB5: My organization is reluctant to radically change the organizational processes that would enable openly sharing
government data
27Image IB1: My organization has a negative image of open government data
Barrier (IB) IB2: My organization believes that open government data is not valuable for users
IB3: My organization fears that openly sharing government data will damage the reputation of my organization
IB4: My organization fears that the accidental publication of low-quality data will damage the reputation of my organization
IB5: My organization fears that associating them to incorrect conclusions drawn from OGD analysis by OGD users will
damage the reputation of my organization
Appendix B
Interview questions
Your organization
We will now start the interview with some questions about the organization you are working for.
Q1. By what government organization are you employed? (name, domain)
Q2. What are the main tasks of your organization?
Q3. What is your role in this organization?
Q4. What type of data does your organization collect? (structured/unstructured, sensitive/non-sensitive, topics,
ownership?)
Your organization and open data
Government agencies increasingly share their data on the internet so that citizens, companies, other government agencies, researchers,
and other actors can freely reuse this data. In the following questions, we refer to this process as openly sharing or providing
government data, or simply ‘open data’.
Q5. Has your organization ever openly shared its own data or the data it collected from other sources?
If yes, go to question 6
If no, go to question 10
Q6. What were the drivers for your organization to openly share its data?
Q7. What type of data did your organization share openly and how often?
Q8. Could you explain how the process of openly sharing data worked and who within your organization was or were involved?
(please refer to roles of colleagues without mentioning names)
Q9. What challenges did your organization face in openly sharing data?
Q10. What were the reasons for your organization not to share data openly?
Barrier-related questions
We will now discuss various types of barriers for openly sharing government data. We would like to know whether and how they are
relevant for your organization.
We will start discussing usage barriers. Usage barriers relate to the degree to which publishing your organization’s data requires
changes in your organization’s routines.
Q11. Are there any usage barriers related to the required changes in your organization’s routines that form a challenge for openly
sharing your organization’s data? (UB)
Q12. To what extent do the following situations form a barrier to openly sharing your organization’s data:
- an inappropriate quality level of your organization’s data? (UB1)
- a complicated process to prepare data for sharing? (UB2)
- a complicated process to make your organization’s data reusable by others? (UB3)
- a complicated process to publish your organization’s data on an open data portal? (UB4)
- an unclear process of publishing your organization’s data on an open data portal (UB5)
- limited functionality of open data portals? (UB6)
- no possibility to semi-automate my organization’s process to openly share its data? (UB7)
- the need and a complicated process to maintain data once published (UB8)
Q13. Are there any other usage barriers that form a barrier for your organization to openly share its data? (UBn)
We will now discuss value barriers for openly sharing government data. We would like to know whether and how these barriers are
relevant for your organization. Value barriers refer to the degree to which a value-to-price ratio is perceived in relation to other product
substitutes (e.g., OGD do not always provide value to users, datasets may be incomplete, there may be concerns about the quality of
open data, Openly sharing government data requires resources, including time and costs, it is impossible to sell the data when it is
openly available, data providers are usually the ones who invest the most effort and time in publishing data, while businesses and
citizens as data users profit the most)
28Q14. Are there any value barriers related to the required changes in your organization’s routines that form a challenge for openly
sharing your organization’s data? (VBn)
Q15. To what extent do the following situations form a barrier to openly sharing your organization’s data:
- the belief of people in your organization that openly sharing government data is often not valuable for the
public? (VB1)
- the belief of people in your organization that many open government datasets are not appropriate for reuse?
(VB2)
- the belief of people in your organization that that many open government datasets suffer from data quality
issues (completeness, accuracy, uniqueness, consistency, etc.)? (VB3)
- the belief of people in your organization that the public gains of openly sharing government data are often lower
than the costs (VB4)
- the belief of people in your organization that your organization’s gains of openly sharing government data are often
lower than the costs (VB5)
- the belief of people in your organization that data preparation is too resource-consuming for your organization?
(VB6)
- the belief of people in your organization that open government data do not provide any value to your organization?
(VB7)
- the belief of people in your organization that open data that your organization can openly share will not provide
value to users? (VB8)
- the belief of people in your organization that the number of resources to be spent to prepare, publish and maintain
open government data outweigh the benefit my organization gains from it? (VB9)
Q16. Are there any other value barriers that form a barrier for your organization to openly share its data? (VBn)
We will now discuss risk barriers to openly sharing government data. We would like to know whether and how they are relevant to
your organization. Risk barriers refer to the degree of uncertainty in regard to financial, functional, and social consequences of using an
OGD (publishing) (e.g., misuse, false conclusions, privacy concerns, mistakes when preparing data for publication, data quality etc.)
Q17. Are there any risk barriers related to the required changes in your organization’s routines that form a challenge for openly
sharing your organization’s data? (RBn)
Q18. To what extent do the following situations form a barrier to openly sharing your organization’s data:
- the fear of the misuse of openly shared government data? (RB1)
- the fear the misinterpretation of openly shared government data? (RB2)
- the fear that openly shared government data will not be reused? (RB3)
- the fear violating data protection legislation when openly sharing government data? (RB4)
- the fear that sensitive data will be exposed as a result of opening its data? (RB5)
- the fear making mistakes when preparing data for publication? (RB6)
- the fear that users will find existing errors in the data? (RB7)
- the fear that openly sharing its data will reduce its gains (otherwise the organization could sell the data or use it in
another beneficial way)? (RB8)
- the fear that openly sharing its data will allow its competitors to benefit from this data? (RB9)
Q19. Are there any other risk barriers that form a barrier for your organization to openly share its data? (RBn)
We will now discuss tradition barriers for openly sharing government data. We would like to know whether and how they are relevant
for your organization. Tradition barriers refer to the degree of uncertainty in regard to financial, functional, and social consequences of
using an OGD (publishing) (e.g., misuse, false conclusions, privacy concerns, mistakes when preparing data for publication, data
quality etc.)
Q20. Are there any tradition barriers related to the required changes in your organization’s routines that form a challenge for
openly sharing your organization’s data? (TBn)
Q21. To what extent do the following situations form a barrier to openly sharing your organization’s data:
- your organization believes that Freedom of information requests are sufficient for the public to obtain
government data? (TB1)
- your organization is reluctant to implement the culture change required for openly sharing government data?
(TB2)
- employees in your organization lack the skills required for openly sharing government data? (TB3)
29- employees in your organization lack the skills required for maintaining openly shared government data? (TB4)
- your organization is reluctant to radically change the organizational processes that would enable openly sharing
government data? (TB5)
Q22. Are there any other tradition barriers that form a barrier for your organization to openly share its data? (TBn)
We will now discuss image barriers to openly sharing government data. We would like to know whether and how they are relevant to
your organization. Image barriers refer to the degree to which an OGD publishing is perceived as having an unfavorable image (e.g.,
reputation will be damaged due to the publication of low-quality data, associated with incorrect conclusions drawn from OGD analysis
etc.)
Q23. Are there any image barriers related to the required changes in your organization’s routines that form a challenge for openly
sharing your organization’s data? (IBn)
Q24. To what extent do the following situations form a barrier to openly sharing your organization’s data:
- your organization has a negative image of open government data. (IB1)
- your organization believes that open government data is not valuable for users.
- (IB2)
- your organization fears that openly sharing government data will damage the reputation of your organization.
(IB3)
- your organization fears that the accidental publication of low-quality data will damage the reputation of your
organization. (IB4)
- your organization fears that associating them with incorrect conclusions drawn from OGD analysis by OGD users
will damage its reputation. (IB5)
Q25. Are there any other image barriers that form a barrier for your organization to openly share its data? (IBn)
Q26. Are there any other barriers that form a barrier for your organization to openly share its data (not limited to the categories
above)?
Closing question yes no
Would you like to get informed about the results of this study? ☐ ☐
Thank you for your participation in this study! We appreciate your time!
30