Automating Deformable Gasket Assembly
Simeon Adebola∗1, Tara Sadjadpour∗1, Karim El-Refai∗1, Will Panitch1, Zehan Ma1,
Roy Lin1, Tianshuang Qiu1, Shreya Ganti1, Charlotte Le 1, Jaimyn Drake 1, and Ken Goldberg1
Abstract—In Gasket Assembly, a deformable gasket must
be aligned and pressed into a narrow channel. This task is
common for sealing surfaces in the manufacturing of auto-
mobiles, appliances, electronics, and other products. Gasket
Assembly is a long-horizon, high-precision task and the gasket
must align with the channel and be fully pressed in to
achieve a secure fit. To compare approaches, we present 4
methods for Gasket Assembly: one policy from deep imitation
learning and three procedural algorithms. We evaluate these
methods with 100 physical trials. Results suggest that the
Binary+ algorithm succeeds in 10/10 on the straight channel
whereas the learned policy based on 250 human teleoperated
demonstrations succeeds in 8/10 trials and is significantly
slower. Code, CAD models, videos, and data can be found at
https://berkeleyautomation.github.io/robot-gasket/.
I. INTRODUCTION
Taskssuchasclothesfolding,threaduntangling,andcable
tracinghaveapplicationsinmanufacturing,logistics,anddo-
mestic applications, but present unique challenges for robots
duetothecomplexphysicsandlargeconfigurationspacesof
deformable objects. One such deformable manipulation task
is the assembly of gaskets, deformable components that fill
the space between two or more mating surfaces to provide
a seal, generally to prevent leakage from or into the joined
objects while under compression [1]. Gaskets compensate
for small gaps or imperfections in mating surfaces and play
Fig. 1: Gasket Assembly Example. This is an example of the Binary+
critical roles in industries such as automotive and appliance procedural algorithm rollout on the curved channel. Initially, the gasket is
manufacturing(wheretheyareessentialforsealingwindows, separate from the channel (1). The robot picks the gasket’s midpoint (2),
places it into the channel’s midpoint (3), and presses down to insert (4).
engines,andfuelsystems),plumbing,powergeneration,and
Then an endpoint of the gasket is picked, placed, and pressed into the
construction.AlmostallGasketAssemblytodayisperformed endpoint of the channel (5,6,7); the same is done with the second gasket
by humans. endpoint (8,9,10,11). We omit the remaining pick-place-press steps at the
quarter and eighth points, as well as the second press that occurs at each
We propose a robot gasket assembly task where a robot
pointforreinforcinginsertion.Finally,thegripperreturnstothemiddleof
must pick and place the gasket, a 1D deformable object, the channel (12) and slides from the middle to one end (13). It returns to
into a channel of similar length and width, such that the the middle and slides to the other endpoint (14,15). The end result is a
successfullyassembledgasket(16).
gasket snugly and completely fills the entire channel. The
setup can be easily and reliably replicated using common procedural.Theproceduralapproachesdifferprimarilyinthe
materials and a 3D printer with the provided CAD model. strategythateachusestochooseandorderthepick-andplace
The task requires pick-and-place, press, and slide moves to and press motions on the gasket, while the learned end-to-
be performed in succession. This is a high-precision, long- end approach utilizes Diffusion Policy [4] to learn a gasket
horizon task with a large state space, complicated dynamics, insertion policy from 250 human demonstrations.
and low error tolerances[2]. This paper makes the following contributions:
Gasket Assembly qualifies as a dull/dreary repetitive task 1) A novel formulation of a gasket assembly task that is
[3] and is thus a candidate for robotic automation with the easy to replicate.
goal of reducing worker fatigue and cost as a result of the 2) A deep imitation learning policy generated from 250
automation. We propose four approaches to automating the human-teleoperated demonstrations.
gasket assembly task: one learned implementation and three 3) Three analytic/procedural algorithms for the same task.
4) Experimental results comparing the learned policy and
∗EqualContribution
the procedural algorithms based on 100 physical trials
1The AUTOLab at UC Berkeley (automation.berkeley.edu)
{simeon.adebola, goldberg} @berkeley.edu that suggests procedural algorithms can be superior in
4202
guA
22
]OR.sc[
1v39521.8042:viXraterms of performance. C. Insertion Tasks
Robot manipulation has been applied to a number of
II. RELATEDWORK
insertion tasks involving both rigid and non-rigid objects.
A. Deformable Linear Object Perception and Manipulation
The most classic example is the peg-hole insertion task. In-
Deformable objects can be categorized into three distinct sertion tasks have been widely explored using learning from
types based on their dimensions: 1D objects (e.g., ropes, ca- demonstrations [27–29], reinforcement learning [30–33], re-
bles, strings, and electrical cords [2, 5–7]), 2D objects (e.g., gression[34] and multimodal perception [35], where the peg
fabrics and clothing [8]), and 3D objects (e.g., bags [9–11]). and insertion hole are rigid. Another work on insertion [36]
Inthispaper,wefocusonthe1Dclassofdeformableobjects, uses visual and tactile sensors and force-torque sensing
also known as deformable linear objects (DLOs), since they togetherwithself-supervisedlearningtoachievepoliciesthat
bestrepresentgaskets.Weusetheterms“DLO”and“gasket” allow a robot to insert a USB connector in an industrial
interchangeably in this paper. task setting. [37] uses reinforcement learning techniques to
There have been recent advancements in robotics for a learn how to insert a rigid peg into a deformable hole. Peg-
variety of manipulation tasks involving DLOs, such as knot hole insertion has recently been applied to medical settings
tying [6], rope untangling [2], and the production of wire in [38], which studies techniques to insert a flexible needle
harnesses [7]. Nonetheless, DLO perception and manipula- into a deformable foam. These iterations of the peg-hole
tion remain open research areas. In this paper, we explore insertion task differ from gasket assembly which requires
the assembly of gaskets, expanding upon the current scope the gasket to deform into the rigid channel.
of robotic manipulation for DLOs. Pirozzi and Natale [39] focuses on wire insertion, where
The typical approach for handling DLOs involves a three- a robot gripper informed by signals from its tactile sensor
step process: state estimation, path planning, and manipu- inserts a wire into a hole as part of a switchgear assembly.
lation to achieve the desired outcome [12, 13]. Achieving
D. Robot Policy Learning for Long-Horizon Tasks
the target state of a DLO can be complex, necessitating
path planning strategies that can adapt to and recover from In long-horizon sequential manipulation tasks, earlier ac-
sub-optimal actions. A wide range of methods have been tions affect the feasibility of subsequent actions [40, 41].
exploredtosolvedifferentaspectsofthisproblem,including Recent approaches include the use of imitation and re-
Coherent Point Drift for DLO state estimation [14], learning inforcement learning [42–44], language-conditioned policy
from demonstrations for DLO manipulation [15–19], and learning [45], self-supervised learning [46] and learning
self-supervised learning for understanding the state-space fromhumandemonstrations[47].GasketAssemblyisalong-
of DLOs [20]. In this work, we present 4 baselines that horizontaskwithsubtasksthatincludepicking,placing,and
encompass a variety of methods seen in these prior works. insertion.
Theanalyticalalgorithmsuseacomputervisionalgorithmto
E. Deep Imitation Learning and Diffusion Policy
detectthechannelandgasket,andprimitivestohelptherobot
Deep imitation learning from human teleoperated demon-
recover from sub-optimal actions taken in prior steps. The
strations is an active area of research. Diffusion Policy [4],
learned baseline learns from human demonstrations using
motivated by the powerful generative modeling capabili-
diffusion policy [4].
ties of diffusion models [48, 49], was recently proposed
B. Cable Routing Tasks with DLOs to represent a robot’s visuomotor policy as a conditional
Acommontaskcategoryfor1Ddeformablemanipulation denoising diffusion process. It learns the gradient of the
is routing, in which a DLO is manipulated to match a given action-distribution score function during training and iter-
set of position and shape constraints. atively performs a series of stochastic Langevin dynamics
Recent research has explored a range of techniques and steps during inference. Specifically, starting from aK sam-
approaches for “cable routing,” a process in which a cable pled from Gaussian noise, the Denoising Diffusion Proba-
is guided along a path by a series of unconnected fixtures bilistic Model (DDPM) performs K iterations of denoising
[21–25]. Some studies have focused specifically on the path to produce intermediate vectors with decreasing levels of
planning aspect of routing, aiming to navigate the cable noise, aK,aK−1,...,a0, until a desired level of noise is ob-
from its starting position to a designated endpoint [13]. tained. Mathematically, to learn the conditional distribution
Another rendition of this task involves guiding a string or p(a t|o t), where o t is the observation of the current step and
rope through openings that are only slightly larger than the a t is the desired action output, we use a conditional CNN
material itself, with a minimal clearance of 1.4mm [26]. ϵ θ(ak,k|o) to get
In contrast with these scenarios that involve threading a ak−1 =α(ak−γϵ (ak,k,o)+N(0,σ2I)),
θ
rope through a series of openings or guiding cables along
a path, this paper focuses on the precise challenge of snugly where α,γ,σ are noise schedule hyperparameters and func-
fitting a gasket into a specifically shaped channel. This task tions of the iteration step k. During training, we minimize
demands a greater level of accuracy in both perception and
L=MSE(ϵk,ϵ (ak,k,o)),
manipulation, highlighting the need for advanced techniques θ
capableofhandlingtheintricaciesofsecuregasketinsertion. where ϵk is a random noise with appropriate variance.III. THEGASKETASSEMBLYPROBLEM
We propose a problem where an automated system must
reliably insert a deformable gasket into a rigid channel of
predefinedshapeandlength.Boththechannelandthegasket
are continuous. In this paper, we consider gaskets with
circular cross-section. We propose two human evaluation
metrics:(1)Alignment:Howwelldoesthegasketalignwith
the target shape of the channel and (2) Insertion: How much
of the gasket is contained within the channel.
As shown in Figure 2, given an RGB image of the
workspace, a gasket of fixed length l and circular cross
g
sectional diameter d, and a channel of width w, length l ,
c Fig. 2: Channels and Gaskets in Goal Positions. Each channel has a
anddepthhwhichisequaltoatleastd,weattempttoinsert gasketfullyinserted.Thestraightchannel(A)andthecurvedchannel(B)
thegasketintothechannelsuchthatthegasketiscompletely arebothopen-endedchannelswhereasthetrapezoidchannel(C)isclosed.
contained within the channel. We assume that l ≈ l and
Thismeansthatforallchannels,thegasketendpoints(g0,g1)andchannel
g c endpoints(c0,c1)lienearlyontopofeachother,butinthetrapezoidcase,
w ≤d≤w+δ,whereδisadeformationconstantdetermined c0 andc1 alsolienearlyontopofeachother.
by the cross-sectional compressability of the gasket.
We denote the endpoints of the gasket as g and g , and The Logitech webcam is mounted on the wrist of the UR5.
0 1
select two points in the channel, which we denote as c and A human operator teleoperates the robot using a 3D mouse.
0
c . When the channel is open-ended (see Section V-B and We use the Gello codebase [50] for teleoperation.
1
Figure 2 A,B) g and g correspond to the two endpoints of Ateamofco-authorspatientlyperformthetask250times
0 1
the channel; however, when the channel is closed (Figure 2 using teleoperation and record all images and joint angles
C), g and g correspond instead to adjacent points in the fortraining.Thisrequiredapproximately15hoursofhuman
0 1
channel such that the inserted gasket, taking the longer path effort. Human demonstrations are collected as described on
between the two points, creates a closed loop. thewebsite.Thestrategyusedforthehumandemonstrations
is closest to the Binary+ algorithm described in IV-B.3.
We assume a planar work surface of known dimension,
As shown in Section VI, Binary+ is the best-performing
a six-axis robot arm with a parallel jaw gripper, and 3
of the three algorithms. We did this so we could properly
RGB cameras with known intrinsic and extrinsic calibration
comparethelearnedpolicywiththealgorithms.Additionally,
matrices affixed at 1) the wrist of the robot, 2) above, and
we focus on just the straight channel which is the simplest
3) to the side of the workspace. For the learned policy
channel and collect all 250 demonstrations for that channel.
in addition to the 3 RGB cameras, we assume a human
We use a CNN-based model architecture for Diffusion
teleoperation input system such as a VR (Meta Quest2)
Policy with an action prediction horizon of 16 and obser-
controller or a 3D Mouse (SpaceMouse) or GELLO [50].
vation history length of 2. ϵ (.) takes in the noisy action
We additionally constrain the problem space by assuming θ
ak anduses361DconvolutionallayerswithFiLM
access to a priori knowledge of the shape and dimension of t,t+1,...,t+15
conditioning [54] on the observation embeddings [4]. For
given channels, a non-adversarial (no sharp corners, knots,
training, we set K =100 and use an initial learning rate of
or crossings) gasket starting configuration located within the
0.0001withadecayfactorof0.1andwemeasurevalidation
reachable workspace of the robot and the camera’s field of
loss using Mean Squared Error(MSE). During execution,
view,andthatthegasketandthechannelcanbeeasilycolor
we use receding-horizon control with horizon 8. We use a
segmented from the workspace.
Denoising Diffusion Implicit Model (DDIM) [55] with 10
IV. FOURBASELINEMETHODS inference steps. These hyperparameter choices are from the
default values as provided in [56]. The result is a policy that
A. Learning Diffusion Policy
takes as input the camera images and generates as output
Deep imitation learning where an agent learns required control actions and gripper position.
skills using deep neural networks trained on human demon-
B. 3 Procedural Algorithms
strations are being considered for a range of manipulation
tasks including grasping, pressing, and pick and place [51]. 1) Perception: The perception system aims to detect,
Various approaches have been used for deep imitation learn- separate, and localize the channel and gasket given an
ing including Behavior Cloning, Generative Adversarial Im- RGB image from an overhead workspace camera. Since the
itation Learning (GAIL), Adversarial Reward-moment Imi- channelshapeisfixed,weuseatemplatematchingalgorithm
tation Learning (AdRIL) and recently, diffusion policies[4, forchannellocalizationandidentification.Toenablethis,we
52, 53], used in this paper. generateagroundtruthbinarymaskandaspectratioforeach
The learned policy uses two ZED 2 stereo depth cameras channel by using the CAD source files for each part. These
andaLogitechBRIOwebcam.OneZED2ismountedabove groundtruthmasksarepassedtotheperceptionpipelineand
theworkspaceandtheotherZED2ismountedtotheleftof used in the classification and planning steps. We detail the
the workspace, with the UR5 and workspace fully in view. approach:endpoints. This ordered list is necessary to relate pixels
to their positions on the channel.
(iv) WaypointSelection:Usingtheorderedgasketskeleton,
we sample a set of points between the two endpoints
accordingtooneoftheinsertionstrategies(enumerated
in section IV-B.3). These points are used for the pick-
place-press actions.
This perception pipeline runs after every step to provide
an up-to-date estimate of the workspace state.
2) Robot Primitives: We define a small set of versatile
primitives to enable efficient environment interaction.
(i) PickandPlace:Therobotmovesjustaboveapointwith
Fig.3:Methods.TheGasket/ChannelDetectionboxshowsgasketsegmen- grippers open, then descends to the height of the work
tation (above) and channel segmentation (below). The Template Matching
surface and closes the grippers. The robot then rises,
boxshowsthethreetemplatesforthecurved,straightandtrapezoidchannel.
TheStraight/CurvedActuationboxshowsselectionandactuationstrategies moves to a target point and opens the grippers.
for the straight and curved channels: (a) is Unidirectional insertion, (b) is (ii) Shift and Place: In this variant of pick and pace, the
Binary search insertion, and (c) is Binary+ insertion. The colors on the
robot slides along the surface until it reaches the target
channels represent the locations the robot attempts to place and press the
gasket into while the numbers represent the order they are placed and point to avoid lifting any adjacent gasket insertions.
pressed.Endpointsaregreen,midpointsarepink,half-pointsareblueand (iii) Press: The robot moves downward from above a target
the quartile-points are cyan. The arrows indicate the direction(s) of the
poseuntilitexperiencesanupwardforceaboveagiven
slide(s).Forthetrapezoidchannel,wetreateachsegmentofthetrapezoid
as an instance of the straight channel. In the unidirectional approach (d) threshold (in our case, 40 N as measured by the robot’s
weprocesseachsegmentinacounterclockwisemanner,startingattheblue torque sensors).
segment.Forhybridandbinary(e),weevaluatethebluesegment,thenthe
(iv) Slide: The robot moves sideways toward a target point
cyan segments, and finally the red segment. The learned policy proceeds
directlyfromtheinitialstatetoactuation(f).TheFinalStateboxshowsthe across the work surface, while also pressing downward
finalassembledgasket. with a small amount of force (20 N).
(v) Home: The robot returns to a position above the
(i) Segmentation and Classification: Given an RGB im-
workspacetoaffordanunobstructedviewofthesurface.
age of the scene, we apply a Gaussian smoothing
operator with a 5×5 kernel to reduce high-frequency 3) 3 Insertion Algorithms: Unidirectional insertion, bi-
sensor noise. Then, we threshold the image to have nary search insertion, and Binary+. These methods differ
pixelvalueswithin[100,255]tominimizetheimpactof in the points selected for alignment, as well as the order in
the background color and apply a Canny edge detector. which the robot actuates to those points. (See Figure 3)
With the mask of edges in the scene, we use the (i) Unidirectional insertion (Fig. 3a): The robot picks,
Ramer–Douglas–Peucker algorithm to get contours for places,andinsertsthegasketintothechannel,startingat
both the gasket and the mold containing the channel. one end of the gasket and progressing toward the other
Given these contours, we extract the smallest rectangle end. Then, the robot presses each selected point of the
that encloses the input 2D point set, which can be gasket into the channel for a second time to reinforce
treatedasadetectionboundingboxdefinedbythebox’s the insertion. Finally, the robot slides its gripper along
center, dimensions, and rotation angle with respect to the entire length of the channel to seal the gasket.
the x-axis. We find the aspect ratio of each detected (ii) Binary search insertion (Fig. 3b): The robot begins by
bounding box and compare it to those of the given pickingandplacingthemidpointofthegasket,followed
templates to classify the channel. by the points located at 1 and 3 of the gasket length,
4 4
(ii) Localization via Alignment: Given the detection followed by those at the eighths, and so on until the
bounding box information and inferred channel, the algorithm reaches a termination limit (we set 1 for the
8
template is rescaled to match the dimensions of the straight and curved channels, and 1 for the trapezoid
4
observed bounding box, translated to align its center channel).Then, therobotpresses eachselected pointof
to that of the bounding box, and rotated to match the the gasket into the channel in the same order as they
boundingbox’srotationwithrespecttothex-axis.Once werepickedandplacedtoreinforcetheinsertion.Lastly,
the template mask and channel are aligned, we can the robot performs a “binary slide” by starting at the
precisely localize the points in pixel space where the midpoint and sliding once toward each end.
insertion channel exists in the physical channel. (iii) Binary+ insertion (Fig. 3c): This method attempts to
(iii) Skeletonization: We skeletonize the localized channel combinetheadvantagesoftheunidirectionalandbinary
to obtain a one-pixel-wide skeleton along the center of search approaches. The robot begins by picking, plac-
thechannel.Wethenperformdepth-first-searchstarting ing, and inserting the midpoint of the gasket, followed
from an arbitrary pixel along this skeleton to get the by the endpoints. The robot then places the quarter and
pixels corresponding to the endpoints of the channel eighthpoints,asinthebinarymethod.Then,thesecond
and order all points in the channel relative to these reinforcing presses follow the unidirectional method.Finally, the binary slide is performed. of 0◦. For Trials 11-100, the position and orientation of the
channel are randomized at the beginning of each trial to any
V. PHYSICALEXPERIMENTS
location completely within the reachable workspace and any
A. Workspace Setup angle within θ =±45◦ of the horizontal, respectively.
We utilize a Universal Robots UR5 to conduct experi- At the beginning of all 100 trials, the starting position of
ments.TheUR5isa6-degreeoffreedommanipulatorwhich the gasket is randomized. We perform this randomization by
can be operated in either position- or force-control modes liftingthegasketwithonefistanddroppingitovereitherthe
to enable pressing and sliding motions. The work surface top or bottom half of the workspace. The ends of the gasket
is aligned with the XY-plane and covered with a green arethenmovedoutwardsuntiltheconfigurationofthegasket
tablecloth to make it perceptually uniform. The workspace conforms to all of the constraints specified in Section III. A
is surrounded by a series of black drapes to control lighting trial endsafter the robotsuccessfully completes thetask, the
and eliminate distractors. We found that the drapes were program terminates, or ten minutes has elapsed, whichever
invaluabletothetemplatematching.Additionally,wemount comes first. For the unidirectional insertion, in the physical
afrontcameralevelwiththeworkspaceonthefarsideofthe experiments, we always pick the left endpoint as a starting
tablefromtherobot.Thiscameraisonlyusedforevaluating point but the algorithm can start from either endpoint.
insertion. A red backdrop is also used to increase contrast Lightproof curtains on all sides of the robot are kept
between the gasket and channel when viewed from the front closedduringexperiments,withtheexceptionofthecurtains
camera for evaluation, and is not present during execution. directly in front of the robot, which are kept open so as not
The workspace is observed by three cameras during train- to obstruct the view of the “front” workspace camera and
ing and execution. The overhead camera is placed 97.1 cm to facilitate the placement of a workspace key light. During
abovethecenteroftheworkspaceandpointeddownwardso data collection for the learned policy, we additionally open
thatitisabletoobservetheentireworkspace.Thisistheonly a small section of drapes behind the “side” camera, from
camera used during the execution of the procedural trials. which the human demonstrator can view the workspace for
The “side” camera is placed 40.3 cm outside the workspace teleoperation. We maintain this during evaluation to ensure
on the left side and 32.7 cm above it, positioned such that thattheenvironmentforrunningtrialswasassimilaraspos-
the camera is able to see the entire workspace along with sibletotheenvironmentinwhichthehumandemonstrations
the robot. The “wrist” camera is mounted 16.0 cm above were collected for best test time results.
the end-effector on a fixed “handle” such that it observes
D. Experimental Evaluation Metrics
the movement of the gripper along with the section of the
workspace near the robot end-effector. Since automated evaluation methods were prone to error,
we developed two manually-evaluated performance metrics.
B. Channels and Gasket
After the robot execution has terminated, a human judge
Weconsider3channelsinincreasingorderofdifficulty,as visually rates performance into one of four alignments cate-
showninFig.2.Fig.2A:Thefirstchannelisanopenstraight gories and one of four insertion categories.
channelwithdimensions26.5”x2.68”x0.56”.Fig.2B:The We note that given the specifications of Gasket Assembly
second channel is an open curved strut channel covering a there is a relationship between alignment and insertion. In
90◦ arcofacircle,withinnerdiameter32.4”,outerdiameter order for the gasket to be properly inserted, it must first
35.1”, and height 0.75”. This results in a channel with an have been well aligned. The quality of alignment affects the
arc length of 26.5”, a width of 2.68”, and a height of 0.75”, resultant quality of insertion.
whichisanalogoustothedimensionsofthestraightchannel.
Fig. 2C: The third channel is a closed trapezoidal channel VI. RESULTS
with a long side of 10”, a short side of 7.5”, and two 4.5”-
A. Alignment and Insertion
long non-parallel sides. All channels have an inner channel
width of 0.5”. All channels are 3D printed from Black PLA We perform 100 physical trials: 10 for the learned dif-
using a Bambu Lab P1S FDM 3D printer. We use a white fusion policy on the straight channel in fixed 0◦ pose and
0.5” braided nylon rope as our gasket analogue as it is 90 across all procedural approaches and all channel types
deformable enough to meet the gasket-channel constraints withvaryingchannelposepositionsandorientationsasnoted
as discussed in Section III. The rope is cut to a length of in Section V-C. See results in Table I. We again note that
26.5” to precisely match the length of the testbed channels. the learned policy was only evaluated for a fixed channel
Figure2showsthechannelsandgasketinthegoalcondition. pose which matched the pose used during data collection
whereas for the procedural algorithms, the channel pose
C. 100 Gasket Assembly Trials
varied significantly.
Weonlytrainedthedemonstrationsonthestraightchannel For the straight channel, the binary search and Binary+
in a fixed position with various gasket initializations both approaches achieve 75-100% in all trials. For the curved
above and below the channel. Thus, during testing, we only channel, the Binary+ approach separates itself from the
had the channel in the same fixed position. For Trials 1-10, binary search approach, attaining the highest alignment and
i.e., for the learned policy, the channel is at a fixed pose insertionperformance.Finally,forthemostdifficultchannel,TrialNo. Channel Method AlignmentPerformance InsertionPerformance
0-25% 25-50% 50-75% 75-100% 0-25% 25-50% 50-75% 75-100%
1-10 Straight DiffusionPolicy 2 0 0 8 2 0 1 7
11-20 Straight Unidirectional 6 0 1 3 6 1 1 2
21-30 Straight BinarySearch 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 10
31-40 Straight Binary+ 0 0 0 10 0 0 0 10
41-50 Curved Unidirectional 5 1 0 4 7 0 1 2
51-60 Curved BinarySearch 0 0 4 6 1 3 6 0
61-70 Curved Binary+ 0 0 1 9 0 0 1 9
71-80 Trapezoid Unidirectional 10 0 0 0 10 0 0 0
81-90 Trapezoid BinarySearch 9 1 0 0 9 1 0 0
91-100 Trapezoid Binary+ 9 0 1 0 9 1 0 0
TABLEI:AlignmentandInsertionPerformanceof100PhysicalTrials.
the trapezoid, the Binary+ approach attains the best align- With the unidirectional algorithm, we observe that after
ment performance, while having the same outcomes as the the first pick and place of an endpoint, most of the gasket
binary search for the insertion performance. still remains on the table. Consequently, the first press into
For the diffusion policy (Trials 1-10), there were three the channel often fails to seat the gasket properly. This
failed trials across the two metrics. These failures occurred misalignment makes the next part of the gasket difficult
because the diffusion policy failed to fully insert the gasket to pick since it is positioned right alongside the channel.
within the 10-minute threshold. In all three instances, the Moreover,eveniftherobotdoesgrabthenextpoint,sincethe
failure stemmed from incorrect execution of the pick-place- previous pick-place-press does not properly seat the gasket,
press sequence. Specifically, the robot either did not pick movingthenextpointalongthegasketforpickandplacecan
up the gasket, picked it but failed to place it correctly in causethatprevioussegmenttobecompletelyunalignedfrom
the channel, or pressed in the wrong position, disrupting thechannel.Sincetheunidirectionalpolicyneverrevisitsthis
the subsequent pick-place-press sequences. Additionally, the priorpointforpickandplace,thepushwillverylikelyfailas
robot could not recover from these failures, often spending well. Alternatively, with binary search, since the robot picks
several minutes attempting to improve the press without the gasket first at the middle, a larger amount of the gasket
success or failing to detect the error. is now on the channel—approximately double compared
Similarly, for the procedural methods on the straight and to the unidirectional policy’s initial pick. This increases
curved channels (Trials 11-70), the failures stemmed from the likelihood that the midpoint will be properly inserted
failing to press the gasket into the channel at some points when pressed. This proper seating at the midpoint is crucial
along the channel, leaving raised portions. When executing for successful assembly, particularly in straight and curved
slide primitive in these scenarios, the raised portions caught channels.Comparedtobinarysearch,theBinary+policyhas
on the gripper, causing large portions of the gasket to more pick-place-pushes at points close to but not exactly at
be unseated from the channel. For the trapezoid channel points that the binary search already reaches. This corrects
(Trials71-100),boththebinarysearchandBinary+methods any errors that the binary search might leave. Additionally,
were initially able to insert the gasket into the long side. the Binary+ policy intentionally carries out pick-place-press
However, when the robot would try to round the corners attheendpoints,whichensuresthatwhentherobotexecutes
to go to the other sides of the trapezoid, it inadvertently the final slide, the grippers do not get caught at an unseated
unseatedthealreadyinsertedpartsofthegasket.Theseerrors endpoint and drag the entire gasket out of the channel.
compounded across all four sides of the trapezoid channel.
VII. LIMITATIONS+FUTUREWORK
B. Completion Time Analysis
Inthispaper,wepresentanewGasketAssemblyproblem
We observe a difference in the time required to com- and provide results from 4 methods, a learned diffusion
plete the task when comparing the learned and procedural policyand3proceduralalgorithms.Inthefuture,wewillper-
methods. The learned diffusion policy ran until the task was form more experiments varying channel pose for the diffu-
completed or it was terminated when the maximum time sionpolicyandlearningdiffusionpoliciesforthecurvedand
horizon of 10 minutes was reached. Across all 10 trials, trapezoidal channels. We also plan to better handle recovery
the average completion time is approximately 5 minutes 34 from poorly executed primitives by exploring additional
seconds. This includes the three trials that terminated at the approachesincludinghierarchicalimitationlearning[25]and
maximum time horizon (10 minutes) without task comple- self-supervisedlearning.Wewillalsoexploremorecomplex
tion; excluding these trials reduces the average completion channel shapes and sizes, work on a perception system
timeto3minutes40seconds.Theproceduralalgorithmsran that is more robust against different lighting conditions and
for approximately 3 minutes 30 seconds for the straight and distractors and examine if various gripper types have any
curved channels and 7 minutes for the trapezoid. significant effect on the task of Gasket Assembly.
C. Discussion ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
This research was performed at the AUTOLAB at UC Berkeley in
Forthelearneddiffusionpolicy,fourhumansprovided250
affiliation with the Berkeley AI Research (BAIR) Lab, and the CITRIS
demonstrations. ”People and Robots” (CPAR) Initiative. We thank our colleagues whoprovided helpful feedback, help and suggestions, in particular Lawrence [21] S. Jin, W. Lian, C. Wang, M. Tomizuka, and S. Schaal, “Robotic
Chen,PhilipWu,KaushikShivakumar,JustinKerrandChungMinKim. cable routing with spatial representation,” IEEE Robotics and Au-
tomationLetters,vol.7,no.2,pp.5687–5694,2022.
REFERENCES [22] G.A.Waltersson,R.Laezza,andY.Karayiannidis,“Planningand
[1] N.Aibada,R.Manickam,K.K.Gupta,andP.Raichurkar,“Review control for cable-routing with dual-arm robot,” in ICRA, 2022,
onvariousgasketsbasedonthematerials,theircharacteristicsand pp.1046–1052.
applications,” Int. J. Text. Eng. Process, vol. 3, no. 1, pp. 12–18, [23] A.Monguzzi,M.Pelosi,A.M.Zanchettin,andP.Rocco,“Tactile
2017. basedroboticskillsforcableroutingoperations,”inICRA,2023.
[2] V. Viswanath, K. Shivakumar, J. Kerr, B. Thananjeyan, E. [24] A. Wilson, H. Jiang, W. Lian, and W. Yuan, “Cable routing and
Novoseller,J.Ichnowski,A.Escontrela,M.Laskey,J.E.Gonzalez, assemblyusingtactile-drivenmotionprimitives,”inICRA,2023.
and K. Goldberg, “Autonomously untangling long cables,” RSS, [25] J.Luo,C.Xu,X.Geng,G.Feng,K.Fang,L.Tan,S.Schaal,and
2022. S.Levine,“Multi-stagecableroutingthroughhierarchicalimitation
[3] M. Ha¨gele, K. Nilsson, J. N. Pires, and R. Bischoff, “Industrial learning,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,2024.
robotics,” in Springer Handbook of Robotics, B. Siciliano and [26] W. Wang, D. Berenson, and D. Balkcom, “An online method for
O. Khatib, Eds. Cham: Springer International Publishing, 2016, tight-toleranceinsertiontasksforstringandrope,”inICRA,2015.
pp.1385–1422. [27] K.Wang,Y.Zhao,andI.Sakuma,“Learningroboticinsertiontasks
[4] C. Chi, S. Feng, Y. Du, Z. Xu, E. Cousineau, B. Burchfiel, and from human demonstration,” IEEE RA-L, vol. 8, no. 9, pp. 5815–
S. Song, “Diffusion policy: Visuomotor policy learning via action 5822,2023.
diffusion,”inRSS,2023. [28] T.Tang,H.-C.Lin,andM.Tomizuka,“Alearning-basedframework
[5] V. Viswanath, K. Shivakumar, M. Parulekar, J. Ajmera, J. Kerr, for robot peg-hole-insertion,” in Dynamic Systems and Control
J. Ichnowski, R. Cheng, T. Kollar, and K. Goldberg, “Handloom: Conference,AmericanSocietyofMechanicalEngineers,vol.57250,
Heterogeneousautoregressivelearneddeformablelinearobjectob- 2015,V002T27A002.
servationandmanipulation,”inCoRL,PMLR,2023. [29] T.Tang,H.-C.Lin,Y.Zhao,Y.Fan,W.Chen,andM.Tomizuka,
[6] P. Sundaresan, J. Grannen, B. Thananjeyan, A. Balakrishna, M. “Teach industrial robots peg-hole-insertion by human demonstra-
Laskey, K. Stone, J. E. Gonzalez, and K. Goldberg, “Learning tion,”in2016IEEEInternationalConferenceonAdvancedIntelli-
rope manipulation policies using dense object descriptors trained gentMechatronics(AIM),IEEE,2016,pp.488–494.
onsyntheticdepthdata,”inICRA,2020. [30] G. Schoettler, A. Nair, J. A. Ojea, S. Levine, and E. Solowjow,
[7] F. Su¨berkru¨b, R. Laezza, and Y. Karayiannidis, “Feel the tension: “Meta-reinforcementlearningforroboticindustrialinsertiontasks,”
Manipulation of deformable linear objects in environments with inIROS,2020.
fixturesusingforceinformation,”inIROS,2022. [31] T.Z.Zhao,J.Luo,O.Sushkov,R.Pevceviciute,N.Heess,J.Scholz,
[8] Y. Avigal, L. Berscheid, T. Asfour, T. Kro¨ger, and K. Goldberg, S.Schaal,andS.Levine,“Offlinemeta-reinforcementlearningfor
“SpeedFolding: Learning efficient bimanual folding of garments,” industrialinsertion,”inICRA,2022.
inIROS,2022. [32] X. Zhang, S. Jin, C. Wang, X. Zhu, and M. Tomizuka, “Learning
[9] D. Seita, P. Florence, J. Tompson, E. Coumans, V. Sindhwani, K. insertionprimitiveswithdiscrete-continuoushybridactionspacefor
Goldberg,andA.Zeng,“Learningtorearrangedeformablecables, roboticassemblytasks,”inICRA,2022.
fabrics, and bags with goal-conditioned transporter networks,” in [33] G. Schoettler, A. Nair, J. Luo, S. Bahl, J. Aparicio Ojea, E.
ICRA,2021. Solowjow,andS.Levine,“Deepreinforcementlearningforindus-
[10] L. Y. Chen, B. Shi, D. Seita, R. Cheng, T. Kollar, D. Held, and trialinsertiontaskswithvisualinputsandnaturalrewards,”inIROS,
K. Goldberg, “Autobag: Learning to open plastic bags and insert 2020.
objects,”inICRA,IEEE,2023. [34] O.SpectorandD.D.Castro,“Insertionnet-ascalablesolutionfor
[11] L. Y. Chen, H. Huang, E. Novoseller, D. Seita, J. Ichnowski, M. insertion,”IEEERA-L,vol.6,no.3,pp.5509–5516,2021.
Laskey,R.Cheng,T.Kollar,andK.Goldberg,“Efficientlylearning [35] M.A.Lee,Y.Zhu,P.Zachares,M.Tan,K.Srinivasan,S.Savarese,
single-armflingmotionstosmoothgarments,”inRoboticsResearch, L. Fei-Fei, A. Garg, and J. Bohg, “Making sense of vision and
A.Billard,T.Asfour,andO.Khatib,Eds.,ser.SpringerProceedings touch:Learningmultimodalrepresentationsforcontact-richtasks,”
in Advanced Robotics, Cham: Springer Nature Switzerland, 2023, IEEETransactionsonRobotics,vol.36,no.3,pp.582–596,2020.
pp.36–51. [36] L.Fu,H.Huang,L.Berscheid,H.Li,K.Goldberg,andS.Chitta,
[12] I. Kabul, R. Gayle, and M. C. Lin, “Cable route planning in “Safe self-supervised learning in real of visuo-tactile feedback
complexenvironmentsusingconstrainedsampling,”inProceedings policiesforindustrialinsertion,”inICRA,2023.
ofthe2007ACMsymposiumonSolidandphysicalmodeling,2007, [37] J.Luo,E.Solowjow,C.Wen,J.A.Ojea,andA.M.Agogino,“Deep
pp.395–402. reinforcement learning for robotic assembly of mixed deformable
[13] A. Keipour, M. Bandari, and S. Schaal, “Efficient Spatial Repre- andrigidobjects,”inIROS,IEEE,2018.
sentationandRoutingofDeformableOne-DimensionalObjectsfor [38] Y. Adagolodjo, L. Goffin, M. De Mathelin, and H. Courtecuisse,
Manipulation,”inIROS,Oct.2022. “Roboticinsertionofflexibleneedleindeformablestructuresusing
[14] T.Tang,C.Wang,andM.Tomizuka,“Aframeworkformanipulat- inversefinite-elementsimulation,”IEEETransactionsonRobotics,
ingdeformablelinearobjectsbycoherentpointdrift,”IEEERA-L, vol.35,no.3,pp.697–708,2019.
vol.3,no.4,pp.3426–3433,2018. [39] S.PirozziandC.Natale,“Tactile-basedmanipulationofwiresfor
[15] J. Schulman, J. Ho, C. Lee, and P. Abbeel, “Learning from switchgearassembly,”IEEE/ASMETransactionsonMechatronics,
demonstrationsthroughtheuseofnon-rigidregistration,”inISRR, vol.23,no.6,pp.2650–2661,2018.
Springer,2016,pp.339–354. [40] S.Pirk,K.Hausman,A.Toshev,andM.Khansari,“Modelinglong-
[16] A. X. Lee, S. H. Huang, D. Hadfield-Menell, E. Tzeng, and P. horizontasksassequentialinteractionlandscapes,”CoRL,2020.
Abbeel,“Unifyingsceneregistrationandtrajectoryoptimizationfor [41] D. Driess, J.-S. Ha, R. Tedrake, and M. Toussaint, “Learning
learning from demonstrations with application to manipulation of geometricreasoningandcontrolforlong-horizontasksfromvisual
deformableobjects,”inIROS,2014. input,”inICRA,2021.
[17] T.Tang,C.Liu,W.Chen,andM.Tomizuka,“Roboticmanipulation [42] A. Gupta, V. Kumar, C. Lynch, S. Levine, and K. Hausman,
of deformable objects by tangent space mapping and non-rigid “Relay policy learning: Solving long horizon tasks via imitation
registration,”inIROS,2016. andreinforcementlearning,”CoRL,2019.
[18] L.Chen,S.Jayanthi,R.R.Paleja,D.Martin,V.Zakharov,andM. [43] F. Schmalstieg, D. Honerkamp, T. Welschehold, and A. Valada,
Gombolay, “Fast lifelong adaptive inverse reinforcement learning “Learninglong-horizonrobotexplorationstrategiesformulti-object
fromdemonstrations,”inCoRL,PMLR,2023,pp.2083–2094. search in continuous action spaces,” in ISRR, Springer, 2022,
[19] M. L. Schrum, E. Hedlund-Botti, and M. Gombolay, “Reciprocal pp.52–66.
mind meld: Improving learning from demonstration via personal- [44] G. Wang, M. Xin, W. Wu, Z. Liu, and H. Wang, “Learning of
ized,reciprocalteaching,”inCoRL,PMLR,2023,pp.956–966. long-horizon sparse-reward robotic manipulator tasks with base
[20] M.Yan,Y.Zhu,N.Jin,andJ.Bohg,“Self-supervisedlearningof controllers,”IEEETransactionsonNeuralNetworksandLearning
stateestimationformanipulatingdeformablelinearobjects,”IEEE Systems,vol.35,no.3,pp.4072–4081,2024.
RA-L,vol.5,no.2,pp.2372–2379,Apr.2020,IEEERA-L.[45] O. Mees, L. Hermann, E. Rosete-Beas, and W. Burgard, “Calvin:
A benchmark for language-conditioned policy learning for long-
horizon robot manipulation tasks,” IEEE RA-L, vol. 7, no. 3,
pp.7327–7334,2022.
[46] S.NairandC.Finn,“Hierarchicalforesight:Self-supervisedlearn-
ing of long-horizon tasks via visual subgoal generation,” ICLR,
2020.
[47] A. Mandlekar, D. Xu, R. Mart´ın-Mart´ın, S. Savarese, and L. Fei-
Fei,“Learningtogeneralizeacrosslong-horizontasksfromhuman
demonstrations,”RSS,2020.
[48] J.Sohl-Dickstein,E.A.Weiss,N.Maheswaranathan,andS.Gan-
guli,“Deepunsupervisedlearningusingnonequilibriumthermody-
namics,” in ICML, ser. ICML’15, Lille, France: JMLR.org, 2015,
pp.2256–2265.
[49] J. Ho, A. Jain, and P. Abbeel, “Denoising diffusion probabilistic
models,”inNeurIPS,ser.NIPS’20,Vancouver,BC,Canada:Curran
AssociatesInc.,2020.
[50] P.Wu,Y.Shentu,Z.Yi,X.Lin,andP.Abbeel,Gello:Ageneral,
low-cost, and intuitive teleoperation framework for robot manipu-
lators,2023.
[51] T. Zhang, Z. McCarthy, O. Jow, D. Lee, X. Chen, K. Goldberg,
andP.Abbeel,“Deepimitationlearningforcomplexmanipulation
tasksfromvirtualrealityteleoperation,”inICRA,2018.
[52] K.ArulkumaranandD.OgawaLillrank,“Apragmaticlookatdeep
imitationlearning,”inACML,2023.
[53] A. Correia and L. A. Alexandre, “A survey of demonstration
learning,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2303.11191,2023.
[54] E. Perez, F. Strub, H. De Vries, V. Dumoulin, and A. Courville,
“Film:Visualreasoningwithageneralconditioninglayer,”inAAAI,
vol.32,2018.
[55] J. Song, C. Meng, and S. Ermon, “Denoising diffusion implicit
models,”ICLR,2021.
[56] Robomimic/robomimic/config/diffusionpolicyconfig.py at r2d2 ·
ARISE-Initiative/robomimic.VIII. APPENDIX
A. Human Demonstrations
Human demonstrations are collected as follows:
1) The channel is fixed in place horizontally across the
workspace, separating the workspace into a lower and
upper section.
2) The gasket is randomly dropped in either the lower or
upper section so that it does not overlap itself and does
not touch the channel.
3) The midpoint of the gasket is grasped and placed on
top of the midpoint of the channel. The gripper then Fig. 4: Evaluation Metric Examples. We provide examples for all four
presses the gasket down into the channel. categories of the alignment and insertion evaluation metrics discussed in
Section V-D. We show the final gasket and channel states after the robot
4) One endpoint of the channel is chosen arbitrarily. The
attemptsgasketassembly.Foralignmentweonlyconsidertheviewfromthe
gasket is placed on top of the selected endpoint of the overhead camera to determine alignment between the gasket and channel.
channel and pressed down into the channel. To determine the snug fit of the insertion, we consult both the overhead
view(toprow)andthefrontview(bottomrow),because(f),forexample,
5) The remaining endpoint of the gasket is then placed on
showshowagasketthatisalignedwiththechannelcanhavepoorinsertion.
top of the other endpoint of the channel and pressed to
insert it into the channel. 2) 25% - 50%: A partial insertion failure, in which
6) The gripper is moved to the quartile points (the order between 25% and 50% of the gasket is inserted.
of the quartile points the gripper goes to is chosen 3) 50% - 75%: A partial insertion success, in which
arbitrarily) and pressed down on the gasket such that between 50% and 75% of the gasket is inserted.
at those points the gasket is inserted into the channel. 4) 75% - 100%: A full insertion success, in which at
7) The gripper goes to the ’eighth’ points (again the order least 75% of the gasket length is inserted.
of the points the gripper goes to is chosen arbitrarily) Figure 4 shows qualitative results from the trials of the
andpressesdownonthegasketsuchthatatthosepoints three analytical algorithms in increasing order of success.
the gasket is inserted into the channel.
8) The gripper goes to the midpoint of the gasket, moves
downslowlytothechannelsurfacesuchthatthegripper
touches the channel surface, and moves horizontally
withnoverticalmovementtowardsoneoftheendpoints
of the channel (chosen arbitrarily). The gripper returns
to the midpoint of the channel and repeats this motion
towards the other endpoint of the channel. This 8-step
procedure is repeated for each human demonstration.
B. Experimental Evaluation Metrics Breakdown
After the robot execution has terminated, a human judge
visually rates performance into one of four alignments cate-
gories, as follows:
1) 0% - 25%: A major alignment failure, in which the
robot has successfully aligned less than 25% of the
gasket with the channel.
2) 25% - 50%: A partial alignment failure, in which
between 25% and 50% of the gasket has been suc-
cessfully aligned.
3) 50% - 75%: A partial alignment success, in which
between50%and75%ofthegaskethasbeenproperly
aligned.
4) 75% - 100%: A full alignment success, in which the
robot has properly aligned at least 75% of the gasket
length with the channel.
Similarly, a human judge visually rates performance into
one of four insertion categories, as follows::
1) 0% - 25%: A major insertion failure, in which less
than 25% of the gasket is inserted into the channel.