Pentagonal Photonic Crystal Mirrors:
Scalable Lightsails with Enhanced Acceleration via Neural Topology Optimization
L.Norder,1S.Yin,2M.J.deJong,1,3F.Stallone,4H.Aydogmus,4P.M.Sberna,4M.A.Bessa,2,∗andR.A.Norte1,3,†
1Department of Precision and Microsystems Engineering,
Delft University of Technology, Mekelweg 2, 2628CD Delft, The Netherlands
2School of Engineering, Brown University, USA
3Kavli Institute of Nanoscience, Department of Quantum Nanoscience,
Delft University of Technology, Lorentzweg 1, 2628CJ Delft, The Netherlands
4Else Kooi Lab, Delft University of Technology, Feldmannweg 17, 2628 CT Delft, The Netherlands
(Dated: July 11, 2024)
TheStarshotBreakthroughInitiativeaimstosendone-grammicrochipprobestoAlphaCentauri
within 20 years, using gram-scale lightsails propelled by laser-based radiation pressure, reaching
velocities nearing a fifth of light speed. This mission requires lightsail materials that challenge the
fundamentals of nanotechnology, requiring innovations in optics, material science and structural
engineering. Unlike the microchip payload, which must be minimized in every dimension, such
lightsails need meter-scale dimensions with nanoscale thickness and billions of nanoscale holes to
enhance reflectivity and reduce mass. Our study employs neural topology optimization, revealing
a novel pentagonal lattice-based photonic crystal (PhC) reflector. The optimized designs shorten
accelerationtimes,thereforeloweringlaunchcostssignificantly. Crucially,thesedesignsalsoenable
lightsail material fabrication with orders-of-magnitude reduction in costs. We have fabricated a
60×60 mm2, 200 nm thick, single-layer reflector perforated with over a billion nanoscale features;
the highest aspect-ratio nanophotonic element to date. We achieve this with nearly 9,000 times
cost reduction per m2. Starshot lightsails will have several stringent requirements but will ulti-
mately be driven by costs to build at scale. Here we highlight challenges and possible solutions in
developing lightsail materials - showcasing the potential of scaling nanophotonics for cost-effective
next-generation space exploration.
Currently,thehuman-madeobjectfurthestfromEarth
is the Voyager 1 [1]. Traversing space since 1977, this
spacecrafthasonlyrecentlyleftoursolarsystem, amere
0.5% of the distance to the nearest star outside our so-
lar system; Alpha Centauri. With existing propulsion
systems, approaching our nearest interstellar neighbour
wouldtakeover10,000years. In2016,theBreakthrough
Prize Foundation announced the Starshot Initiative to
push the development of low-mass microchip satellites
with cameras, sensors, and probes accelerated to high
speeds by low-mass lightsails [2]. The Starshot Mis-
sionleveragesadvancesinnanotechnologytoachievelow- Fig. 1. High power earth-based laser propelling a fleet of
mass objects, and progress in high-power lasers to direc- lightweight sails to 20% of the speed of light, to reach Alpha
tionallybeamenergytodistantlocationsasfarastensof Centauri in 20 years [2]. The lightsail needs to be reflective
millions of kilometers away. This microchip approach to over a broad bandwidth due to the Doppler red-shift of the
spaceexplorationaimstoreachAlphaCentauri(i.e., the laser resulting from the change in velocity of the sail. The
minimum feature size of a photonic crystal based lightsail is
neareststaroutsideourSolarsystem)within20yearsby
relatedtothefabricationcost. Acommonlyusedperformance
reaching speeds up to 20% of the speed of light, made
metricforalightsailistheaccelerationdistance. Thelaunch
possible by the rapidly advancing field of nanotechnol-
cost is mainly determined by the energy consumption of the
ogyandthefuturepotentialofnext-generationlasersys-
laser [3].
tems. Regardless of the payload mass, this mission is
fundamentally exploring the physical limits of mass ac-
celerationandourabilitytoreachrelativisticspeedswith
ered one of the most challenging components to realize
novel mesoscopic objects made possible by nanotechnol-
duetotheiruniquegeometriesandstringentperformance
ogy. Of the many ambitious developments required by
requirements.
theStarshotInitative,thelightsailsaregenerallyconsid-
The Starshot concept, presented in Fig. 1, is based on
generatinganopticalforceonareflectivelightweightsail
material by projecting a high-power Earth-based laser
∗ miguel bessa@brown.edu on it. As proposed in the Starshot initiative, the light-
† r.a.norte@tudelft.nl sail will be approximately 10 m2 and the laser power
4202
luJ
01
]scitpo.scisyhp[
1v69870.7042:viXra2
10-100 GW/m2 to generate sufficient radiation pressure rect relation between the minimum feature size (MFS)
[2] within a few minutes of laser exposure. To approach of the patterns (e.g., minimum distance between holes),
relativistic speeds (0.2c), stringent low-mass budgets are and the costs of manufacturing the lightsail; lower MFS
required,limitingtheweightofthesailandtheconnected meanshighercosts(moreintricategeometricdetails)but
payload chip to approximately 1 gram each. The laser potentiallylowermassandbetteracceleration. Thissets
used for radiation pressure on the sail needs to oper- up a complex trade-off between cost [19], manufacturing
ate on wavelengths in the near-infrared (NIR) spectrum and acceleration performance that has not been previ-
from 1 - 2 µm because of its low atmospheric absorp- ously considered. Additionally, a bigger MFS and larger
tion [4]. These lightsails will experience Doppler-shifts surfaceareaofthesail,canbefavourabletocrucialprop-
as they accelerate, requiring high broadband reflectivity erties like stress reduction and increased radiative cool-
[5]. Larger bandwidth can generally be achieved by in- ing.
creasingthethicknessofthesailsatthecostofadditional Althoughsingle-layerphotoniccrystalshaveprovento
mass, which can severely reduce its acceleration perfor- be effective reflectors even with simple two-dimensional
mance. Given the interaction with a high-power laser holelatticedesigns,thefewcontributionstargetinglight-
beam, lightsails must achieve ultra-low optical absorp- sail design have not considered state-of-the-art manu-
tion to avoid thermal fracturing. While all components facturing constraints. The traditional optimization of
from payload to lightsails will require significant devel- photonic structures is highly iterative and relies on do-
opmentoverthenextdecades, thelightsailstandsoutas main knowledge from experienced researchers [20]. This
themajorchallengeofthisinitiativebecauseofitsunique trial-and-error process is unlikely to be successful in
requirements. Achievinga1gmicrochippayloadwillre- finding high-performance designs because of the high-
quire miniaturizing all of its components like cameras, dimensional design space. Additionally, photonics op-
communications, and sensors in x, y and z dimensions. timization is usually non-convex, resulting in a challeng-
On the contrary, achieving gram-scale, 10 m2 lightsails ing optimization. Notwithstanding, inverse design meth-
willrequirespanningareflectortometerscalesinxandy ods have resulted in promising, non-trivial and high-
whileretainingnanoscalethickness–farfromanyaspect- performancePhCdesigns[21–24]evenforlightsaildesign
ratioachievablebymodernnanotechnology. Thephysics [6].
and economics of how these high-aspect ratio reflectors
Recently, a new inverse-design method referred to as
aremadewillbecrucialtothesuccessofthistechnology.
neural topology optimization (neural TO) has been pro-
Oneoftenneglectedaspectofthismissionisthatthese posed where conventional TO is enhanced by machine
long-distance missions rely on a shotgun approach of learning via the reparameterization approach proposed
many sails to increase the chance of success. This means by Hoyer et al. [25]. This strategy differs from most
thecostsofmanufacturingandlaunchingthesesailswith machine learning contributions aimed at improving in-
highpower(forseveralminutes)aremajorconsiderations verse design methods. Usually, machine learning is used
that have not been taken into account in the design pro- in inverse design by training generative models such as
cess of the sails but are crucial to Starshot’s ambitious variational autoencoders and generative adversarial neu-
goals. ralnetworks[26–28]thatrequirelargetrainingdatabases
Many possible lightsail materials are proposed in the and have difficulties with predictions that fall out of the
literature[5–11]. Amongthesematerials,single-layersil- training data distribution. In contrast, neural TO intro-
iconnitride(SiN)photoniccrystalsarethetopcandidate ducesaneuralnetworkbeforeaphysicssolver(e.g. finite
material because SiN combines low optical absorption elementanalyses)andshiftstheoptimizationproblemto
andthelowmassandhighreflectivityachievedbysingle- findingtheweightsandbiasesoftheneuralnetworkthat
layer hole-based photonic crystals. Advantageously, sil- minimizetheobjectivefunctioncalculatedbythephysics
icon nitride is a well-studied and mature CMOS mate- solver. Neural TO is still in its infancy and has not been
rialthatcanbeconventionallyintegratedwithmanymi- applied in the context of inverse problems in photonics.
crochipplatforms. PhotoniccrystalsmadefromSiNhave However, in this work we find that the method is partic-
been well studied in the field of optomechanics, which ularly advantageous for lightsail design when compared
alsofavourslowmassandabsorptionwithhighreflectiv- to conventional TO strategies. Additional information
ity [12–18]. Additionally, SiN membranes will not wrin- regarding the employed optimization algorithm is pre-
kle due to the internal tensile stresses generated in the sented in the supplementary information.
deposition allowing for better stability once suspended. TheprimaryobjectiveofthisstudyistodesignaPhC
Thispre-stressinSiNphotoniccrystalsallowsforprecise lightsail that maximizes acceleration capabilities while
alignment of optical beams onto the suspended photonic minimizing mission costs by addressing both the MFS
crystalsinalab-scaletestsetup. Duetothesefavourable constraints imposed by lithography processing and the
properties, SiNischosenasthelightsailmaterialforthis costs associated with laser time needed to accelerate
work. the lightsail. Optimizing solely for acceleration capa-
Given that photonic crystal reflectors rely on a two- bilities can lead to designs with a small Area fraction
dimensionalarrayofsubwavelengthholesinasingle-layer (less mass) [6] which are more delicate and difficult to
SiNmembrane, itisimportanttonotethatthereisadi- fabricate and launch. Conversely, the costs of manufac-3
turing high-yield lightsails and producing minimum fea-
turesizestendtoresultindesignswithhigherAreafrac-
tion. To navigate this complex parameter space, neural
topology optimization is adapted to meet these lightsail
design challenges. We then show we can produce these
wafer-scale lightsail materials at nearly three orders-of-
magnitude reduction in costs.
RESULTS
Photonic Crystal Lightsail Design. The stringent
Starshot mission requirements have driven research on
free-standing photonic crystals (PhCs) as broadband re-
flectors. PhCs control light propagation by tuning sub-
wavelength variations in refractive index materials [29].
Figure2aillustratestheworkingprinciplesofdifferent
PhC architectures. The most well-known reflectors for
mirrorcoatingsaremultilayeredphotoniccrystals,ordis-
tributedBraggreflectors(DBRs),whichconsistofseveral
layers of dielectric materials with alternating refractive
indices and subwavelength thicknesses. These multilay-
ered PhCs, typically several microns thick, can achieve
very high reflectivity (>99.5%) over a broad bandwidth
(≈200nm). However,theyaretoomassiveforStarshot’s
requirements (hundreds of grams for a 10 m2 sail), and Fig. 2. a, Working principles of different photonic crystal ar-
their ultra-high reflectivity is not particularly useful for chitectures. MultilayeredPhCconsistsofstackedlayerswith
varying refractive indices. The bilayer PhC consists of a re-
acceleration.
peatingPhCpatternontopofasolidmembrane. Singlelayer
Incontrast,single-layerphotoniccrystalsachievechanges
PhC is a membrane with a repetitive PhC hole pattern. For
inrefractiveindexthroughperiodicholesinamembrane,
both the bilayer and single-layer PhC, the incident light cre-
providingalternatingrefractiveindicesinthexandydi-
atesanopticalmodewithinthematerialthatdeconstructively
rections. Incoming light creates an optical mode in the
interferes with the transmitted light and constructively with
membrane that constructively interferes with incoming thereflectedlight. ThebestoptimizedsinglelayerPhCdesign
light and destructively interferes with transmitted light, without area constraint for square lattice (b) and hexagonal
resulting in high reflectivity (≈ 98.9%) over a narrower lattice(c),whereblackismaterialandwhiteisvacuum. The
range (20 nm). This design offers an ultra-thin geome- square and hexagonal lattice thicknesses are 0.2 µm and 0.3
try. Duetotheirdesignflexibilityandsingle-layernature, µmrespectively. d,ThepentagonallatticedesignforanArea
two-dimensionalPhCsareexpectedtoofferhigherreflec- fraction A f of 55% with a thickness of 0.18 µm.
tivityforalowermass[9],asthesmallfilmthicknessand
holes reduce nearly half the mass. Single-layer PhCs are
currently the only architecture thin enough to achieve a 67 Gm compared to a 35% reflective and 200 nm thick
1-gram lightsail. However, evaluating their acceleration unpatterned SiN membrane, as shown in Fig. 3a (red
properties rigorously requires considering broadband re- line). ThisisinagreementwithAtwateret. al(2018)[5],
flection, mass, and laser divergence. and underscores the challenging mass requirements for
Bilayer photonic crystals offer a hybrid approach by in- designing lightsails thicker than a single layer to achieve
creasing thickness (up to a micron) [8, 10, 30–32] to en- broader bandwidths. Consequently, given the stringent
hance reflection bandwidth (Fig. 2a), but this trade- mass requirements, we focus on single-layer PhCs, which
off adds mass, significantly impacting the sail’s accel- are more suitable for lightsail design than other PhC ar-
eration. Recent efforts have explored a bilayer pho- chitectures. The supplementary information includes a
tonic crystals [30], which consist of one uniform layer studydiscussingthelimitsoftheinitiallyproposedmass
and an additional layer of single-layer photonic crystal target using two-dimensional PhC sails.
on top to increase the bandwidth and ease fabrication. Acceleration Performance vs. Costs. In design-
However, these types of reflectors can quickly perform ing the lightsail, we must consider not only its accelera-
worseintermsofaccelerationthanasingle-layer, unpat- tionperformancebutalsotheassociatedcosts, including
terned (low-reflectivity) SiN membrane, which serves as those resulting from lithography, manufacturability, and
our standard worst-case scenario. For instance, bilayer yield, whichultimatelyimpactthefinalcosts. Thiscom-
PhCs with a SiN PhC on a Si layer with an average re- plexity arises because optimizing for acceleration often
flectivity of 80% have a similar acceleration distance of leads to designs with low Area fraction and thickness,4
while manufacturing costs and yield would be signifi- is an inverse relationship between the thickness of the
cantly reduced with high Area fraction. This sets up reflectors and their reflectivity bandwidth: ultra-thin re-
achallengingsetoftradeoffsindesigningandoptimizing flectorsexhibithighreflectanceoveranarrowband,while
a photonic crystal that balances both acceleration per- thickerreflectors,whichcanincreasethebandwidth,also
formance and costs. add significant mass. This added mass can hinder accel-
In terms of cost, we focus on the lithography process to eration. Thus, balancing thickness and broadband op-
reduce the fabrication cost as it takes the most time and eration is a major challenge, which is evaluated using a
money compared to other fabrication steps, especially figure of merit that includes reflectivity, mass, and the
when scaled to square meter-sized PhCs. Selecting a fit- Doppler shift of the sail.
ting lithography method for patterning the PhC-based Initially,itischosentominimizetheaccelerationdistance
lightsail is an integral part of the nano-photonics fabri- (D), i.e. the distance required to reach the final veloc-
cation due to its direct impact on the achievable resolu- ity of the lightsail, as the optimization objective. This
tionandwritingspeed. E-beamlithographyiscommonly quantity of interest is commonly used in lightsail design
used for nm-sized structures, yet it is slow and expen- as it enforces a tradeoff between weight and broadband
sive for more extensive areas [33]. E-beam writing times reflectivity [38]. Furthermore, it implicitly takes into ac-
for 1 cm2 can vary from multiple days for conventional count the laser’s divergence limits [39]. The MFS im-
techniques [9] to numerous hours for the most advanced posedbythefabricationmethodmustbeincludedinthe
methods [30, 34]. However, a faster and more affordable optimization to consider the fabrication cost. However,
nanofabrication method is optical lithography [35, 36]. controllingtheMFSexplicitlyisachallengingproblemin
Therefore, i-line photolithography (i.e. light source with theTOfield[40]andbecomesevenmorenon-trivialfora
365nmlight),whichhasanMFSof500nm,wasselected neural network-based TO. Therefore, the MFS is gener-
for this study based on its cost-effectiveness, availability, allycontrolledimplicitly[41]. Weextendedtheoptimiza-
and established processing protocols. Additionally, the tion with a simple approach of adding an Area fraction
writing time is independent of the design because of the (A ) as an extra optimization constraint [25] to control
f
use of a mask, making it a good match for the possible the MFS of the final design.
irregular and non-trivial design generated by the neural For the final mission, the laser is presumedto emita lin-
TO. In the supplementary information, a more detailed ear polarised plane wave. Optimizing a PhC lightsail for
comparison is made between the different photolithogra- only one polarization direction results in parallel strings
phy methods. aligned with the polarisation [6]. Thus, a precise and
The writing costs are related to the operating costs of a challenging alignment of the physical sail with the laser
cleanroom,whichareexpectedtobearound200euro/hr. beam position and its polarization is required. Addi-
Whenchoosingopticalovere-beamlithography,thewrit- tionally, string-based PhCs are not practical for lightsail
ingtimeofa10m2 sailcanmarkedlybereducedfrom15 fabrication as they would stick together. Therefore, in
years to one day, calculated with 7.5×10−5 m2/hr and this study, the sail is optimized for two orthogonal po-
0.43 m2/hr respectively. Therefore, the cost can be re- larisation angles ϕ=0 and ϕ= 1π (i.e. rotation around
2
duced almost 9000 times, from 26 million euros to 3,000 thenormalofthecrystalplane)toobtainproducibletwo-
euros per sail. dimensionaldesignsandpromoteapolarisationdirection
Within the Starshot initiative, there is no agreement yet invariant design, relaxing the alignment requirements.
on which wavelength the laser uses. Specifically for the Additional information regarding the optimization and
lightsail development, 1550 nm is the preferred wave- its formulation is described in the methods section.
lengthbecausethefeaturesizeofthePhCisproportional
Computational Results. At first, the optimization
to the wavelength. Therefore, the fabrication cost and
was conducted without an area constraint (A ), yielding
complexity are reduced due to the larger features. Fur- f
designs with patterns following conventional square and
thermore, the optical absorption of SiN is lower for 1550
hexagonal crystal lattices (Fig. 2b,c). However, these
nm light [37], allowing for the use of high-power lasers.
fall short of the MFS > 500 nm objective. Therefore,
As an additional benefit, the atmospheric absorption of
optimizationswithaA constraintfrom40%-70%were
1550 nm light is less than other wavelengths in the NIR f
subsequentlyrealized. Notably,largerA ledtoaunique
[4]. f
pentagonal lattice structure [42] (Fig. 2d). The perfor-
TheStarshotmissionnotonlyemphasizesreducingmass
mance of various designs is compared in Fig. 3a. The
through nanotechnology but also harnesses advance-
figure shows that an increasing A correlates to an in-
ments in arrayed lasers to project energy directionally f
crease of MFS and, consequently, a decrease in perfor-
across vast distances, optimizing propulsion efficiency.
mance (i.e. an increase of D).
The high-power lasers for the Starshot mission are ex-
The equation of motion of the lightsail [39] is solved di-
pected to operate at a single wavelength. As the sail
rectlyfromthereflectivityspectrumpresentedinFig. 3b
acceleratestohighspeeds,Dopplerred-shiftingwillalter
toobtainthesailvelocityoveritsaccelerationtime(Fig.
the wavelength of the light relative to the sail. This ne-
3b),sotherelationbetweenthereflectivityspectrumand
cessitates that these ultra-thin reflectors remain highly
the performance can be studied. Intuitively, one would
reflective over the Doppler bandshift. However, there
think that a design with a larger acceleration distance5
dividual launches become of utmost importance.
Secondly, the lightsail is optimized to minimize T as the
FOM because of the large impact of T on the launch
cost. The formulation of the FOM can be found in the
methods section. For this optimization, the obtained de-
signs are the same as when optimizing for D. The best
design from this optimization, which satisfies the MFS
objective, is presented in Fig. 4b. Notably, the best de-
sign optimized for T follows a hexagonal lattice and has
reduced the launch time by 6 minutes compared to the
design optimized for D. This decrease in launch time re-
sultsinacostreductionofapproximately2millioneuros
per launch (i.e. following the same calculation presented
above).
However, this decrease in T comes with the cost of an
increased D. Fig. 4a,c shows that the reflectivity of the
Fig.3. a,Accelerationdistance(D)fordifferentlatticestruc- PhCfortheinitialwavelengthsisresponsibleforthefast
tureswithvaryingminimumfeaturessize(MFS).Theredline
initial acceleration of the sail and, therefore, reaching its
indicates the D for a 200 nm thick un-patterned PhC mem-
final velocity in less time. Alternatively, for a lightsail
brane. b, The reflectivity spectrum of the selected photonic
with low reflectivity at the initial wavelengths, the sail
crystal designs from a for the full Doppler shift region. The
will only be accelerated slowly, wasting a lot of illumi-
rest of the energy is transmitted due to the ppm absorption
of SiN [37] c, The velocity of the hexagonal and pentagonal nation time before it gets significantly accelerated. So,
PhClightsailduringaccelerationcomparedwiththespeedof when optimizing a PhC for only D, initial reflectivity is
light. notprioritizedandcanresultinalongaccelerationtime.
Regarding the pentagonal lattice, optimizing for T or D
did not change the performance significantly. However,
when comparing the pentagonal and hexagonal designs
will also take more time to be accelerated. However, the
optimizedforTinFig.4b,itcanbeseenthatbothdesigns
key insight obtained from Fig 3c is that this is not the
followasimilarpathwhenaccelerated,meaningthatthe
case. The pentagonal design with a higher D than the
designs are close together within the design space. This
hexagonal design has a significantly lower acceleration
can indicate the neural TO finds the final solution in a
time.
basin where different designs have comparable outcomes
Additionally, the pentagonal design obtained by the
for the FOM. Additional mission requirements can be
neural TO method gives the non-trivial insight that a
included in the optimisation to resolve this basin. Dif-
broadbandreflectorcanbemadewithatwo-dimensional
ferent requirements will call for other inherent proper-
PhC by designing it with multiple hole sizes and shapes,
ties of a PhC and determine the most suitable crystal
resulting in multiple resonance peaks. However, these
structure for the lightsail application. For example, a
peaks’ total reflectivity is lower than that of a PhC de-
notable difference between the pentagonal and hexago-
signed with one fixed shape, thereby making the reflec-
nal designs is that the A for the pentagonal design is
tor more broad-band rather more than reflective. This f
higher. This property can be beneficial to aid radiative
allows a sail to be tuned to more wavelengths within the
cooling and reduce stress concentration within the sail
Doppler range, a quality not usually needed for conven-
during its dynamic operation. In terms of fabrication, a
tionalmirrorsbutcriticallyimportantforlightsails. The
larger A means more material between holes, and more
supplementary information provides a more comprehen- f
robuststructures. Incontrast,smallA wouldmeanPhC
sive analysis of the obtained designs, including the po- f
designscharacterizedbysmalldelicatewiresofmaterials
larization dependence, acceleration distance, and time.
betweenholeswhichmustsurvivethefabricationprocess
Notably,thelaunchcostisonlydeterminedbytheaccel-
of suspending the structures and subsequently undergo
erationtime(T)(i.e. thetimerequiredtoreachthefinal
fast accelerations. The Area fraction will be a crucial
velocity of the lightsail), making it a significant perfor-
parameter affecting several other important factors, in-
manceparametertoconsider. Forexample,whenassum-
cluding costs from minimum feature size and manufac-
ingidealenergyconversiontothelaserandidealmomen-
turability (i.e. the ability not to fracture too easily) and
tum transfer to the sail, the time difference of 5 minutes
acceleration capabilities.
between the pentagonal and hexagonal lattice, shown in
Fig. 3c,canmeanadifferenceinlaunchcostof1.5million Transitioning to the broader context of existing liter-
euros with respect to a total launch cost of 9.3 million ature, different two-dimensional PhC designs have been
euros when calculating for a 10 GW/m2 laser on a 10 proposedbefore,withdesignshavingaMFSbetween125
m2 sail and 0.185 euro/kWh [3] (average non-household - 260 nm, and D between 1.9 - 13 Gm [5, 31, 43–45].
energy price 2023). Considering the high throughput of However,meaningfulcomparisonswithourfindingspose
launches required for Starshot missions, the costs of in- a challenge due to the different mission parameters em-6
Fig. 4. a, Reflectivity spectrum of two hexagonal PhCs. The
red arrow indicates the shift of the reflectivity peak to the
laser wavelength (i.e. to the left) when optimizing for T.b,
the final design of hexagonal (blue) and pentagonal (green)
PhC optimized for T. c, The velocity of the PhC lightsail
duringaccelerationcomparedwiththespeedoflight. Regions
I (orange) and II (yellow) indicate how the beginning of the
reflectivity spectrum translates to the initial acceleration of
the sail.
Fig.5. a,Photographofa100mmwaferwitha60×60mm2,
200 nm thick suspended SiN PhC membrane, covered with
a pentagonal pattern having a period of 3.0 µm. b, Micro-
ployed in previous studies. Factors such as variations in
scopeimageoftwoarrowsetchedintothesubstratepointing
payload mass, laser power, and sail material limit the
towardsa350×350µm2suspendedPhCmembrane. Thebot-
direct applicability of our optimized designs to those re-
tomoftheorange-framedinsetshowstheedgeofthe60×60
ported in the literature. Hence, newly proposed designs
mm2 suspended membrane in the same magnification. The
inthisfieldshouldideallyutilizethesamemissionparam- 350×350 µm2 membrane puts the large membrane in per-
eters. Nevertheless,itisworthnotingthat,despitelower spectivebyshowcasingthelargestsingle-layersuspendedPhC
D, the designs proposed in the literature are challenging membranes at Starshot’s announcement (2016) [16] c, 50x
or expensive to fabricate due to their intricate features magnification of the edge of the membrane. One can see the
and material choices. Additionally, there is a challeng- repeatingpatterncoveringthe60×60mm2 phononiccrystal
ing tradeoff between preferable physical properties like (PhC). The SiN is still attached to the silicon frame in the
broadbandreflectivity,stabilityorcoolingandthethick- purpleregions. Thelightpinkindicateswherethesiliconhas
been removed under the PhC, leaving a suspended SiN PhC
ness of the PhC [6, 8, 30, 32]. However, the extra mass
membrane. The yellow-framed inset shows a further zoom of
can significantly increase the acceleration distance and
the pentagonal lattice taken with a scanning electron micro-
time and thereby the cost.
scope.
Experimental Results. For the reasons invoked pre-
viously, the pentagonal design presented in Fig. 3, was
chosen to be fabricated in this work as a proof of con-
cept. Fabricating a pentagonal lattice PhC membrane nanophotonic element and covered in about 1.5 billion
also illustrates the robustness of the fabrication method nanoscaleholes. Togiveanintuitivesenseofthisaspect-
(elaboratedintheMethodssection). Fig. 5shows60×60 ratio, our 200nm-thick photonic crystal scaled up to a
mm2 and a 350×350 µm2 suspended single-layer PhC 1mm thick glass sheet would extend for nearly 1 km
3
membrane. To illustrate the large scales of these sus- laterally, covered in ≈2.5mm-diameter holes with ≈2.5
pended devices, we have etched millimeter-scale arrows mm of glass between holes – an aspect ratio that is far
pointing towards the smaller membrane. The smaller beyond anything manufactured at macroscopic scales.
membrane represents the largest photonic crystals made At nanoscales where weight and forces scale differently
at Starshot’s announcement in 2016 [16], highlighting a due to low masses and small surface areas, unique high-
nearly 30,000-fold increase in surface area of SiN pho- aspect-ratio geometries can be reliably produced.
toniccrystalmaterials. Here,weareabletoproducethis
reflective material at nearly 9000 times reduced cost per A tunable laser (range: 1530 - 1620 nm) is used in the
square meter. This underscores the progress in the scal- measurement setup (Fig. 6a and Methods) for obtaining
ability and aspect ratio achievable with our fabrication apartofthereflectivityspectrumtovalidatethesimula-
method and design methodologies that consider yield. tions. The measurement and the simulations are shown
Remarkably, the device shown in Fig. 5 is one of the in Fig. 6c. The measured value differs from the original
largest single-layer suspended PhC to date, having the spectrumduetothefabricationsteps,likeetching,which
highest aspect ratio (length/thickness) of 3×105 of any etch away some of the membrane’s thickness during the7
undercutandenlargestheholesduetonon-perfectselec-
tivity. Therefore, the final shape of the PhC is retrieved
via an electron microscope and used to obtain the ex-
pectedreflectivity. Notably,themeasurementperformed
is in good agreement with the simulation of the fabri-
cated PhC.
Analysis of the final membranes revealed that the hole
sizeofthePhCattheedgeisapproximatelythreepercent
larger than that of the center holes. This size difference
causes a small shift in the reflectivity spectrum of 10-20
nm, likely because the etch rate in the middle is lower
due to more etchant chemicals being available at the
edge. Therefore, the middle, having more exposed sili-
conthantheedges,consumesmoreSF chemical(usedto
6
undercut our PhCs) and reduces the etch rate compared
to the edge, which is adjacent to the substrate without
holes and does not consume the chemical. This results
in the membrane releasing first from the edges and then
fromthecenter,whichisadvantageoussinceweusecryo-
genic temperatures to improve the SiN/Si selectivity of
theSF etchant. Thus, thecenterremainswellanchored
6
thermally to the substrate during the release. The fab-
rication process can be optimized to counter the above-
mentioned variations for an even better match with the
optimized design. However, the suspended PhC mem-
brane measurement is in reasonable agreement with the
simulations.
DISCUSSION & CONCLUSION
High-aspect-ratio PhC reflectors, with subwavelength
thickness and centimeter-scale dimensions, offer unique
Fig. 6. a, Experimental setup. Circ, circulator; PC, polar-
capabilities not achievable at smaller micron scales, as
izationcontroller;Col.,collimator;Lin. Pol.,linearpolarizer;
shown in Fig 5b. Centimeter-scale photonic crystals can
obj.,objective;PD,photodetector. b,100mmdiameterwafer
achieve higher reflectivity with thinner geometries be- with60×60mm2 suspendedPhCmembraneclampedinthe
causetheydonotrequirelighttobefocuseddown,which measurement setup. c, Simulations from the actual fabri-
can severely reduce reflectivity from the ideal case of cated design obtained from the scanning electron microscope
a plane wave incident on a PhC. In these larger-scale (blue), measurement (orange) with respect to a silver mirror
PhCs, the incident beam can interact with billions of reference. d, Schematic representation of the simulation. A
nanoholes, similar to a plane wave on an infinitely sized smalllayerwitharelativepermittivityof(ϵ Si+ϵ vac)/2[46]is
PhC[9]. Theirnovelgeometriesopennewpossibilitiesfor introduced to represent the rough surface resulting from the
undercut of the SiN membrane.
lightweight, compliant reflectors in dynamic applications
like movable mirrors [47], imaging optics [48], as well as
for acceleration to high speeds in space exploration.
of optimizing for MFS, which is traditionally difficult in
This study presents the fabrication of the largest
topology optimization.
single-layer suspended photonic crystal (PhC) with the
highestaspectratioachievedforananophotonicelement, Previous research has focused on optimizing accelera-
marking an advancement for large-scale PhC lightsails tion performance, but this study directly addresses the
required for missions like the Starshot Initiative. No- criticalcostsofmanufacturing,yield(i.e.,lightsailbreak-
tably, we have achieved a 9000 times reduction in manu- age),andlaserlaunching. TheStarshotproject’sshotgun
facturing costs, a critical breakthrough for the project’s approach highlights that economic considerations are as
viability. This cost reduction stems from surpassing the crucialasscientificperformanceformissionsuccess. The
minimumfeaturesize(MFS)thresholdsetbydiffraction, coupling of economics and performance will ultimately
allowingtheuseofhigh-throughputphotolithographyfor determinefeasibilityandcanleadtonon-intuitivedesign
large wafer-scale production at significantly lower costs. strategies.
WeusetheAreafractionofthephotoniccrystalasaway The design process was conducted by neural topol-8
ogy optimization (neural TO). This method was found by focusing on acceleration time, we estimate significant
to be more robust than performing topology optimiza- overall budget reductions approaching 25 million euros
tionwithouttheneuralnetworkreparameterizationtrick, per lightsail. This continual focus on cutting costs is es-
as it does not require artificial relaxation in the simu- sential for Starshot’s success.
lations to converge to optimum solutions. Traditional Future research should explore multi-objective topol-
PhCscanbehighlyreflectiveatasinglewavelengthpeak ogy optimization, incorporating structural [49], thermal
or more broadband by increasing thickness, which adds [10, 31], and photonic stability [8, 32, 50, 51] parameters
mass. Constrained to a single layer of SiN, neural TO to develop viable lightsails producible by cost-effective
discovered a basin of possible designs with similar per- methods. Including realistic constraints, such as mass
formance and a novel periodic placement of holes: the penalties for the lightsail’s connection to the payload,
pentagonal lattice. This lattice features several peaks will also be crucial.
of relatively lower reflectivity strategically spread over a This study underscores the potential of neural topol-
broad wavelength range, optimizing to reduce accelera- ogy optimization to achieve innovative and economi-
tiontime. Thisinnovativeapproachdemonstratesthata cally viable lightsail designs, crucial for next-generation
pentagonal lattice with multi-shaped periodic structures space exploration. We demonstrate that wafer-scale
offers extra degrees of freedom, enabling the ability to subwavelength-thickness reflectors can be produced in a
tunebeneficialtrade-offsbetweenreflectivity,broadband trulyscalablemannerbyoptimizingbothmanufacturing
operation, and Area fraction. costs and design. In principle, our techniques allow for
A key insight is that Starshot’s feasibility will hinge the production of these low-mass, broadband reflectors
onbalancingmanufacturingcostsandperformance,both at any wafer size currently available in the semiconduc-
linkedtothePhCAreafraction. AhighAreafractionre- tor industry (currently 400mm diameter). Integrating
duces manufacturing costs and improves yield but hurts economic and performance considerations will be pivotal
acceleration performance. Additionally, a low Area frac- for the feasibility and success of ambitious projects like
tion enhances acceleration but increases manufacturing the Starshot Initiative. While the trajectories for such
complexity and costs. Neural TO navigates this opti- a mission are ambitious, these goals initiate a new ex-
mization landscape by balancing these demands. plorationofextremelight-matterinteractions,leadingto
Integratingthecost-savingmeasuresdiscussed,theto- advancements in photonics, structural engineering, and
tal savings per sail are substantial. By reducing manu- materials science, and opening up a new regime in these
facturingcostsby9000timesandoptimizinglaunchcosts fields.
[1] NASA, “Voyager1,” https://voyager.jpl.nasa.gov/, [13] K. Makles, T. Antoni, A. G. Kuhn, S. Del´eglise, T. Bri-
accessed: 2021-03-30. ant, P.-F. Cohadon, R. Braive, G. Beaudoin, L. Pinard,
[2] Breakthrough Initiatives, “Starshot,” https: C. Michel, V. Dolique, R. Flaminio, G. Cagnoli,
//breakthroughinitiatives.org/initiative/3, I. Robert-Philip, and A. Heidmann, Opt. Lett. 40, 174
accessed: 2021-03-29. (2015).
[3] Eurostat, “Electricity prices for non-household [14] A. T. Land, M. Dey Chowdhury, A. R.
consumers,” https://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ Agrawal, and D. J. Wilson, Nano Lett. (2024),
databrowser/view/nrg_pc_205/default/table?lang= 10.1021/acs.nanolett.4c00737.
en, accessed: 2024-05-07. [15] R.A.Norte,J.P.Moura, andS.Gro¨blacher,PRL116,
[4] H.HemmatiandD.Caplan,Optical Satellite Communi- 147202 (2016).
cations (Elsevier Inc., 2013) pp. 121–162. [16] X. Chen, C. Chardin, K. Makles, C. Ca¨er, S. Chua,
[5] H.A.Atwater,A.R.Davoyan,O.Ilic,D.Jariwala,M.C. R. Braive, I. Robert-Philip, T. Briant, P.-F. Cohadon,
Sherrott, C. M. Went, W. S. Whitney, and J. Wong, A. Heidmann, T. Jacqmin, and S. Del´eglise, Light: Sci-
Nature Materials 17, 861 (2018). ence & Applications 6, e16190 (2017).
[6] W.Jin,W.Li,M.Orenstein, andS.Fan,ACSPhotonics [17] S.Bernard,C.Reinhardt,V.Dumont,Y.-A.Peter, and
7, 2350 (2020). J. C. Sankey, Optics letters 41, 5624 (2016).
[7] K. V. Myilswamy, A. Krishnan, and M. L. Povinelli, [18] G.Enzian,Z.Wang,A.Simonsen,J.Mathiassen,T.Vi-
Opt. Express 28, 8223 (2020). bel,Y.Tsaturyan,A.Tagantsev,A.Schliesser, andE.S.
[8] R. Gao, M. D. Kelzenberg, and H. A. Atwater, Nature Polzik, Optics Express 31, 13040 (2023).
Communications 15, 4203 (2024). [19] P.LubinandA.N.Cohen,“Theeconomicsofinterstellar
[9] J. P. Moura, R. A. Norte, J. Guo, C. Scha¨fermeier, and flight,” (2022), arXiv:2112.13911.
S. Gro¨blacher, Opt. Express 26, 1895 (2018). [20] Z.Liu,D.Zhu,S.P.Rodrigues,K.-T.Lee, andW.Cai,
[10] G.R.Jaffe, G.R.Holdman, M.S.Jang, D.Feng, M.A. Nano Lett. 18, 6570 (2018).
Kats, and V. W. Brar, Nano Lett. 23, 6852 (2023). [21] J. S. Jensen and O. Sigmund, Laser and Photonics Re-
[11] R. Gao, M. D. Kelzenberg, Y. Kim, O. Ilic, and H. A. views 5, 308 (2011).
Atwater, ACS Photonics 9, 1965 (2022). [22] W. Li, F. Meng, Y. Chen, Y. f. Li, and X. Huang, Ad-
[12] C. Stambaugh, H. Xu, U. Kemiktarak, J. Taylor, and vanced Theory and Simulations 2, 1900017 (2019).
J. Lawall, Annalen der Physik 527, 81 (2015). [23] S. Molesky, Z. Lin, A. Y. Piggott, W. Jin, J. Vuckovi´c,9
and A. W. Rodriguez, Nature Photonics 12, 659 (2018). [50] O. Ilic and H. A. Atwater, Nature Photonics 13, 289
[24] S. D. Campbell, D. Sell, R. P. Jenkins, E. B. Whiting, (2019).
J. A. Fan, and D. H. Werner, Opt. Mater. Express 9, [51] J.Siegel,A.Y.Wang,S.G.Menabde,M.A.Kats,M.S.
1842 (2019). Jang, and V. W. Brar, ACS Photonics 6, 2032 (2019).
[25] S. Hoyer, J. Sohl-Dickstein, and S. Greydanus, “Neural [52] J.Nocedal,Mathematicsofcomputation35,773(1980).
reparameterization improves structural optimization,” [53] R.A.Norte,M.Forsch,A.Wallucks,I.Marinkovi´c, and
(2019), arXiv:1909.04240. S. Gro¨blacher, Phys. Rev. Lett. 121, 030405 (2018).
[26] W. Ma, F. Cheng, and Y. Liu, ACS Nano 12, 6326 [54] D.Shin,A.Cupertino,M.H.J.deJong,P.G.Steeneken,
(2018). M. A. Bessa, and R. A. Norte, Advanced Materials 34,
[27] J.Jiang,D.Sell,S.Hoyer,J.Hickey,J.Yang, andJ.A. 2106248 (2022).
Fan, ACS Nano 13, 8872 (2019). [55] M.Xu,D.Shin,P.M.Sberna,R.vanderKolk,A.Cuper-
[28] J.Peurifoy,Y.Shen,L.Jing,Y.Yang,F.Cano-Renteria, tino,M.A.Bessa, andR.A.Norte,AdvancedMaterials
B. G. DeLacy, J. D. Joannopoulos, M. Tegmark, and 36, 2306513 (2024).
M. Soljaˇci´c, Science Advances 4, eaar4206 (2018).
[29] J. D. Joannopoulos, S. G. Johnson, J. N. Winn, and
R. D. Meade, Photonic Crystals (Princeton University
Press, Princeton, 2008).
[30] J. Chang, W. Ji, X. Yao, A. J. van Run, and METHOD
S. Gro¨blacher, Nano Lett. 24, 6689 (2024).
[31] J. Brewer, M. F. Campbell, P. Kumar, S. Kulkarni,
D. Jariwala, I. Bargatin, and A. P. Raman, Nano Lett. Optimization formulation
22, 594 (2022).
[32] M. M. Salary and H. Mosallaei, Laser & Photonics Re-
The neural TO algorithm is divided into four sections:
views 14, 1900311 (2020).
[33] Y. Chen, Microelectronic Engineering 135, 57 (2015). convolutional neural network (CNN), post-processing,
[34] J. Trasobares, F. Vaurette, M. Franc¸ois, H. Romijn, J.- functionalanalysis, andcalculationofthe figureofmerit
L. Codron, D. Vuillaume, D. Th´eron, and N. Cl´ement, (FOM) [25]. Furthermore, the optimization consists of a
Beilstein J. Nanotechnol. 5, 1918 (2014). forward and backward step. The forward step involves
[35] E. Sharma, R. Rathi, J. Misharwal, B. Sinhmar, S. Ku- feeding a randomized vector β into the CNN, which pro-
mari,J.Dalal, andA.Kumar,Nanomaterials12(2022), duces the image of the optimized structure (i.e. the dis-
10.3390/nano12162754.
cretizeddesignspace). Thisimageisfiltered,afterwhich
[36] M. v. den Brink, in 2019 IEEE International Electron
the performance parameters obtained in the functional
Devices Meeting (IEDM) (2019) pp. 1.2.1–1.2.5.
analysiscanbeusedtodeterminetheFOM.Intheback-
[37] J. Steinlechner, C. Kru¨ger, I. W. Martin, A. Bell,
ward step, the gradients with respect to the FOM are
J. Hough, H. Kaufer, S. Rowan, R. Schnabel, and
calculated for all the trainable variables of the CNN and
S. Steinlechner, Phys. Rev. D 96, 022007 (2017).
[38] A.Macchi,S.Veghini, andF.Pegoraro,Phys.Rev.Lett. the elements of β so that the L-BFGS [52] optimizer can
103, 085003 (2009). be used to update them at each new iteration. This pro-
[39] N.Kulkarni,P.Lubin, andQ.Zhang,TheAstronomical cedure is repeated until the FOM reaches a pre-set rela-
Journal 155, 155 (2018). tive tolerance or a maximum number of iterations. The
[40] O. Sigmund and K. Maute, Structural and Multidisci- performance of the neural TO approach is discussed in
plinary Optimization 48, 1031 (2013). more detail in the supplementary information.
[41] W. Zhang, D. Li, J. Zhang, and X. Guo, Computer
For the optimization of the PhC based lightsail, only
MethodsinAppliedMechanicsandEngineering311,327
(2016). the PhC unit cell is considered. In this optimization, a
[42] B.Moulton,J.Lu, andM.J.Zaworotko,J.Am.Chem. two-dimensional design space is discre √tized into a grid
Soc. 123, 9224 (2001). of N × N (square lattice), and N × 3N (hexagonal
[43] W.Jin,W.Li,C.Khandekar,M.Orenstein, andS.Fan, lattice) pixels, and these pixels’ material properties can
ACS Photonics 9, 3384 (2022). be continuously varied between the vacuum and the re-
[44] Z. A. Kudyshev, A. V. Kildishev, V. M. Shalaev, and quired material. Furthermore, the unit cell’s period Λ
A. Boltasseva, ACS Photonics 9, 190 (2022).
(i.e. thelatticevector)andthelayerthicknesstareused
[45] O.Ilic,C.M.Went, andH.A.Atwater,NanoLett.18,
asoptimizationparameters. Aschematicoverviewofthe
5583 (2018).
optimization and the parameters is presented in Fig. 7.
[46] H. Fujiwara, “Effect of roughness on ellipsometry analy-
sis,”inSpectroscopicEllipsometryforPhotovoltaics: Vol- The functional analysis is performed with Rigor-
ume 1: Fundamental Principles and Solar Cell Char- ous coupled-wave analysis (RCWA) because this semi-
acterization, edited by H. Fujiwara and R. W. Collins analytical method is computationally efficient in solving
(Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2018) pp. scattering problems for periodic structures with layers
155–172. that are invariant in the direction normal to the period-
[47] P.-Y. Madec, Proc.SPIE 8447, 844705 (2012).
icity [6].
[48] C. Xu, R. Zhao, X. Zhang, S. Zhang, X. Li, G. Geng,
J.Li,X.Li,Y.Wang, andL.Huang,eLight4,9(2024). Minimizing D is chosen as the first objective for the
[49] M. F. Campbell, J. Brewer, D. Jariwala, A. P. Raman, designoptimization. Theformulationfortheacceleration
and I. Bargatin, Nano Lett. 22, 90 (2022). distance is presented in Eq. (1).10
TheoptimizationaimstominimizetheFOMforaSiN
lightsail following the 2016 Starshot parameters. The
density of SiN is set to 3100 kg/m3 [55], and its rela-
tive permittivity is 4 [37]. The relative permittivity of
the pixels is varied between 1 (vacuum) and 4 (SiN).
The thickness (t) and period (Λ) are constrained to
0.01 µm ≤ t ≤ 1 µm and 0.1 µm ≤ Λ ≤ 7.2 µm re-
spectively. The intensity I of the laser beam is set to
10 GW/m2 with a wavelength λ of 1.55 µm, illuminat-
0
ing a sail area of 10 m2. The laser is assumed to be a
linear polarised plane wave, and the sail is optimized for
two orthogonal polarisation angles ϕ = 0 and ϕ = 1π.
2
The initial solution of the material distribution is ran-
dom, and the initial solution of the thickness and period
is set to 100 nm and λ respectively. The design space is
0
divided into a 100 × 100 and 100 × 172 pixel grid for a
square and hexagonal lattice respectively.
Nanofabrication of the PhC
ThestringentmassrequirementsoftheStarshotInitia-
tivemakehole-basedphotoniccrystals(PhCs)inevitable.
While multilayered and bilayer PhCs have a 100% fill
factor (i.e., no holes), making them heavier and easier to
fabricate,theyareunsuitableduetotheirexcessivemass.
To approach the target mass of 1 gram, we must employ
Fig.7. Schematicoflightsailoptimization. a,Thelightsailis single-layerPhCswithholes,achievingafillfactorof40-
optimized for one layer with thickness t. The unit cell with
70%. Thisdesignchoice,althoughnecessaryforreducing
the period of Λ is optimized. The discretized voxels (N) of
weight, introduces fragility, as stress concentrations oc-
material have an assigned dielectric constant ϵ . The shape
N cur in the material between holes. Consequently, fabri-
of the design space for a hexagonal (b) or square (c) lattice.
cating centimeter-scale nanophotonic reflectors that are
both lightweight and robust poses significant challenges.
Effectivelithographyofbillionsofholesmustbeachieved
rapidly,andthehigh-aspect-ratiosingle-layerPhCsmust
c3 (cid:90) βf h(β) be suspended with a single, stiction-free undercut using
D = (ρ +ρ ) dβ (1)
2I l s R[λ(β)] dry chemical etching.
0
Fig. 8displaysthefabricationprocessofthesuspended
Inthisequation,Distheaccelerationdistance,I isthe
PhC lightsail, of which a similar process is described in
intensity of the propulsion laser, ρ and ρ are the area
l s theworkofShinetal. (2022)[54]. Initially,a100mmSi
densitiesofthelightsailandthesatelliterespectively,λis
waferiscoveredwith200nmofsiliconnitrideusinglow-
thewavelengthofthepropulsionlaser,Risthereflection
(cid:112) pressure chemical vapour deposition (LPCVD) to attain
asafunctionofλ,andh(β)=β/(1−β)2 1−β2,where
apre-stressof270MPa. Next,theAZECI3012positive-
βisthevelocityfractionwithrespecttothespeedoflight
tone resist is spin coated. Before the coating a HMDS
β = v/c. Due to the Doppler red-shift of the laser, the
and baking step is performed at 130 ◦C for 30 s and 60 s
wavelength of the laser can be written as a function of
(cid:112) respectively. The resist is then spin coated at 6850 rpm
the relative speed, λ(β) = λ (1+β)/(1−β). When
0 toreach1µmthicknessandsoftbakedat95◦Cfor150s.
using a 1.55 µm laser, the bandwidth at which the sail
An ASML PAS 5500/80 automatic wafer stepper is used
will operate is from 1.55 µm to 1.86 µm. ρ and R are
l to expose the resist with a 110 mJ/cm2 dose, operating
the geometry-dependent parameters.
withchromeonquartzmasktostitch5×5mm2 patterns
Secondly, the lightsail is optimized for T [39]. The
togethertoa60×60mm2PhC.Thedevelopmentconsists
formulation of T is presented in Eq. 2.
of a PEB step at 115 ◦C for 150 s, followed by single
puddle development with MF322 for 60 s at 3000 rpm.
m c3 (cid:90) βf γ(β)3 (cid:18) 1+β(cid:19) Atlast, thewaferishard-bakedat100◦Cfor150s. The
T = t dβ (2)
resist mask enables the PhC pattern to be transferred
2IA R[λ(β)] 1−β
0
usinga60sdirectionalinductivelycoupledplasma(ICP)
For this equation, m t and A are th (cid:112)e total mass and to etch the SiN layer with C 2F 6. Finally, a 45 s fluorine-
area of the sail respectively, γ(β)=1/ 1−β2. based SF ICP etch is used at -120 ◦C to suspend the
611
the Si wafer, which is around 4 µm and can be deducted
from the undercut at the edge of the membrane through
optical microscopy. Additionally, a layer around 100 nm
with a refractive index of (ϵ +ϵ )/2 [46] was added
Si vac
on top of the Si wafer, representing the roughness re-
sulting from the undercut. This resulted in a qualitative
match of the measurement, yet the total reflectivity did
not match. This mismatch is because the setup is de-
signedonlytomeasurethenormallyreflected,zero-order
diffracted light. However, the total reflectivity is used in
the lightsail optimization to obtain the total momentum
transferinthenormaldirectionofthesail. Consequently,
afterfittingtheheightofthegab,theroughnesslayerand
when only considering the zero-order reflected light, the
simulationisingoodagreementwiththemeasurements.
Fig. 8. Schematic overview of the fabrication steps of the
suspended PhC lightsail [54]. a, SiN (blue) positioned on Si
wafer with LPCVD. (b) Patterning of the photoresist mask
ACKNOWLEDGEMENTS
(red), (c) Directional C F plasma etch, (d) Resist removal,
2 6
(e) SF undercut.
6
We want to thank Yufan Li, Peter Steeneken, Megha
Khokhar, Mark Kalsbeek, Juan Lizarraga Lallana and
PhC membrane. Ata Keskeklar for stimulating discussions. Additionally,
wewanttothankR.TufanErdoganforhissupportwith
our measurements. Funded/Co-funded by the European
Measurement setup for Reflectivity PhC Union (ERC, EARS, 101042855). Views and opinions
expressed are however those of the author(s) only and
donotnecessarilyreflectthoseoftheEuropeanUnionor
Thelarge-scalesuspendedPhCmembraneismeasured
the European Research Council. Neither the European
in the setup shown in Fig. 6a to obtain the actual re-
Unionnorthegrantingauthoritycanbeheldresponsible
flectivity spectrum and to validate the simulations. The
for them. R.N. and M.A.B would like to acknowledge
setup consists of a tunable laser that emits a laser beam
support from the Limitless Space Institute’s I2 Grant.
from 1530-1620 nm. This laser beam passes through
an optical fibre to a circulator, followed by a polariza-
tion controller (PC). The light then goes into free space
through a collimator. The light passes through a linear
polarization filter to ensure it is linearly polarised. The
beam size is then decreased and focused with a lens set
and an objective. The reflected light follows the same
pathbackandisdivertedinthecirculatortoanattenua-
torandfinallytothephotodiode. Themeasurementsare
performed by first maximizing the signal retrieved from
a silver mirror at 1580 nm, after which its reflectivity
spectrum is measured, and this is repeated for the PhC
membranes. The actual reflectivity could be obtained
by normalising the measurement of the PhC membrane
with the known reflectivity of the silver mirror. Fig. 6b
shows the 100 mm diameter wafer within the measure-
ment setup.
Simulation of measurement
The PhC unit cell of the lightsail is simulated as a
SiN membrane surrounded by a vacuum in the lightsail
TO. However, the fabricated design is a suspended SiN
membrane attached to a Si wafer. Therefore, to match
the measurements with the simulations, the full system
must be considered as presented in Fig. 6d. This figure
shows the vacuum gap between the SiN membrane andSupplementary Information on
"Pentagonal Photonic Crystal Mirrors:
Scalable Lightsails with Enhanced Acceleration via Neural
Topology Optimization"
July 4, 2024
L. Norder, S. Yin, M. J. de Jong, F. Stallone, H. Aydogmus, P.M. Sberna, M. A.
Bessa, R. A. Norte,
Section A - Design analysis
24 evaluation points are used in calculating the D in the optimization to reduce the
computationalcost,resultinginanerrortotheactualD.Therefore,thethreedesigns
fromFig.S1closesttothe500nmmeanfeaturesize(MFS)objectivearestudiedmore
thoroughlytochooseafinaldesignforthisstudy.Firstly,thefullreflectivityspectrum
of the four designs is calculated for 300 wavelengths and presented in Fig. S1b. These
spectra are then used to integrate the equation of motion directly [4], resulting in the
velocity and the travelled distance of the lightsails following the Starshot parameters
(Fig. S1d,e), giving insight into how the reflectivity spectrum translates to the D.
It stands out that for designs with similar D the actual acceleration time can vary
significantly.
Secondly, the design polarisation dependency is studied by plotting the D of
the sail for a single plane wave normal to the sail surface by varying from ϕ=0 to
ϕ=π, because during the launch the lightsail will only be illuminated by a single
linear polarised plane wave. Fig. S1c shows that the three designs perform differently.
Whereas the D varies negligibly for the hexagonal design, the square design loses all
its performance between ϕ=0.5π and ϕ=π. Therefore, the feasibility of PhC design
depends on the alignment accuracy or the envisioned operating state (e.g. spinning
lightsails).
It should be noted that the final acceleration time and distance presented in
Fig. S1e are probably not feasible for a physical lightsail, as it is not considering
the connection of the sail to the payload. Although this study has shown some
practical limits to the lightsail missions, it would be valuable to study the limits of
1Fig. S 1: Performance evaluation of the obtained designs. a, Acceleration distance D
of obtained designs for various MFS. b, Reflectivity spectrum. c, D for one incident
plane wave with changing polarisation angle. The velocity (d) and the travelled
distance (e) of a PhC lightsail over its acceleration time.
Source Spectrum λ[nm] MLW [nm] system cost [$M]
Hg i-line UV 365 350 4-6
KrF DUV 248 150 7-11
ArF EUV 193 19 25-110
Table 1: Minimal line width (MLW) for optical lithography using different light
sources [5, 1]
the different subsystems (e.g. laser array and lightsail) to improve the optimization
and feasible design generation. Moreover, Fig. S1c,d shows that optimizing for D
alone is insufficient to capture the challenging mission criterion.
To summarise, optimising a lightsail for D needs to consider designs with varying
MFS, polarisation dependence, and acceleration time. These three parameters can
highly influence the mission’s success by determining the fabrication and the launch
costs.
Section B - System costs optical lithography
Multiple optical lithography systems with different light sources and, therefore,
different minimum line widths are presented in TABLE 1. However, the MFS of this
lithographymethodwillexceedtheminimumlinewidth(MLW)duetothediffraction
limitofthelight.Therefore,sharpfeatureslikecurvaturesmaynotbecapturedduring
production, resulting in an MFS of 500 nm. For this study, i-line photolithography
was selected based on its cost-effectiveness, availability, and established processing
protocols.
2Fig. S 2: Reflectivity measurement from the 60 60 mm2 suspended photonic crystal
×
membrane together with the RCWA simulation of the reflectivity and related error
band. h , the height of vacuum gap between the membrane and the Si substrate;
gap
t , the thickness of the membrane; t , the thickness of the roughness layer in
PhC rough
the simulation; v , the volume fraction of the roughness layer which determines the
f
relative permittivity of the layer by ϵ =ϵ v +ϵ (1 v ) [2].
rough Si f SiN f
−
Section C - Measurement simulations
To accurately represent the measurement, a new simulation is performed, in which
not only the membrane in a vacuum but also the Si wafer and the gap between
the wafer and the membrane are simulated. Additionally, a small layer with relative
permittivitybetweenairandSiisaddedtosimulatetheroughnessoftheSisubstrate
due to the fabrication. Fig. S2 shows a representative measurement that is fitted to
the model by varying the height of the SiN layer, the gap between the Si and SiN,
and the layer representing the rough Si surface.
Section D - Mass constraint
In the context of the Starshot initiative, the total mass of the lightsail has been
suggested to be 1 gram. The design we found, as reported in the main text and
illustrated in Fig. 3, has an approximate mass of 3 grams for a 10 m2 lightsail using
the selected material. We have investigated the feasibility of creating a lightsail with
less mass by adjusting the area fraction and the sail’s thickness, ensuring a particular
total mass value is satisfied. Fig. S3 illustrates the outcome of the optimization for
different mass constraints when considering different sail thicknesses. We found that
the designs obtained for a mass constraint of 1 gram are not viable for manufacturing
(labelled case 1 in the figure) because they have freely suspended masses. In fact, the
main factor contributing to a large acceleration distance is the low mass of these
sails, rather than an increase in reflectivity. We also highlight that the best designs
3Fig. S 3: Best design for different mass constraints. a. Limiting the lightsail to 1
gram precludes manufacturability, as shown in Case 1. Case 2 yields the shortest
acceleration distance yet suffers from significantly reduced reflectivity compared to
Case 3, which exhibits a marginally greater acceleration distance. b. Reflectivity
spectrum for these three cases. Case 3 has a relatively lower acceleration distance
but the highest reflectivity. c. Case 3 has the lowest acceleration time because of the
high reflectivity.
we found for a lightsail with 2.5 grams are still not viable for manufacturing, as they
would correspond to parallel strings of material – case 2 in the figure. Furthermore,
weshowinpartFig.S3b,cthatthelowerreflectivityacrossthelaserwavelengthspec-
trum leads to a higher acceleration time, which would require more exposure to the
laser light. Therefore, the pentagonal crystal structure found for larger mass values
ismoreinteresting,asithasloweraccelerationtimeanditisviableformanufacturing.
Section E - Neural topology optimization
Inthisstudy,weinvestigatedforthefirsttimetheuseofneuraltopologyoptimization
in Photonics by considering a convolutional neural network that reparameterizes the
lightsail design on the fly (without training). This recent method has been evaluated
forstructuraloptimizationtasks,butwebelievedthatitwouldbemoreadvantageous
in the context of lightsail design because conventional topology optimization requires
a relaxation factor Q to ensure a smooth optimization process [3]. The conventional
strategy utilizes a pixel-based model and the Method of Moving Asymptotes (MMA)
as the optimizer. We implemented this strategy using the NLopt library, referring to
it as “Pixel model”, and compared it with the neural TO method.
In the absence of a relaxation factor the simulation is closer to the real physical
problem, but the conventional TO method does not converge to a good solution.
4Fig. S 4: Comparative performance of the “Pixel” and neural TO models on a
fabricated unit cell with a periodicity of 3.0 µm and thickness of 200 nm. a Loss
curves for the two models, with and without the relaxation factor. b and c show
the similarity in design and objective values achieved by the “Pixel” TO model and
neural TO model, respectively, when a relaxation factor is applied. Without the
relaxation factor, as shown in panels d and e, the “Pixel” model does not converge
to a good solution, whereas the neural TO model successfully converges.
.
Even when considering more than 100 iterations, there is virtually no change in
the design for the conventional strategy. In contrast, our findings demonstrate that
the neural TO method finds a similar solution (pentagonal crystal) without the
need for this relaxation factor, while predicting a lower (better) objective value. The
reparameterization technique allows to handle objective landscapes that are non
trivial and non-convex by over-parameterizing the problem and avoids getting stuck
in local optima. We found this method to be robust and we did not have to invest
significanttimeinhyperparameteroptimization.WebelievethatneuralTOwillopen
new avenues in design for problems that may involve even more complex objective
landscapes in the future.
5References
[1] Robert Castellano. The switch to asml’s euv lithography will impact the
entire semiconductor supply chain. https://seekingalpha.com/article/
4059013-switch-to-asmls-euv-lithography-will-impact-entire-semiconductor-supply-chain.
Accessed: 2023-03-03.
[2] Hiroyuki Fujiwara. Effect of Roughness on Ellipsometry Analysis, pages 155–172.
Springer International Publishing, Cham, 2018.
[3] Weiliang Jin, Wei Li, Meir Orenstein, and Shanhui Fan. Inverse design of
lightweightbroadbandreflectorforrelativisticlightsailpropulsion. ACSPhotonics,
7(9):2350–2355, September 2020.
[4] Neeraj Kulkarni, Philip Lubin, and Qicheng Zhang. Relativistic spacecraft
propelled by directed energy. The Astronomical Journal, 155(4):155, mar 2018.
[5] Ekta Sharma, Reena Rathi, Jaya Misharwal, Bhavya Sinhmar, Suman Kumari,
JasvirDalal,andAnandKumar. Evolutioninlithographytechniques:Microlithog-
raphy to nanolithography. Nanomaterials, 12(16), 2022.
6