Fusion Intelligence: Confluence of Natural and
Artificial Intelligence for Enhanced
Problem-Solving Efficiency
Rohan Reddy Kalavakonda1,∗, Junjun Huan1, Peyman Dehghanzadeh1, Archit Jaiswal1,
Soumyajit Mandal2, and Swarup Bhunia1
1Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering, University of Florida, Gainesville, FL 32611
Email: rohan.reddykalav@ufl.edu
2Instrumentation Department, Brookhaven National Laboratory, Upton, NY 11973
Abstract—ThispaperintroducesFusionIntelligence(FI),abio- odor [2], they struggle with accuracy, precision, range, and
inspiredintelligentsystem,wheretheinnatesensing,intelligence robustness.Biologicalsystemsuseattentionmechanismstofo-
and unique actuation abilities of biological organisms such as
cusonimportantstimuliandrespondquicklytoenvironmental
bees and ants are integrated with the computational power of
cues.Animalsfromsimpleinsectstocomplexprimatesdisplay
Artificial Intelligence (AI). This interdisciplinary field seeks to
create systems that are not only smart but also adaptive and a range of cognitive abilities involving instincts, conditioning,
responsiveinwaysthatmimicthenature.AsFIevolves,itholds andlearning.ReplicatingtheseabilitiesinAIsystemsinvolves
the promise of revolutionizing the way we approach complex notonlythesensoryprocessingbutalsotheintegrationofthis
problems, leveraging the best of both biological and digital
information with motor functions, which in natural systems is
worldstocreatesolutionsthataremoreeffective,sustainable,and
seamlesslyefficientandadaptable.Incontrast,artificialsensor
harmoniouswiththeenvironment.WedemonstrateFI’spotential
to enhance agricultural IoT system performance through a systemsandAIalgorithmsareenergy-inefficientandneedvast
simulated case study on improving insect pollination efficacy memory/data to replicate a fraction of these abilities, making
(entomophily). it challenging to deploy biomimetic AI on edge devices.
In this paper we propose Fusion Intelligence(FI), a bio-
I. INTRODUCTION
inspired integration framework which merges the intrinsic
Artificial Intelligence (AI) has revolutionized the way ma- capabilities of natural systems with the potential of AI-driven
chines interact with the physical world, mirroring some facets electronic systems. An overview of the proposed system is
of human cognition. The integration of AI with sensory shown in Fig. 1. FI can be applied in various domains includ-
inputsandactuationmechanismshasgivenrisetoautonomous ing agriculture, environmental monitoring, search and rescue
systems capable of self-regulation and decision-making in operations, national defence, and security. An agricultural
real-time. These systems are designed to process and analyze application of the FI framework was evaluated in a simulated
data streams from sensors, which act as proxies for human virtual environment and is presented as a case study. The
sensory organs, allowing the AI to perceive its environment. study demonstrates an FI system with bees acting as sensors
The computational models underlying AI are built upon al- and actuators to enhance pollination across a large field. By
gorithms that learn and evolve, drawing from the principles integrating AI with NI, the system learns from the insects and
of machine learning and neural networks. This enables AI then guides them to optimize pollination.
to recognize complex patterns, make informed decisions, and
carryouttaskswithadegreeofautonomythatwaspreviously
II. RELATEDWORK
unattainable. However AI necessitates considerable compu- For decades, insects have been studied for applications in
tational resources, particularly for advanced algorithms like national defense, agriculture, navigation, search and rescue,
deepneuralnetworks[1].Thecomputationaldemandescalates and explosives detection [3], [7]–[11]. Previous approaches
when training models on extensive datasets. Moreover, the involveintegratingminiaturizedsensorsoninsectbodies,such
precision of AI outputs is linked to the quality of sensor data, aswirelesscameras[12],RFIDtags[13],harmonicradar[14],
which poses its own set of challenges. Sensor calibration and Lidar[15],auditorysensors[16],andflightrecorders[8].One
the assurance of data accuracy are critical, especially in envi- alternative to direct control of insects for performing tasks is
ronments where conditions fluctuate unpredictably, impacting sensory control through stimuli, guiding insect activities [10],
the reliability of the data collected. [17], [18], with insects trained via classical conditioning [17],
Natural systems like insects provide a benchmark for although this requires periodic reconditioning.
improving AI systems. Biological sensory systems excel Table I compares previous work on controlling insects
in capturing and processing environmental stimuli. While to our case study on using FI to improve bee pollination.
biomimetic sensors mimic perceptions of light, sound, and All earlier works require a payload ranging from 3 mm
1
4202
yaM
61
]IA.sc[
1v36790.5042:viXraTABLEI
COMPARISONWITHEARLIERWORK
Complexityof Effecton Extentof
PreviousWorks MainFocus InsectUsed KeyFeatures
Integration DailyRoutine Damage/Invasiveness
Neural/muscularstimulators, Notdiscussed,but Invasive;requires
Implantable Complex;involves
Satoetal2008.[3] Cotinistexana visualstimulator, likelyaffecteddueto preciseimplantation
flightcontrol multipleimplantations
microcontroller physicalmodifications duringpupalstage
Invasive;involves
Complex;integration
Radio-frequency RFreceiver,microbattery, Altersnormalbehavior implantationof
Satoetal2009[4] Mecynorhinaspp. ofRFsystemand
neuralcontrol electrodestimulators forcontrolledflight electrodesand
electrodes
receiver
Minimallyinvasive;
Moderatelycomplex; Altersnormalbehavior
Organicsolarcell Ultrathinorganicsolarcell, attachmentof
Kakeietal.[5] G.portentosa attachmentofsolarcell forcontrolled
oncyborginsects wirelesslocomotioncontrol componentson
andelectronics movement
exterior
Moderatelycomplex; Altersnormalbehavior Minimallyinvasive;
Wirelesslynavigated ZigBee-enabled
Latifetal.[6] G.portentosa integrationofwireless forcontrolled backpackmounted
biobots neurostimulationbackpack
navigationsystem movement externally
Microsystem Complex;implantation Invasive;precise
Microprobe-basedplatform Altersnormalbehavior
Bozkurtetal.[7] platformforflight Manducasexta ofmicroprobesin insertionduring
formuscleactuation forcontrolledflight
muscleactuation muscles earlymetamorphosis
Improving Normalbehavioris Non-invasive;does
FIcasestudy pollinationand Honeybees UtilizesAItoassistbees Relativelysimple notalteredandcan notinvolve
healthofbees beenhanced implantation
to 30 mm long and weighing 422 mg to 8140 mg. How- a pack of dogs, can be deployed simultaneously. Each group
ever, a honey bee only measures 5.5-23 mm in length and has an array of sensors observing their responses. Biological
has a payload capacity (≈50% of its own weight) of only stimulus-response pairs serve as inputs and outputs for the
∼50 mg. Thus, “backpack” control devices, tested on large sensors and actuators, enabling the training of entities for
free-moving insects like beetles, moths and cockroaches [3]– various applications. Fig. 1(a) illustrates the NI subsystem
[7], are not practical for guiding the flight of small insects architecture.
suchashoneybees.Alsoopen-loopcontrolsystemshavebeen
1) Biological Entities: This block hosts living creatures
implemented by using microelectronic backpacks to stimulate
(animals, plants, fungi, or bacteria) operating in two modes.
invertebrates [19], [20]. The lack of feedback prevents such
In Sensing, creatures are exposed to a physical phenomenon,
biohybrid systems from adjusting to dynamic environments.
and their responses are recorded and transmitted to the AI
The reliability of stimulation signals remains an issue [21].
subsystem.Thisdatatrainsthemonitoringmodel,enablingAI
Our case study uses bees to improve pollination with-
to detect changes. In Actuation, creatures execute actions or
out conventional training or payloads. We employ electro-
tasks in an environment based on AI-generated instructions.
mechanical sensors and AI-powered actuators to guide bees
Creatures can operate in both modes simultaneously, acting
and enhance pollination. The absence of a payload results
as autonomous actuators under AI supervision. For example,
in low sensing and actuation power consumption of ∼29.5-
a creature in Sensing mode can autonomously navigate to
50.2 mW per bee [22]. The system is also more scalable
find a target source, with the AI subsystem governing overall
than previous works, which require surgical intervention to
interactions.
implant the payload. Lastly, our FI system is not restricted
to a specific task (pollination) but can be extended to more 2) Sensors and Actuators: Electromechanical sensors cap-
applications such as explosive and chemical detection, soil turetheresponsesoflivingcreaturestostimuli,selectedbased
quality improvement, and water quality detection. on response characteristics. For instance, infrared cameras
andmicrophonesrecordmotionandsound.Electromechanical
III. SYSTEMARCHITECTURE actuators manage their activity per user requirements, imple-
menting AI-generated or user-specified instructions. Training
AtthecoreofanFI-basedIoTsystemliesastructuredarchi-
mechanisms, such as food rewards, can be automated using
tecture for integrating NI and AI. Such integration is essential
AI to motivate and train the creatures.
to ensure reliable communication, efficient data processing,
and effective decision-making within the FI system. In this 3) Control Unit: The control unit interfaces NI with AI
section, we discuss both the overall system architecture and using a microcontroller to convert sensor outputs to digital
the components of the NI and AI subsystems. data and AI instructions to actuation signals, as summarized
in Fig. 1(a). Additional edge devices can interface with the
A. NI Subsystem
microcontroller via communication ports. The control unit
The primary function of NI (Natural Intelligence) is to acquires raw sensor data through standard digital protocols
interface with the physical world by collecting data and (I2C, SPI etc.) or an ADC. An onboard DSP filters and
interacting with the environment. The NI subsystem includes packages this data for network transmission. The network
biological entities and a suite of electromechanical sensors interface also receives and decodes AI instructions, with a
and actuators. Multiple entities, such as a colony of ants or DAC driving actuators to induce NI to perform tasks.
2Fig.1. FlowchartoftheNIandAIsubsystemsusedwithintheFIsystemarchitecture.(a)TheNIsubsystemhoststhebiologicalentitiesthatactassensors
andactuatorsintheenvironment.Compatibleelectromechanicalsensorsobservetheseentities.Thecontrolunitdigitizesthesensoroutputs,sendsthemtothe
AIsubsystem,anddecodesitsinstructions.Thelatterarerelayedtotheentitiesviacompatibleactuationdeviceslikespeakersorfooddispensers.(b)TheAI
subsystemhoststhedigitalprocessesrequiredtointerprettheactionsofbiologicalentitiesandaltertheirbehaviourbasedonuserobjectives.TheSupervisor
comparestheobservedandrequiredoutcomestomanagetheAImodeloutputsinreal-timebasedonuser-definedcontrolalgorithms.
4) Power Management Unit (PMU): The PMU supplies and correcting or removing inconsistencies. Normalizing and
energy to the NI subsystem for field deployment. It handles scaling ensure feature comparability. The Feature Extraction
battery monitoring, management, and automated food disper- block selects or creates relevant features to improve AI model
sal to the living creatures. The control unit’s microcontroller performance.Dataisthensplitintotrainingandtestsets,with
translates AI food delivery instructions, which the PMU then thetrainingsettotrainthemodelandthetestsetassessingits
executes using dedicated actuators. generalization to new data.
B. AI Subsystem
2) Supervisor: The Model Supervisor oversees AI mod-
The AI subsystem processes data from the NI subsystem, els, enabling automated iterative training and model deploy-
including activity patterns of living creatures and sensor data ment for an autonomous FI system. It includes a Processing
fromedgedevices.ThisdatatrainsAImodels,utilizingcloud- Unit and a Discriminator, as shown in Fig. 1(b). Additional
basedcomputingforresource-intensivetasks.Separatemodels memory/computing resources can be incorporated into the
are used for monitoring and controlling NI, as shown in Model Supervisor to enhance functionality. The Processing
Fig. 1(b). These models interpret, control, and adapt NI in Unit generates hyperparameters and datasets using extracted
real-time, creating a flexible, self-reconfigurable FI system. features for model training and then validating them with a
The AI subsystem comprises three blocks, detailed below. testdataset.Outputsfromtrainedmodelsarecomparedbythe
1) Data Processing: The Data Collection block stores in- Discriminator with user configuration and observed/expected
coming data from the NI subsystem, while the Data Transfor- NI activity, providing feedback to optimize training processes
mationblockprocessesthisdatathroughcleaning,scaling,and iteratively. The Processing Unit can also utilize output from
normalization. Cleaning addresses missing, inconsistent, or the Monitoring AI model to incorporate domain knowledge
erroneousvalues,usingimputationtechniquesformissingdata for training the Controlling AI Model.
33) AI Models: Evaluation metrics such as accuracy, pre- memoryelementstoreceive,process,andtransmitsignals
cision, recall, or mean squared error (MSE) are used to fromthesensors/actuators.Itshouldalsohavenetworking
evaluate model performance on unseen data. The resulting AI capabilities for communicating with the AI subsystem.
subsystem can be hosted either in the field or in the cloud • Data processing and AI model training. Raw data from
dependingonthespecificIoTarchitecture.Userscanconfigure the control unit is analysed and processed to create
theAIsubsystemtohostseveralAImodelstotrainanddeploy datasets for the AI models. Data processing involves
in parallel. However, the FI system requires at least one of steps such as data cleaning, normalization, and feature
the following models to either monitor or control the living engineering, as discussed earlier. The choice of machine
creatures in the NI subsystem: learningalgorithmsfortrainingtheAIdependsontheap-
• Monitoring AI model:Identifiescreatureactionsandcor- plication. The monitoring models are used to understand
relates them with physical parameters, providing insight andinterpretNIactions,whilethecontrollingmodelsare
into NI behavior. used to generate instructions for governing NI actions
• Controlling AI model: Generates instructions based on based on user requests and application requirements.
monitoring model output and NI data to control creature • AI model deployment and control. Thetrainedandvali-
actions. datedAImodelscannowinteractwiththeNIsubsystem.
The AI subsystem receives real-time NI data, which is
This model combination enables autonomous learning and
analyzedbythemonitoringAImodelstomakeintelligent
functioning of the AI subsystem while accommodating user
real-time decisions. The controlling AI models then gen-
inputs for desired actions.
erateactuatorcontrolsignalstoinducetheNItoperform
the desired actions.
IV. IMPLEMENTATION
• Monitoring and optimization. The closed-loop nature of
Designing an IoT system that collects data from NI, trains anFIsystemenablesittorespondtochangingconditions
the AI models, and deploys them to manage/ control NI by adapting its functionality based on AI-driven insights.
requirescarefulconsiderationofvariouscomponentsandtheir Mechanisms can be implemented to monitor the system
integration. In this section we provide a process for users to and incorporate user inputs to optimize performance.
use as a reference when designing an FI system according to Regular updates to the AI models can further enhance
their application requirements. the efficiency and accuracy of the FI system over time.
• Define problem and identify physical phenomena. Be-
gin by clearly defining the purpose and functionality of
V. CASESTUDY
the FI system. Identify the relevant physical phenomena Ensuring adequate pollination for crops like apples, sun-
associated with the sensors and actuators. For example, flowers, strawberries, and almonds is one of the challenges
thiscouldinvolvemonitoringtemperature,gasconcentra- in farming [23]. Insects typically perform pollination in large
tion, humidity, or performing navigation tasks. This step farms, but greenhouse and vertical farms, offering benefits
guidestheselectionofsuitablelivingcreaturesfortheNI like year-round production and pest protection, isolate crops
subsystem. from natural pollinators. Farmers augment pollination either
• Select living creatures. Select creatures based on their manually or with electromechanical devices like shakers cou-
responses to specific physical phenomena relevant to the pled with blowers. Advanced technologies like self-driving
application. Evaluate stimulus-response relationships to robots [24]–[26] and autonomous drones [27], [28] have been
determine suitability. A few example stimulus-response proposed for improving pollination. However, automation has
pairsarelistedasfollows.Stonefliesperformpushupsor proven to be challenging due to the complexity of tasks such
jump in response to decreased oxygen levels, indicating asvisualidentificationofflowers,flowermanipulation,motion
water pollution. Bumblebees exhibit unique responses to control, route planning, localization, and mapping [29], [30].
scentortastestimuliwhiledetectingtemperaturechange, These devices are energy-intensive. Natural pollinators are
choosing feeders based on temperature and sucrose con- much more energy-efficient, having evolved to perform these
centration.Antsgatheringroupsbefore,during,andafter tasks effectively.
earthquakes. Bumblebees carry heavier pollen loads and cover larger
• Select sensors and actuators. Integration of NI with AI distancesthanhoneybees[31].Theyaremoreresilienttocold
requires the behavior of living creatures to be digitized weather, low light, forage longer, and navigate better [32].
before further processing. Choose sensors and actuators In this case study, we propose an FI system to improve and
basedoncreatureresponsestoselectedphysicalphenom- augment natural pollination using Bumblebees as sensors and
ena, establishing the AI-NI feedback loop. For example, actuatorsintheNIsubsystem.SupportedbytheAIsubsystem,
cameras monitor the movements of ants and bees, while FI maximizes pollination potential. We simulate this using
artificial food sources such as sugar water can train a single virtual beehive in the Beehave suite’s virtual bee
them. The next step is to design the control unit for foraging environment [33]. Beehave-BeeMapp, Beescout and
interfacing with the selected sensors and actuators. The Beehave-weather models were employed to simulate the for-
control unit should have the necessary processing and agingbehaviourofin-hivebeesacrossagivenlandscape[34].
4Fig.2. BlockdiagramoftheAIimplementedfortheFIpollinationsystem.Themonitoringmodelistrainedtorecognisepatchlocationsthatarenotvisited
bythebees.Thecontrollingmodeltakesthisinformationandaddsartificialpatchestoguidethebeestowardsun-visitedpatches.
A. Pollination and Foraging Activity - NI Subsystem (Fig. 2) to maximize daily visits, enabling the supervisor to
enhance foraging activity.
Forager bees bring nectar and pollen to the hive, where it
is consumed or stored in reserves. Pollination rates depend on The Beescout model simulated bee scouting behavior in a
beeforagingactivity,influencedbyseveralenvironmentalfac- landscape [34], producing a dataset of images with varying
torsfrombeetraitstogenetics[35].Increasedforagingleadsto bee coverage levels over the field. A CNN as shown in
highervisitationmetricslike”DailyVisits,””ForagingPeriod,” Fig. 2, serves as the controlling AI model, classifying regions
”TripsperhourofSunshine,”and”CompletedForagingTrips” as ”low,” ”normal,” or ”high” coverage. The supervisor then
present in Beehave. Multiple visits to a flower can enhance tags low/normal coverage regions, comparing estimated and
pollination success (∼40% for a single visit), but subsequent required coverage to generate a loss function. Artificial food
visits to a pollinated flower do not improve efficacy. Rather, patches acting as actuators, guide bees to low-coverage areas.
it is beneficial if bees could cover as many flower patches as The feedback loop shown in Fig. 2 enables the supervisor to
possible, measured by ”Detected Patches” and ”Covered Area optimize placement of food patches across the field.
in km2” in the simulator.
Quantifying changes in pollination effectiveness due to
foraging is complex due to the interplay between various VI. SIMULATIONSETUPANDRESULTS
factors. Here we use a Pollination Improvement Index (PII)
that combines field coverage and visitation metrics. Mathe- A. Simulation Setup
matically, PII is defined as
The Beehave model, updated in 2016 with the BeeMapp
PII =W (∆ )+W (∆ ), (1)
1 PD 2 DV module,wasusedforsimulationsalongwithBeehaveWeather
where ∆ and ∆ quantify the improvements in patch for BeeMapp (2016) and Beescout (2016) models in a Net-
PD DV
detection and daily visits, respectively, while W and W Logo environment. The input field image for Beescout and
1 2
represent the normalized weights of each factor. Beehaverepresentsareallandscapeof7,200hectares(approx.
9 km ×8 km) of farmland with a single crop (yellow) and
B. Foraging Activity Monitoring and Control - AI Subsystem
greygapsasphysicalboundaries.Beescoutsimulationsfeature
Beescout generates a foodflow file for Beehave simulation, a colony of 10,000 bees, typical in commercial rearing, with
detailing patch size, coordinates, distance from hive, nec- foragingperiodsettorunfor9hours,andallotheroptionsset
tar/pollen quantity, and detection probability. The FI system to their default values. Beehave simulations run from January
adjusts temperature and light hours in Beehave simulations 1st to December 31st with weather conditions consistent to
usingtheWeatherModule(2016).Amodifiedweatherfilein- the location at Hertfordshire, England, during the year 2009.
corporateschangesinforaginghoursduetominimumforaging The simulation begins with 10,000 worker bees classified as
temperature (15◦C) and additional light hours. Beehive simu- foragers until new in-hive bees emerge. Taking into account
lation produces daily bee visit counts per patch, forming the seasonal population changes and the fact that the simulation
trainingdataset.Alinearregressionmodel,trainedonBeehave starts without prior bee hive activity, we compare the trends
input parameters, quantifies foraging data dependence. This in the FI-enabled and baseline scenarios from spring (April)
monitoring AI model optimizes temperature and light hours until the end of summer (August).
5C. Limitations
TheBeehavesimulatorlacksoptionstoaccuratelyrepresent
greenhouse settings and 3D physical obstructions that could
hinder bee navigation. It also only simulates a single beehive.
A physical implementation of FI system would reveal chal-
lenges such as hive maintenance and ethical considerations
would need to be addressed. A virtual evaluation negates
the requirement to tackle these broader problems, making it
suitable for initial studies of the FI paradigm. However, the
lack of similar comprehensive simulation models for other
insects largely limits the scope of virtual experiments to bees.
VII. CONCLUSION
Replicating tasks performed by living creatures with en-
gineered systems cannot match the efficiency of biological
mechanisms evolved over millennia. Previous work has en-
hanced engineered systems with AI, but this paper proposes
integrating AI with NI to form FI systems. This integration
allowsAItoleverageNI’sadaptive,resilient,anduniquesens-
Fig.3. Simulatedbeeforagingactivityoverthelandscapeinthebaseline(left)
ingcapabilities,whileNIbenefitsfromAI’scomputationaland
andFI-enabled(right)scenarios.Theyellowrectangularpatchesrepresentthe
flower/cropundercultivation.Thesmallerredpatchesrepresentartificialfood analyticalstrengths.Wepresentedamodelandarchitecturefor
patchesplacedbetweenthecropsenabledbytheFIsystemtoguidethebees. anFIsystem,detaileditsdesign,anddemonstrateditspractical
application. Simulation results show significant performance
improvements in agricultural scenarios. Future work on FI
B. Effects of FI on Pollination Efficiency
includes: (1) exploring alternative AI-NI cooperation mecha-
Inthebaselinescenario,Beescoutmodelcoverageislimited nisms, (2) experimentally demonstrating FI’s efficacy, and (3)
topatchesnearthehiveduetoobstacles(greyspaces),seenin evaluating FI’s potential in various applications leveraging AI
Fig.3 (left panels). The FI system, with artificial food patches and NI’s complementary capabilities.
acting as guides, overcomes these limitations, as shown in
REFERENCES
Fig.3 (right panels). Fig. 4 compares patch coverage and visi-
tationmetricsforbaselineandFIscenarios.BaselineBeescout [1] C.-J.Wuetal.,“SustainableAI:Environmentalimplications,challenges
generated 245 patches, covering 35.1% area and discovering and opportunities,” Proceedings of Machine Learning and Systems,
vol.4,pp.795–813,2022.
33.5% of all the patches. FI increased patches to 337 with the
[2] Y.H.Jung,B.Park,J.U.Kim,andT.-i.Kim,“Bioinspiredelectronics
addition of artificial patches but these patches were removed for artificial sensory systems,” Advanced Materials, vol. 31, no. 34, p.
while evaluating field coverage, thus being consistent with 1803637,2019.
[3] H. Sato et al., “A cyborg beetle: Insect flight control through an
baseline.Areacoverageandpatchdiscoveryroseto96.0%and
implantable, tetherless microsystem,” in 2008 IEEE 21st International
95.2%, respectively. The monitoring regression model scored ConferenceonMicroElectroMechanicalSystems,2008,pp.164–167.
an R2 of 88%. The controlling CNN classification model [4] H.Sato,Y.Peeri,E.Baghoomian,C.Berry,andM.Maharbiz,“Radio-
controlled cyborg beetles: A radio-frequency system for insect neural
accuracywasat90%.TheFIsystemextendedforagingperiods
flight control,” in 2009 IEEE 22nd International Conference on Micro
to 63% from April to August due to cold, cloudy weather in ElectroMechanicalSystems,2009,pp.216–219.
2009. This led to total patch visits increasing to 41% during [5] Y.Kakeietal.,“Integrationofbody-mountedultrasoftorganicsolarcell
oncyborginsectswithintactmobility,”npjFlexibleElectronics,vol.6,
this period.
p.78,092022.
To summarize as seen in Fig. 4, the FI system improved [6] T. Latif and A. Bozkurt, “Line following terrestrial insect biobots,”
Conference proceedings : ... Annual International Conference of the
the area covered by the bees, foraging period, total number of
IEEEEngineeringinMedicineandBiologySociety.IEEEEngineering
foraging trips, and total trips per hour of available sunshine. inMedicineandBiologySociety.Conference,vol.2012,pp.972–5,08
The positive changes in these factors led to increased patch 2012.
[7] A. Bozkurt et al., “Microprobe microsystem platform inserted during
detectionanddailyvisits,whichinreturnimprovepollination.
early metamorphosis to actuate insect flight muscle,” in 2007 IEEE
This improvement was quantified by approximating the PII 20th International Conference on Micro Electro Mechanical Systems
with equal weights of W =W =0.5, resulting in (MEMS),2007,pp.405–408.
1 2
[8] H.M.Abdel-Raziq,D.M.Palmer,P.A.Koenig,A.C.Molnar,andK.H.
Petersen, “System design for inferring colony-level pollination activity
PII ≈0.5×(∆ +∆ ). (2)
PD DV throughminiaturebee-mountedsensors,”SciRep,vol.11,no.1,p.4239,
Feb.2021.
The simulation resulted values of ∆ PD = 61.71% and [9] A.Bozkurt,E.Lobaton,andM.Sichitiu,“Abioboticdistributedsensor
∆ = 38% lead to PII = 49.85%. Thus, the FI system networkforunder-rubblesearchandrescue,”Computer,vol.49,no.5,
DV
pp.38–46,2016.
provides a pollination improvement of ∼50% within the
[10] J.Filipietal.,“Honeybee-basedbiohybridsystemforlandminedetec-
simulated landscape. tion,”SciTotalEnviron,vol.803,p.150041,Sep.2021.
6Fig.4. ComparisonofsimulationmetricsinbaselineandFI-enabledscenariosforevaluatingpollinationefficiency.FIincreasedcoverageofthetotalfield
area to 96%. Similarly, the fraction of detected patches increased to 95%. We see FI improving foraging period to 63% taking control of the environment.
The resulting improvement in visitation metrics results in average number of trips per hour and average number of completed foraging trips increasing to
35%and27%respectively.Duetoimprovedvisitation,thenumberoftotaldailyvisitsincreasesto41%.
[11] M.K.Habib,“Controlledbiologicalandbiomimeticsystemsforland- tonomouslyandpreciselyusingarobotarm,”ComputersandElectronics
minedetection,”BiosensBioelectron,vol.23,no.1,pp.1–18,Jun.2007. inAgriculture,vol.214,p.108274,2023.
[12] V.Iyer,A.Najafi,J.James,S.Fuller,andS.Gollakota,“Wirelesssteer- [27] T. Hiraguri et al., “Autonomous drone-based pollination system using
able vision for live insects and insect-scale robots,” Science Robotics, ai classifier to replace bees for greenhouse tomato cultivation,” IEEE
vol.5,no.44,p.eabb0839,2020. Access,vol.11,pp.99352–99364,2023.
[13] M.Henryetal.,“Acommonpesticidedecreasesforagingsuccessand [28] M. Shukla, L. Singh, S. Vidya, H. Quasim, and R. Bhandari, “Polli-
survivalinhoneybees,”Science,vol.336,no.6079,pp.348–350,Mar. nation system for greenhouse flowering plants using nano drones,” in
2012. Advances in Mechanical Engineering and Technology: Proceedings of
[14] J. L. Osborne et al., “A landscape-scale study of bumble bee foraging 6th International Conference on Advanced Production and Industrial
rangeandconstancy,usingharmonicradar,”JournalofAppliedEcology, Engineering(ICAPIE)-2021. Springer,032022,pp.157–162.
vol.36,pp.519–533,1999. [29] J.Straderetal.,“Flowerinteractionsubsystemforaprecisionpollination
[15] K. Rydhmer et al., “Scheimpflug lidar range profiling of bee activity robot,”in2019IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligentRobots
patternsandspatialdistributions,”AnimalBiotelemetry,vol.10,042022. andSystems(IROS),2019,pp.5534–5541.
[30] S.BermanandR.Nagpal,“Designofcontrolpoliciesforspatiallyinho-
[16] I. Fishel et al., “Ear-Bot: Locust Ear-on-a-Chip Bio-Hybrid platform,”
mogeneous robot swarms with application to commercial pollination,”
Sensors(Basel),vol.21,no.1,Jan.2021.
in2011IEEEInternationalConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation,05
[17] G. C. Rains, J. K. Tomberlin, and D. Kulasiri, “Using insect sniffing
2011,pp.378–385.
devices fordetection,” Trends Biotechnol, vol.26, no. 6, pp.288–294,
[31] P.Willmer,A.Bataw,andJ.Hughes,“Thesuperiorityofbumblebeesto
Mar.2008.
honeybeesaspollinators:insectvisitstoraspberryflowers,”Ecological
[18] B. Piqueret et al., “Ants detect cancer cells through volatile organic
Entomology,vol.19,no.3,pp.271–284,1994.
compounds,”iScience,vol.25,no.3,p.103959,Feb.2022.
[32] P. Kevan et al., “Measuring foraging activity in bumblebee nests: a
[19] S.Ma,P.Liu,S.Liu,Y.Li,andB.Li,“Launchingofacyborglocust
simplenest-entrancetriprecorder,”JournalofAppliedEntomology,vol.
via co-contraction control of hindleg muscles,” IEEE Transactions on
133,no.3,pp.222–228,2009.
Robotics,vol.38,no.4,pp.2208–2219,2022.
[33] M.A.Becheretal.,“Beehave:asystemsmodelofhoneybeecolonydy-
[20] H.D.Nguyen,P.Z.Tan,H.Sato,andT.T.Vo-Doan,“Sidewayswalking namicsandforagingtoexploremultifactorialcausesofcolonyfailure,”
controlofacyborgbeetle,”IEEETransactionsonMedicalRoboticsand JournalofAppliedEcology,vol.51,no.2,pp.470–482,2014.
Bionics,vol.2,no.3,pp.331–337,2020. [34] M.Becheretal.,“Beescout:Amodelofbeescoutingbehaviouranda
[21] V. A. Webster-Wood et al., “Biohybrid robots: recent progress, chal- software tool for characterizing nectar/pollen landscapes for beehave,”
lenges,andperspectives,”Bioinspiration&Biomimetics,vol.18,no.1, Ecologicalmodelling,vol.340,pp.126–133,2016.
p.015001,nov2022. [35] M. A. Hall, J. Jones, M. Rocchetti, D. Wright, and R. Rader, “Bee
[22] J.GhazoulandP.WILLMER,“Endothermicwarm-upintwospeciesof visitationandfruitqualityinberriesunderprotectedcroppingvaryalong
sphecidwaspanditsrelationtobehaviour,”PhysiologicalEntomology, thelengthofpolytunnels,”JournalofEconomicEntomology,vol.113,
vol.19,pp.103–108,032008. no.3,pp.1337–1346,2020.
[23] A. Klein et al., “Importance of pollinators in changing landscapes for
worldcrops,”Proceedings.Biologicalsciences/TheRoyalSociety,vol.
274,pp.303–13,102006.
[24] N. Ohi et al., “Design of an autonomous precision pollination robot,”
in 2018 IEEE/RSJ international conference on intelligent robots and
systems(IROS),082018,pp.7711–7718.
[25] H. Williams et al., “Autonomous pollination of individual kiwifruit
flowers:Towardarobotickiwifruitpollinator:Williamsetal.”Journal
ofFieldRobotics,vol.37,012019.
[26] M. Yang et al., “Delivery of pollen to forsythia flower pistils au-
7