1
A Survey on Drowsiness Detection – Modern
Applications and Methods
Biying Fu, Fadi Boutros, Chin-Teng Lin and Naser Damer
Abstract—Drowsiness detection holds paramount importance
inensuringsafetyinworkplacesorbehindthewheel,enhancing
productivity, and healthcare across diverse domains. Therefore
accurate and real-time drowsiness detection plays a critical role
in preventing accidents, enhancing safety, and ultimately saving
lives across various sectors and scenarios. This comprehensive
reviewexploresthesignificanceofdrowsinessdetectioninvarious
areasofapplication,transcendingtheconventionalfocussolelyon
driverdrowsinessdetection.Wedelveintothecurrentmethodolo-
gies, challenges, and technological advancements in drowsiness
detection schemes, considering diverse contexts such as public
transportation, healthcare, workplace safety, and beyond. By
examiningthemultifacetedimplicationsofdrowsiness,thiswork
contributes to a holistic understanding of its impact and the
crucial role of accurate and real-time detection techniques in
enhancing safety and performance. We identified weaknesses in
current algorithms and limitations in existing research such as
accurate and real-time detection, stable data transmission, and Fig.1. Depictsareasofapplicationsinurgentneedofaccurateandreal-time
buildingbias-freesystems.Oursurveyframesexistingworksand drowsinessdetectiontask.
leadstopracticalrecommendationslikemitigatingthebiasissue
by using synthetic data, overcoming the hardware limitations
with model compression, and leveraging fusion to boost model theirwell-beingandhelpshealthcareprovidersmakeinformed
performance. This is a pioneering work to survey the topic of decisions about accurate treatment plans [11]–[15]. Finally,
drowsinessdetectioninsuchanentirelyandnotonlyfocusingon drowsinessdetectioniscrucialinsectorssuchasaviation[16],
onesingleaspect.Weconsiderthetopicofdrowsinessdetectionas
[17] and public transportation [18]–[20], where a drowsy op-
adynamicandevolvingfield,presentingnumerousopportunities
erator can compromise passenger safety. The attentiveness of
for further exploration.
the driver significantly impacts railway safety [19]. Incidents
IndexTerms—Drowsinessdetection,Fatiguedetection,Drowsi-
involving high-speed trains can result in severe consequences,
nessandsafety,PublicTransportation,Sleepanalysisanddrowsi-
as evidenced by the most catastrophic railway accident in
ness
Chinese history occurring on 23 July 2011, resulting in 40
fatalitiesandatleast192injuries[21].Therefore,findingways
I. INTRODUCTION
tounobtrusivelydetectdriverdrowsinessoperatingthesehigh-
Drowsiness detection aims at detecting the early symptoms
speedtrainsisimportant.Figure1summarizestheapplication
of individual drowsiness using physiological (EEG [1], ECG
areas that can benefit greatly from accurate and real-time
[2]) and visible behavioural (eye blinking [3] and eye closure
drowsiness detection.
[4]) indications. The accurate and real-time identification of
Drowsiness detection is thus vital for safety, preventing
drowsiness detection is crucial for multiple reasons. One of
accidents caused by impaired attention and reaction times. It
themostprominentuse-casesisdriverandroadsafety;drowsy
improves health by identifying sleep disorders and enhances
driving[5]isadominantcauseofaccidents,injuries,andfatal-
productivity in various settings. After motivating the impor-
itiesontheroad.TheNationalHighwayTrafficSafetyAdmin-
tance of drowsiness detection, our work preliminary focused
istration estimated that up to 20% of the annual traffic deaths
on showing modern applications and methods on drowsiness
were attributed to driver drowsiness in 2016 [6]. An early
detection. We are the first work concluding multiple aspects
alert can help prevent accidents caused by impaired reaction
andareasofdrowsinessdetectionnotonlyfocusingespecially
timesofadrowsydriver.Underthesettingofworkplacesafety,
ondriverdrowsinessdetection.Currentsurveysondrowsiness
such as employees working in jobs like e.g., operating heavy
detectionmainlyfocusedonpresentingeithertechniques[22]–
machinery [7], industrial equipment, or in medical establish-
[25] or systems [5], [26], [27] on driver drowsiness detection.
ment[8]–[10],drowsinesscanleadtoaccidentsthatjeopardize
Less focus was put on the general use-cases of drowsiness
worker’ssafetyorpatientsafety.Inaddition,drowsinesscould
detection in such a broad application area and its faced
negatively impact the cognitive function and productivity of
challenges.
shift workers with long working hours. Even in healthcare,
monitoring the drowsiness of patients, especially those with
sleep disorders or undergoing medical treatments, ensures
4202
guA
32
]VC.sc[
1v09921.8042:viXra2
Fig.2. Overallstructureofthesurveyedadvancementsindrowsinessdetection.Thisprimaryframeworkillustratesthethreemeasuringtechniquesutilized
in drowsiness detection, along with their respective attributes and methodologies. From the considered topology, we first distinguish between drowsiness
detectionbasedonphysiologicalsignalsandmonitoringthroughvision.Basedontheseclassification,weassigndifferentattributestoindividualmeasuring
techniques.ThesensingmodalitiesforEEGandECGarenotmutuallyexclusiveandcanbedividedunderwiredandwirelessapplication.Whileunderthe
vision-approach,wenowconsiderstaticinvestigationforsingleframeanddynamicinvestigationformultipleframesandtheunobtrusivenessforthegeneral
setup. Abbreviations like HRV stands for heartrate variability, PRV for pulserate variability, QRS for morphological components of a heartbeat, LF/HF for
certainfrequencybands,andfinallyPERCLOSforpercentageofeyeclosure.Thesensingmodalitydemonstratesthepotentialrealizationofapplications.The
bottomrowoutlinesthetypicalareasofapplicationfordrowsinessdetectionacrossallmeasuringtechniques.
Figure 2 depicts a primary framework of this survey, il- marks used to evaluate or design algorithms for drowsiness
lustrating the three measuring techniques and their respective detection both in form of time series and image- or video-
attributes used for detection, sensing modalities, and typical sequence-based data. In Section VI, we exclusively explained
application areas across all measuring techniques. and pro- the performance and evaluation metrics used for assessing the
vides a clear view of the structure of our work. Based on algorithm’seffectivenessinstate-of-the-art(SOTA)works.We
our proposed topology, we differentiate between drowsiness then discuss and reveal the existing limitations within this
detection relying on precise physiological signals and moni- researchareacategorizedunderphysiologicalandvision-based
toring through vision-based approaches. Biological processes approaches and present potential solutions and actionable
manifestthemselvesinbrainandheartactivities,thatcanlead suggestions in Section VII. In Section VIII, we summarize
todistinctchangesinspecificattributesinducedbydrowsiness. thecurrentresearchgapsandprovidepotentialfutureresearch
Consequently, we can assign different attributes to individual directions.Finally,weconcludeourworkbysummarizingthe
measuring techniques based on our classification. The sensing major findings in Section IX.
modalityforphysiologicalsignalstypicallyinvolveselectrode-
basedmethods.However,thereisashifttowardswearableand II. AREASOFAPPLICATIONS
wirelesscommunicationtechnologiesinthisregardtoenhance Inthissection,wefirststartwithrelevantworksfordrowsi-
useracceptance.Monitoringthroughvisionisingeneralmore ness detection grouped by applications. Beyond the scope of
unobtrusive and user friendlier, focusing on relevant attributes driver’s drowsiness detection, drowsiness detection can take
such as facial features, eye closures, and head poses, among place in several other aspects of our daily life, as it has far-
others. We view single frame as static and consecutive frames reaching effects ranging from affecting our quality at work,
as dynamic sensing modality in this context. influencing our healthcare, or clouding our ability at working
The structure of our work is outline in the following. on cognitive tasks.
In Section II, we discuss recent works within each of the a) Drowsinessdetectioninworkplaceandsecuredareas:
applicationareas.InSectionIIIwefirstintroducethreegeneral Drowsiness and sleepiness in the workplace are two of the
techniques typically used for drowsiness detection under two majorrisksofmodernsociety[28],[29].Well-restedandalert
main categories, i.e. physiological signal- and vision-based employeesarefundamentalforbetterproductivityandcreativ-
approaches. In Section IV, we extend the techniques with ity,whileexcessivefatiguenotonlyreducesefficiencybutalso
relevantworks.InSectionVweprovidealistofpublicbench- canposeariskatworkplaces,thusfatiguemanagementinthe3
workplace [30] aims to enhance worker health and well-being leading to increased fatigue, sleepiness, and decreased atten-
both on and off the workspace. tion. Other studies investigating the subjective sleep quality
Oneexampleofamitigatingsafetyissuecausedbydrowsi- and daytime sleepiness among nursing staff can be found in
ness at the workplace is proposed in [7]. The work by Liu et [9], [10]. As a result, it becomes imperative to promptly and
al. [7] focused on improving the performance of drowsiness accurately identify fatigue in real-time to mitigate potential
detection for crane operators by using hybrid deep neural instances of malpractice stemming from fatigue-related issues
networks connecting both spatial and temporal features from in the medical domain.
videos. The primary contributions of this study involved ex- Chervin et al. [38] conducted an investigation in 2000,
tending drowsiness detection beyond vehicle drivers to crane focusing on the relation of sleepiness, fatigue, tiredness, and
operators, introducing relevant facial features as indicators for lack of energy in individuals to obstructive sleep apnea. The
detection.Inadditiontotheircustomizeddatasetonsimulated study encompassed a comprehensive analysis involving 190
craneoperationscenarios,theresearchprovidedrecommenda- participants, including 117 males (M) and 73 females (F),
tions for gathering extensive and publicly accessible realistic within a university-affiliated sleep laboratory. Data were de-
drowsiness datasets tailored to crane operators. rived from both sleep studies and questionnaires. The study’s
Sectors engaged in safety-critical endeavors, including the findingssuggestedthatcomplaintsregardingfatigue,tiredness,
oil and gas industry, exhibit a vested interest in monitoring and reduced energy levels could hold comparable significance
biological markers to avert human errors and enhance pro- toreportsofsleepinessamongobstructivesleepapneapatients.
cess safety, thereby enhancing their readiness for emergency Notably, female patients seemed to express such concerns
situations [31]. Within this context, the reliability of human more frequently than their male counterparts.
performance assumes a pivotal role in preventing potential c) Drowsiness detection at public transportation and
catastrophic incidents stemming from human factors, such as aviation: In the public transportation sector, accurate and
worker fatigue. Ramos et al. [32] introduced an ensemble real-time drivers’ drowsiness detection can save human lives
approach for fully automated drowsiness detection utilizing [20]. Wu et al. [39] proposed a non-parametric solution for
Electroencephalogram (EEG) signals. detectingthecognitivestateofpilotsbyutilizinga64-channel
Even in office environments across various industries, per- brain EEG signal. They developed 2D brain maps from these
sistent drowsiness poses a significant challenge, resulting in spatially distributed 3D multichannel EEG signals and ex-
occupational fatigue due to excessive work demands, partic- tractedusefulfeaturemapsfordevelopingalgorithmstodetect
ularly when precise operational output is essential. Presently, fatigueinpilots.AnotherworkbyWangetal.[16]showcased
companies are increasingly dedicating resources to monitor drowsiness detection within the aviation industry too. They
their workplaces, aiming to uphold employees’ optimal work- utilizedEEGsignalsobtainedfromastandardaviationheadset
ing states and sustain a desirable level of productivity [28]. to identify the drowsiness levels of pilots. The researchers
Natnithikarat et al. [33] proposed one approach to detect integrated the Seeing Machines driver monitoring system 1
the drowsiness state of an office worker that combines Bio- with electrooculogram (EOG) data to localize microsleep
metric characteristics like keyboard keystrokes and mouse events and investigated unique characteristics in EEG spectral
movement along with eye tracking during office-related tasks. patternsduringtheseevents.SimultaneousrecordingsofEEG,
The objective was to identify and assess drowsiness based EOG, and facial behavior data were taken from 16 pilots
on the self-reported Karolinska sleepiness scale (KSS) [34] during simulated flights. Their study demonstrated useful
questionnaire. The study identified a correlation between the featuresfromtheEEGsignalsandconfirmedtheeffectiveness
anticipated level of drowsiness inferred from the biometric of drowsiness detection by embedding EEG electrodes within
data and the estimated KSS score provided by the users. the commonly used aviation headset.
These findings suggest the viability of using the proposed Zhang et al. [18] targeted drivers operating high-speed
method to effectively detect the level of drowsiness among trains. They proposed a driver’s drowsiness detection system
office workers. for high-speed train safety based on monitoring train driver’s
b) Drowsiness detection in healthcare sectors: Modern vigilanceusingawirelesswearableEEG.Theproposedsystem
industries, hospitals, and many other essential sectors require includesthreestagesrangingfromwirelessdatacollectionand
shift work to maintain productivity and profit [35], [36]. driver vigilance detection to pushing early alert messages to
Howevershiftworkwithitsinduceddrowsinessandfatiguein drivers. An 8-channel wireless wearable brain-computer in-
shift workers has proved to be the source of human error and terfaceisusedtounobtrusivelycollectthelocomotivedriver’s
can lead to a number of accidents, catastrophes, and health- brainEEGsignal,whilethedriverissimultaneouslyoperating
related problems [36], [37]. a high-speed train.
In healthcare sectors, Geiger-Brown et al. [8] revealed in Multi-modal fusion of multiple physiological signals and
their study that nurses frequently express fatigue and dis- leveraging deep learning techniques for driver’s drowsiness
satisfaction with the quality of sleep when engaged in 12- detection for high-speed rail operators can be found in [19].
hour shifts. This study examines the sleep patterns, levels of Oneresearchspecificallydealswithdrowsinessdetectionfrom
sleepiness, fatigue, and neuro-behavioral performance across facialclueswithoccludedfaceimagesofrailwaydrivers[20].
three consecutive 12-hour shifts (both day and night) for This study was conducted in the post-covid phase to work
hospital nurses. The findings indicate that nurses accumulate
a substantial sleep deficit during successive 12-hour shifts, 1SeeingMachinesdrivermonitoringsystem:https://seeingmachines.com/4
withtheautonomous-railrapidtransitsysteminChinarailway. theEEGsystemcontinuouslyrecordsbrainactivitythroughout
This research was built upon facial thermal imaging and also the driving session. From the raw multi-channel EEG data,
included environmental information for detection. relevant features are extracted that correlate with drowsiness.
d) DrowsinessDetectioninsmarthomecontext: Beyond These features often include changes in different brainwave
workspace applications, modern homes with integrated smart frequencies[44],asymmetryinfrequencybands[45],orpower
technologies also intend to enhance the user’s living experi- spectral density [46], [47]. Similarly, these features are used
ence in domestic areas. The smart home application with the to train a machine learning model detecting the real-time
smart mirror is used as an example to assess residents’ well- state of the driver as in either awake or drowsy state. Mardi
beingovertimetoimprovetheirlifestylethroughuser-centered et al. [48] demonstrated that the brain exhibits its lowest
guidance. Facial clues indicating user’s emotional states like levels of activity and complexity when a driver experiences
stress, fatigue and anxiety are targeted in [40]. drowsiness.Consequently,individualsinsuchastatelosetheir
Elderly fall due to drowsiness was studied in [41]. Based concentration and control, thereby hindering their ability to
on facial landmarks and eye openness, Kumar et al. further respond promptly to stimuli.
analyzedsleeppatternsinordertohelptopredictthephysical EEG is a valuable tool in neuroscience and clinical set-
conditionoftheelderlyandtoavoidemergencysituationssuch tings, providing insights into brain function and helping di-
as falls. The main contribution of this work is to predict the agnose and manage various neurological conditions. Its non-
healthconditionoftheelderlybyleveragingmachinelearning invasiveness and ability to capture real-time brain activity
models and their results were verified on real-world scenarios make it a widely used method for studying brain health and
while maintaining good accuracy (Acc). understanding brain-related disorders. EEG also serves as the
Another proof of concept work focusing on real-time ’gold standard’ and is extensively applied to indicate the tran-
drowsiness detection for elderly care is in [42]. The study sition between wakefulness and sleepiness [49]. Spontaneous
is based on video feeds to extract visible facial clues, such alpha activity detected in EEG signals can indicate different
as yawning, eyelid and head movement over time which are underlying physiological process. Spontaneous alpha activity
relatedtodrowsinessdetection.Classificationsimplybasedon refers to rhythmic electrical oscillations in the brain that
eyelidandmouthstatusalreadyachievedanaccuracybetween occur predominantly in the alpha frequency range, typically
94.3%-97.2%. between 8 and 13 Hz [50]. According to Cantero et al. [50],
In this survey, we focus on showing modern application alpha activity in this range can be related to processes like
areas and methods in terms of drowsiness detection not only wakefulness,drowsinessperiod,andREMsleepphase.Ogilvie
limited to driver’s drowsiness detection but extended to cover et al. [51] investigated the process of falling sleep in relation
much broader possible scenarios and detection under more to the alpha activities being recorded and associated the alpha
general and diverse purposes. wave disappearance to be related to stage I sleep. Kleitman
and his students [52] also examined the correlation between
III. MEASURINGTECHNOLOGY muscle relaxation and EEG activity, observing a drop of a
hand-held spool between 0.5 and 25 seconds after the alpha
In this section, we present the three most popular mea-
wave had vanished.
suring techniques for drowsiness detection. These measuring
techniques can be categorized under physiological sensing
(which uses either EEG or ECG) and vision-based sensing. B. How does Electrocardiogram work for drowsiness detec-
Under physiological sensing, researchers aim to capture nu- tion?
merous biological signals of each individual, such as heart
The most effective outcomes in driver drowsiness detection
rate variability, muscle movement, and brain wave activities.
have been attained through these electrode based instruments
From these biological signals, unique biological markers are
including EEG and EOG measurements to date [53], thus
extracted to detect drowsiness. Under vision-based capture,
establishing them as the prevailing standard in this research
visual feeds are leveraged to derive facial expressions and eye
domain. Nevertheless, implementing driver monitoring using
blinking status, among other clues, to give an indication of
EEG measurement proves impractical. In contrast, Electrocar-
drowsiness.
diogram (ECG) recording offers a more feasible alternative,
given its ease of capture, significantly larger magnitude, and
A. How does Electroencephalogram work for drowsiness de-
lower susceptibility to noise interference.
tection?
Sleep is a complex state marked by important changes
Electroencephalogram (EEG) [43] measures the electrical in the autonomic modulation of the cardiovascular activity
activity of the brain. It involves the recording of the brain’s as investigated by Viola et al. [54]. Heart rate variability
electrical signals using electrodes placed on the scalp. EEG (HRV) undergoes substantial alterations across different sleep
is a non-invasive and painless procedure used to study brain stages,reflectingaprevailingparasympatheticinfluenceonthe
activity, diagnose certain brain disorders, and monitor brain heart during non-rapid eye movement (NREM) sleep, while
health during medical treatments. displaying heightened sympathetic activity during rapid eye
EEG-based drowsiness detection systems are just one com- movement (REM) sleep. In addition, respiration also under-
ponent of an overall driver safety system. During a driving goes notable changes, deepening and becoming more regular
simulation or driving a vehicle in a controlled environment, during deep sleep and shallower and more frequent during5
REM sleep. These effects were thoroughly investigated by The pipeline of vision-based drowsiness detection often in-
Cabidduetal.in[55]andthusmakingtheECGmeasurement cludesthefollowingsteps.Duringtheimage/videoacquisition
a well-suited technique for investigating sleep analysis and stage, a camera mostly installed on dashboards captures real-
drowsiness detection. time visual data from the occupant, such as facial images
ECGisamedicalinstrumenttorecordtheelectricalactivity or eye movement. Relevant facial features are extracted from
oftheheartoveraperiodoftime.TheECGprovidesvaluable the acquired images or video frames. Typical features involve
information about the heart’s rhythm, rate, and overall elec- facial landmarks, eye closures, head movements, and changes
trical activity [56]. To perform an ECG, a set of electrodes in gaze direction. These features are used to train a machine
is placed on the patient’s skin at specific locations. The elec- learning model often leading to a binary classification model
trodes are connected to an electrocardiograph which detects to determine the binary states of awake or drowsiness [70],
and amplifies the electric signals generated by the heart. The [72].
recorded electrical impulses are time series representing the Vision-based drowsiness detection systems offer real-time
movement of the heart’s chambers during each heartbeat. A monitoring capabilities and can be integrated into various
cardiologist or a trained technician can analyze the ECG applications, such as in-vehicle driver assistance systems [65]
recording to identify abnormalities or irregularities that can or workplace safety monitoring [7]. They play a crucial role
indicate various heart conditions or problems. ECG signals in enhancing safety and reducing the risk of accidents caused
can exhibit various abnormalities indicative of heart related by drowsy or fatigued individuals.
deceases,includingarrhythmia[57],ST-segmentabnormalities
[58] as indicators for hear attack, T-wave abnormalities [59] IV. MODERNAPPLICATIONSANDMETHODS
and QT interval prolongation [60] indicative of electrolyte
Inthissection,weprovideacomprehensivesurveyofrecent
imbalances, QRS complex abnormalities [61] indicative for
relevant research, which is divided into three main methods
bundle branch blocks, and other artifact or noise [62] among
for detecting drowsiness using either physiological signals or
others.
visual sampling. We distinguish between these methods based
The ECG is a non-invasive and painless measuring proce-
on the variables measured. ECG signals use low-dimensional
dure,makingitawidelyusedtoolfordiagnosingheart-related
heartbeat signals, EEG signals use multichannel brain activity
issues. In sleep studies, ECG can be used to record heart rate
signals, and visual feeds provide image data. Each method is
variationsprovidinghintsforsleepdisorders[63],[64]orsleep
summarized with a table containing the investigated research
apnea[15],[65],[66]detection.Nowadays,simplifiedversions
works, which is later discussed. Thereby, we consider various
of ECGs exist, such as portable ECG devices [67] based on
aspects, such as year of publication, area of use, specific
Bluetoothtransmissionorwearablesensors[68],[69]forECG
algorithms developed, evaluation database and its properties,
measurement,makingtheapplicationofECGineverydaylife
performance, and conclude with special remarks.
possible.ThereareseveralstudieslinkingECG-basedfeatures
todrowsinessdetectionasin[12]–[14].Mostofthesefeatures
A. EEG-based Drowsiness Detection
arebasedondetectingheartratevariabilityandarecommonly
derived from the frequency and spectrum domains. EEG signals are often used to detect the mental stress of
patients[73]butarealsooneofthephysiologicalsignalsused
to derive the drowsiness state [74]. For detecting the EEG
C. How does a vision-based drowsiness detection system
signals, electrodes are detached from the skin directly thus
work?
allowing clear signal acquisition. Earlier works as in [16],
Both previous methods, which rely on biosignals, are well- [18], [32] applied traditional machine learning approaches
suited for laboratory conditions but are not very practical in with handcrafted features extracted from these physiological
real-world driving scenarios. This is because, while driving signals.Thedevelopmentinthelastfewyearsmovedtomore
on the road, both the movement and the dynamic environ- advanced approaches based on Deep Q-Learning [75] or deep
ment significantly impact performance and pose challenges to learning in general [1], [17], [76].
extracting features from captured biosignals. Both measures Traditional machine learning uses handcrafted feature ex-
would require individuals sitting still and wearing cables or tractedfromtheEEGpowerspectrumdensitytobuildefficient
head-mounted devices. Thus, we motivate for vision-based models for drowsiness detection. Zhang et al. [18] applied a
approaches overcoming the restrictions of wired installation support vector machine (SVM) on Fast Fourier Transforma-
or head-mounted devices, which might effect usability in tion (FFT) features as a binary classifier. Wang et al. [16]
some use-cases. Vision-based drowsiness detection [4] refers investigated unique characteristics from EEG spectral patterns
to a technique that uses visual information, such as facial during micro-sleep events. Ramo et al. [32] leveraged data
expressions and eye movements, to identify signs of drowsi- fromfivediverseEEGsignalchannelsandemployedensemble
ness in individuals [70]. This method is commonly employed learning techniques such as bagging to construct a robust and
in various domains, including driver fatigue monitoring [3], more precise drowsiness detection system. The efficacy of the
operator alertness assessment [7], and other safety scenarios system was validated using the DROZY database [77].
[16]–[18] where detecting drowsiness is crucial for safety Spatio-temporal convolution served as the cornerstone for
and performance. Research linking facial muscle movement successive deep learning-based approaches to derive both
to different levels of muscle fatigue can be found in [71]. the sequential and spatial characteristic features from this6
physiological signal. Jeong et al. [17] extended the binary EEG data to better derive the response time in order to
classification task of the drowsiness state to a more fine- indirectly estimate the driver’s drowsiness state. Their results
grained classification of five drowsiness levels from EEG sig- showedsuperiorperformancecomparedtosupervisedlearning
nals.Theystatedtobethefirstworkprovidingsuchadetailed and is promising for real applications.
classification of drowsiness levels using only EEG signals. The most current research by Zhuang et al. [83] lever-
They acquired EEG data from ten pilots in a simulated night aged Graph Neural Networks (GNNs) for EEG-based driver
flight environment. They proposed a deep spatio-temporal drowsiness detection in real-time. Their results surpassed the
convolutional bidirectional long short-term memory network accuracy of other CNNs and graph generation methods based
(DSTCLN)model.Theclassificationperformanceisevaluated on drowsiness detection schemes. They proposed a GNN-
usingtheKarolinskasleepinessscale[34]fortwomentalstates based network with a self-attention mechanism that can focus
andfivedrowsinesslevels.Resultsdemonstratedthefeasibility on developing task-relevant connectivity networks via end-to-
of their proposed fine-grained drowsiness classification. end learning. In addition, the authors leveraged a squeeze-
Similarly, Cui et al. [78] improved the subject-independent and-excitation (SE) block to select the most relevant features
drowsiness recognition from single-channel EEG with an andfeaturebandsfordrivers’drowsinessdetection.Thisblock
interpretable CNN-LSTM model. In this work, authors put is shown both to improve the classification accuracy and the
moreeffortontheexplainabilityoftheproposeddeeplearning model’s interpretability.
models by revealing the network’s decision with respect to From the data augmentation point of view, Chaabene et al.
the input data. Results showed a model average accuracy of [76] introduced an EEG-based drowsiness detection system
72.97% on 11 subjects for leave-one-out subject-independent based on deep learning networks. The system follows a two-
detectiononapublicdataset2.Theystatedthattheirproposed stage framework, encompassing (i) data acquisition and (ii)
method surpasses conventional baseline methods and other model analysis. For data collection, the authors employed
SOTAdeeplearningmethodstillpublication.Similarnetwork a wearable Emotiv EPOC + headset [84], recording EEG
architecture is leveraged by Lee et al. [79] in a more recent signals from 14 channels along with signal annotations. Data
work. This work investigated the optimal length of input time augmentation techniques were implemented to prevent the
series for more accurate detection of drowsiness at multiple proposed model from overfitting. The chosen deep learning
levels (awake, sleep, and drowsy), while few studies have architectureinthisstudyusedaCNNnetwork.Aself-collected
seriously considered this feature before. dataset containing 42 records of six men and eight women
Paulo et al. [80] investigated two approaches for drowsi- agedbetween14and64withnormalmentalhealthareusedfor
ness detection using EEG signals during a sustained-attention evaluation. The outcomes exhibited a noteworthy accuracy of
driving task. The study focused on pre-event time windows 90.42% in binary classification for distinguishing drowsy and
and addressed the challenge of cross-subject zero calibration. awake states. Compared to alternative research, the proposed
EEG signals are known for their low signal-to-noise ratio and approach demonstrated its efficacy and efficiency.
individual differences between subjects, thus requiring indi- From the distributed system point of view, Qin et al. [1]
vidual calibration cycles. To tackle this issue, the researchers proposed a driver’s drowsiness state detection system using
employed spatio-temporal image encoding representations in EEG signals. They increased the accuracy of their system
theformofrecurrenceplotsforclassificationusingdeepCNN. by using Federated Learning (FL) and CNN. FL is used to
The results obtained from a public dataset of 27 subjects accumulateknowledgefromthedataofdifferentclientsunder
showedtheeffectivenessoftheircross-subjectzerocalibration privacyprotectingmechanismandCNNisusedtoidentifyand
approach, highlighting its success in drowsiness detection. explain the driver’s drowsiness state. However, they evaluated
Similarly, Jiang et al. [81] targeted the same issue by only their method only on a relatively small amount of private
requiring a few subject-specific calibrations to adjust for a database consisting of 11 subjects.
new subject. They provided an online and multiview setup to Another more difficult and pressing issue is the detection
enforcetheconsistenciesacrossdifferentviewsinbothsource of microsleep events (MSE). MSE [85] refers to abrupt and
and target domains, and thus, making the system in general non-anticipatedlapsesofattentionexperiencedbyindividuals,
more robust. In addition, online training makes the proposed typically resulting from drowsiness and monotony. MSE can
application more suitable for practical requirements. Recent serve as objective indicators of excessive daytime sleepiness
follow-up work focusing on cross-subject investigations was and can be characterized by a non-anticipated brief period
presented by Cui et al. [82]. In this work, the focus further of sleep lasting between 2 and 30 seconds, occurring amidst
liesintheinterpretabilityofdrowsinessdetectionschemesand ongoing wakefulness as investigated by Carskadon et al.
automatic feature selections from EEG signals. [86] in the Encyclopedia of sleep and dreaming. Microsleep
A reinforcement learning-based method for the task of accounts for an annual loss of nearly 150 million dollars
drowsiness detection is introduced in [75]. Ming et al. [75] due to diminished daily work performance and vehicular
leveraged deep Q-learning to analyze EEG dataset collected accidents [87]. Assessing an individual’s level of sleepiness
during simulated driving to estimate driver drowsiness state. and detecting the onset of microsleep is thus crucial for
The main research is to relate certain characteristics of the tasks demanding sustained focus [88], such as driving or
operating machinery during nighttime hours, where falling
2Projectpagewithaccesstodata:https://figshare.com/articles/dataset/Multi-
asleep poses high risks. In recent years, this subject has
channel EEG recordings during a sustained-
attention driving task/6427334 received widespread attention from governmental bodies, the7
public, and the research community alike [89]. the scalp, thus can be more suitable for drowsiness detection
Such subtle events like microsleep episodes are very hard under more relaxed and natural conditions. Interestingly, the
torecognize.ThegroupofGolzetal.[85]workedextensively trendgoesbeyondthedevelopmentofthealgorithmsandalso
ondetectingmicrosleepepisodesfromEEGandEOGdata.To affects the design of the sensors. The latest trend shows a
achievedetection,signalscomingfromheterogeneoussources shift from traditional, stationary medical placement to a more
are processed, such as the brain electric activity captured by convenient, and wearable design [2].
EEG data, variation in the pupil size, and eye and eyelid Takalokastari et al. [94] carried out real-time drowsiness
movements captured by EOG data. By combining the spectral detectionutilizingawirelesssensornodeconnectedtoawear-
and the state space, both linear and non-linear features are able ECG sensor. They build a binary classification method
considered. The binary decision networks between MSE and based on extracted features from the ECG signal, which
non-MSE are based on a support vector machines (SMV) and was sampled at 100Hz, to distinguish between awake and
a learning vector quantization (LVQ) scheme. However, pupil drowsystates.Thewirelesstransmissionofdatafacilitatedthe
adaptation through light stimuli could affect the accuracy of forwarding of information to a server PC. Notably, the QRS
detection. complex in the ECG signal [95] offered valuable features that
Pham et al. [90] proposed a more flexible and mobile couldaidinthediagnosisofvariouscardiovascularconditions.
application by introducing WAKE, which is a behind-the- Theprocessofdrowsinessdetectionofteninvolvestheanalysis
ear wearable device for microsleep detection. They utilized of R peaks, R-R intervals, the interval between R and S
bone-conduction headphones to gather biosignals including peaks, and the duration of the QRS complex. Another work
brain activity, eye movements, facial muscle contractions, by Martins et al. [96] conducted a comprehensive review
and galvanic responses from the area behind the user’s ears. that examined the latest research on fatigue detection and
TheirfindingsdemonstratedthatWAKEeffectivelysuppressed monitoring using wearable devices. Wearable devices offer
motionandenvironmentalnoiseinreal-timeby9.74-19.74dB a significant advantage by facilitating continuous and long-
during activities such as walking, driving, or being in various term monitoring of biomedical signals with comfort and
environments, ensuring reliable capture of the biosignals. non-intrusiveness. However, the study also identified distinct
A preliminary training conducted on 19 sleep-deprived and challenges associated with using wearable devices for fatigue
narcoleptic subjects demonstrated an average precision and monitoring.
recall of 76% and 85% on an unseen subject with leave one Later, Shebakova focused on the inter-person variability
subject out cross validation technique. of the detection scheme. Sherbakova et al. [97] performed
Awaytodetectmicrosleepwithdeeplearningarchitectures a thorough analysis of ECG signal for driver drowsiness
even with less training data is proposed by Chougule et detection. The authors stated that the threshold of drowsiness
al. [91]. Their model uses the attention-based mechanism, based purely on individual’s heart rate can vary for different
which combines the advantages of the wavelet transform people. Possible causes that could affect the threshold of
with the Short Time Fourier Transform (STFT) Spectogram. drowsiness include the individual’s current postures [98] or
Byseparating”time-dependent”and”time-independent”parts, different cognitive states [99] among other factors. Relevant
the deep learning model is more robust to capture both the works showed that the heart rate is significantly different
sequence features and simultaneously learn the relationships when individuals are supine or upright [98]. Difference in
betweenepochs.OnlyasingleelectrodeEEGsignalwasused heart rate is also observable during the sleep phase in a high
to achieve greater social acceptability. The training and evalu- or low worrier state [99]. However, research demonstrated
ationareperformedonthepublicMaintenanceofWakefulness that parameters of HRV change over time depend on the
Test (MWT) dataset 3. current state (i.e. during wakefulness, drowsiness, and stress).
Table I summarizes the investigated works using EEG sig- Therefore, the authors suggested using the analysis of three
nals for drowsiness detection in various application scenarios. ECG parameters, including heart rate (HR), LF/HF, and the
Sensing modality covers both wired and wireless wearable Baevskystressindex[100]asrobustindicationsfordrowsiness
devices targeting non-intrusive applications. References to the detection. GPRS data transmission allows the processing and
public databases are provided in the footnote. From Table I, storage of ECG signals on a powerful server.
we notice that all recent works starting from 2021 utilized Ke et al. [101] proposed a drowsiness detection system
deep learning-based approaches to mitigate the investigation using heartbeat detection from Android-based handheld de-
of handcrafted features. We further observed that the most vices. ECG signal acquired from a sensor is first transferred
predominant evaluation dataset for physiological signal-based via Bluetooth to an Android device. The system extracted
drowsiness detection is the DROZY dataset. meaningful information from the ECG signal and indicative
features are calculated from the power ratio after applying the
B. ECG-based Drowsiness Detection hamming window and the Fourier transformation. Data was
collectedfromamaleandfemaletestsubjectbothintheawake
The ECG is another measurement on the skin to record the
state as well as in the asleep state. Evaluation results revealed
heartbeat variability. This physiological signal is also often
acorrelationbetweenthestateofdrowsinesswithadecreasing
appliedfordriverdrowsinessdetection[93].Differenttomulti-
trend in the ratio (LF/HF). LF band stands for low-frequency
channel EEG signals, ECG does not need to be placed on
componentrangingfrom0.04∼0.15HzandHFbandstandsfor
3MWTdataset:https://sites.google.com/view/utarldd/home high-frequency component ranging from 0.15∼0.4Hz. Each8
TABLEI
SUMMARIZESRECENTWORKSPERFORMINGDROWSINESSDETECTIONBASEDONEEGSIGNALS.
work year areaofuse algorithm database subjects/sessionperformance remarks
BiosignalsfromEEGandvariationsin
supportvectormachine
Golzetal.[85] 2007microsleepevents private 23subjects testerrors=9% pupilsizeandeyemovements
Learningvectorquantization
simulateddriving,sleepdeprivatedsubjects
awake/drowsy,wearable
SVMbuildsonFFT
high-speedtrain precision=90.79%, BCImodelforEEGs,
Zhangetal.[18] 2017 featuresextractedfrom private 10drivers
operators sensitivity=86.80% wirelessdatatransmission,
EEGpowerspectrum
virtualdrivingenvironment
deepspatio-temporal 2statesAcc=0.87 awake/drowsy
Jeongetal.[17] 2019aviation,pilots private 9M,1F
convolution 5levelsAcc=0.69 morefine-grainedclassification
handcraftedfeatures
aviation,public
Wangetal.[16] 2019 fromEEG,EOG,and private 16pilots findoperationalfeatures aviationheadsetequippedwithsensors
transportation
facialdata
keystroke,mousemove keyboard,mouseevents,
Natnithikarat linearregressiontask, 18(15M,3F),
2019officeemployees private andself-evaluatedKSS eye-tracking,EEG+ECG
etal.[33] PCA,SVM 1hofficework
correlationtodrowsiness asreference
featureengineering+classifiers Avgprecision=76% Headphonesaswearabledesign
Phametal.[90] 2020microsleepevents private 19subjects
deeplearnningonrawdata recall=85% noisemitigationandusesEEG+EOG+EMG
spatio-temporalen-
Pauloetal.[80] 2021driverdrowsiness private 27subjects LOO-CVAcc=75.87% awake/drowsy
codingCNNclassifier
DL-basedtwo-stage, 6M,8F,
Chaabeneetal.[76]2021driverdrowsiness private Acc=90.42% awake/drowsy
networks 42records
Cuietal.[78] 2021driverdrowsiness CNN-LSTMmodel public2[92] 11subjects AvgAcc=72.97%(LOO)awake/drowsy
crosssubjectrecognition
automaticfeatureselectionfromEEGfeatures;
Cuietal.[82] 2022driverdrowsiness interpretableCNN private 11subjects AvgAcc=78.35%(LOO)
crosssubjectrecognition
useDQNtoderive RelateEEGcharacteristicsto
Mingetal.[75] 2021driverdrowsiness DeepQ-Learning private 37subjects responsetimefrom responsetimetoindrectly
EEGdata estimatedrowsinessstates.
sectorsengagedin multiplechannelEEGs, Accuracy≥90%for awake/drowsy,
Ramosetal.[32] 2022safetycriticalend- ensemblemachine DROZY12 14subjects specificsubjectsand considereddifferentsetups
eavors,oil&gas learning dedicatedmodels forevaluation.
Chouguleetal.[91] 2022microsleepevents attention-basedmethod MWTdataset3 64(27M,37F) trainacc=92% OneelectrodeEEGformoreuseracceptance
combineSTFT+Wavelets testacc=89.9%
avgAcc=73.56%
federatedlearning
Qinetal.[1] 2023driverdrowsiness private 11subjects F1-score=73.26% awake/drowsy
CNNclassifier
AUC=78.23%
GraphNeuralnetwork 27subjects Acc=72.6%
Zhangetal.[83] 2023driverdrowsiness public awake/drowsy
withattention 62+sessions F1=70.7%
multistageconsciousness
F1=95%(4000ms)
Leeetal.[79] 2023drowsinessdetectionLSTM-CNNmodel private 19subjects (awake,sleep,drowsiness)
Acc=85.6%(500ms)
auditorystimuliandbuttonresponses
controls certain functionalities in the vegetative nervous sys- clists becomes more relevant [103]. Motorcyclists are often
tem. more vulnerable compared to car drivers in case of accidents
A more extended investigation of ECG-based drowsiness [104]. To address this concern, Fahrurrasyid et al. [105]
detection study was conducted by Fujiwara et al. [102]. They introduced an innovative solution: a smart helmet integrated
proposed a detection algorithm based on heart rate variability with various sensors. These sensors monitor psychological
(HRV) analysis and validated their method by comparing it signals, including heartbeats, alongside a GPS module, GSM
with EEG-based sleep assessment. Eight features of heart rate module, and alert push notifications. The study’s experiment,
variability are monitored to detect known abnormalities in the involving10participants,demonstratedthehelmet’scapability
signal. During the experimental phase, data were collected to identify drowsiness and send alerts when the heart-rate
from 34 participants in a driving simulator and their sleep dropsbelow60bpm.Thisdataisaccessibleinreal-time,while
stages were labeled by a sleep specialist. Results show that thehelmetalsoemploystheGoogleMapsapplicationtotrack
sleepiness was detected in 12 of 13 pre-N1 episodes before the precise location of the incident.
sleep onset. LatestinterestingworkbyHeydarietal.[106]introduceda
TheworkbyLeeetal.[2]introducedadeeplearningbased techniquetoidentifydriverdrowsinessbymonitoringthepulse
approach for drowsiness detection. The authors investigated rate variability (PRV) measured on a finger. They analyzed
the robust and deterministic pattern of HRV signals collected fingerpulsedatawhicharederivedfromPPGsignals,focusing
from wearable ECG or photolethysmogram (PPG) sensors for onfeatureswithinthepulseratevariabilitythatexhibitnotable
driverdrowsinessdetection.Challengesofusingwearableadds changesduringdrowsiness.Findingsrevealthatthevariability
additional moving artifacts to collected time series. These values, along with their averages, increased before the onset
motion artefacts can be alleviated. Three types of recurrence of sleepiness. Additionally, it was observed that the standard
plots are generated as input features to a CNN for the binary deviation of all peak-to-peak intervals notably decreases dur-
classification of drowsy and awake state. An experimental ing drowsiness. Also, an increase in the values of the Root
dataset was collected under a virtual driving environment to MeanSquareofSuccessiveDifferences(RMSSD)isobserved
evaluate the proposed measures. during the drowsiness stage. The authors suggested a purely
With a notable surge in motorcycle traffic accidents, fre- conceptual design to integrate PPG sensors into a steering
quently leading to serious consequences and a significant loss wheel to detect the driver’s finger pulse rate, offering a viable
of life, research on driver drowsiness detection for motorcy- and non-invasive means for detecting driver drowsiness.9
TABLEII
SUMMARIZESRECENTWORKSPERFORMINGDROWSINESSDETECTIONBASEDONECGSIGNALS.
work year areaofuse algorithm database subjects/session performance remarks
heartratevariability
Takalokastarietal.[94] 2011 driverdrowsiness private - findoperationthresholds wirelesssensornode,wearableECG
handcrafted,heuristic
heartratevariability portabledevicefor1leadECG,
Sherbakovaetal.[97] 2015 publictransportation private - findoperationthresholds
handcrafted,heuristic wirelessdatatransmission
HRV,FFT 1M,1F,
Keetal.[101] 2016 driverdrowsiness private findoperationthresholds handhelddevices,wirelesstransmission
handcrafted,heuristic 120minutes
findingsignificantchanges
ECGfeaturesbefore 7subjects;
Lenisetal.[107] 2016 microsleepevent private - inheartratevariability
andafterMSE 14records
aroundMSE
12outof13pre-N1
heartratevariability episodespriorsleep datalabeledbysleepspecialist
Fujiwaraetal.[102] 2018 driverdrowsiness private 34subjects
handcraftedfeatures onsetsdetected detectionofsleeponsets
FP=1.7timesperhour
ReLU-RPCNN:
Recurrentmethods 6subjects,
Leeetal.[2] 2019 driverdrowsiness private ECGAcc=70% wearableECG+PPGsensors
CNNclassification 22recordings
PPGAcc=64%
heartratevariability
Fahrurrasyidetal.[105] 2022 motorcycledriver private 10subjects findoperationthresholds asmarthelmetequippedwithsensors
handcrafted,heuristic
pulseratevariability awake/drowsy,heuristicfeaturesfromtime,
Heydarietal.[106] 2022 driverdrowsiness private 10subjects relevantfeaturesselection
ofafingerfromPPG frequencydomain,andnonlinearanalysis
sensitivity=70.3%
explainableMLin validationtechniquesforblackboxmodel
Hasanetal.[108] 2024 driverdrowsiness private 35subjects specificity=82.2%
multimodalsystem combiningEEG+EOG+ECGsignals
Acc=80.1%
Due to the subtlety of microsleeps, these events are usually more official databases for the development and evaluation
recorded using EEG or EOG signals from subtle eye muscle of vision-based drowsiness detection schemes.
movements. Towards that, Lenis et al. [107] proposed a work Earlier work by Garcia et al. [4] proposed a vision-based
investigating MSEs during a car driving simulation using drowsiness detector under real driving conditions. An infrared
ECG features. In this work, morphological and rhythmical camera is placed in front to capture the driver’s face and to
features before and after a MSE are extracted from the ECG obtain drowsiness clues from their eyes closure. Three stages
signalsandanalyzedtowardsbaseline.Thefindingssuggested of processing include face and eye detection, pupil position
that detecting (or predicting) MSE solely based on the ECG detection, and illumination adaptation. Finally, the PERCLOS
is not feasible. However, when MSE is present, noticeable features are extracted to relate them to the drowsiness state.
differences in both the rhythmic and morphological features An outdoor database of several experiments over 25 driving
were observed compared to those calculated for the reference hours was generated as the evaluation dataset. Results of
signal in the absence of sleepiness. the binary classification for awake and fatigue states showed
Table II summarizes the investigated works using ECG sig- a specificity, sensitivity, and recall of 92.23%, 79.84%, and
nals for drowsiness detection in various application scenarios. 90.68% respectively.
Sensing modality covers both wired and wireless wearable In this research [111], Yu et al. introduced an innovative
devices targeting non-intrusive applications. References to the approach for drowsiness detection, utilizing three main steps
publicdatabasesareprovidedinthefootnoteifavailable.From for simultaneous representation learning, scene understand-
TableII,wenoticethatbeyondthedevelopmentofalgorithmic ing, and feature fusion. They extracted and learned spatio-
choices, i.e., starting from a more heuristic pattern generation temporal representations from consecutive frames and em-
tomoreadvancedrecurrentandCNN-basedmethods,thetrend ployed scene conditional understanding and fusion techniques
alsogoestotheevaluationoflargergroupswithmoresubjects to enhance the accuracy of drowsiness detection. To evaluate
and in the design choices of more flexible and wearable theirmethod’sperformance,theytesteditontheNTHU-DDD
sensors introduce their own individual pros and cons. dataset. Results showed a validation accuracy of 88% and an
F1-score of 0.712. However, the limitation of the proposed
model is its generalizability. Since it is trained on NTHU-
C. Vision-based Drowsiness Detection
DDD dataset, it may not be directly applicable to scenarios
Vision-based drowsiness detection is intended to be non- that deviate from the trained conditions.
invasive and non-intrusive. Unlike physiological signals, this Deng et al. [3] proposed a system called DriCare which
method does not require close contact with the subject. It unobtrusively detects the driver’s fatigue status clues, such as
operatesremotelyanddoesnotnecessitatephysicalattachment yawning,blinking,anddurationofeyeclosure,basedonvideo
or direct interaction with the individual being monitored. images. They introduced a face-tracking algorithm to improve
Most relevant features for vision-based drowsiness detection the tracking accuracy and designed a new detection scheme
are focused on the facial attributes [4], [109], such as eye for facial regions based on 68 facial landmarks which are
blinking, eye aspect ratio or facial expressions [3], [70], [110] leveraged to access the driver’s state. By fusion features of
such as yawning or mouth opening which indicates the level the eyes and mouth, DriCare achieved an accuracy of 92% on
of drowsiness. In contrast to the works developed based on the YawDD database.
physiological signals from previous sub-sections, it exists To mitigate the problem of changing illumination under10
real driving conditions in a car, Bakheet et al. [109] pro- for classification. Evaluation is performed on the UTA-RLDD
posed an improved histogram of oriented gradients (HOG) dataset with five-fold cross-validation. Results showed an
features combined with a naive Bayesian classification to accuracy of 96.8% which is higher than most previously
detect driver drowsiness. The experimental outcomes on the reported algorithms. Another customized dataset with 10 sub-
publiclyaccessibleNTHU-DDDdatasetdemonstratedthatthe jects under different light conditions was collected to evaluate
proposed framework has the potential to compete strongly the generalizability of the proposed method.
with several SOTA baselines. Results showed an average
accuracyof85.62%.However,themodelcouldhavethesame In addition to the detection of eye blinking and yawning
shortcomings of missing generalizability. in a visual image, Khan et al. [72] further considered another
Vijay et al. [110] presented a vision-based, two-stage visual feature as an indicator of ’distraction’ by detecting the
pipeline for real-time driver drowsiness detection using Facial driver looking sideways for a certain duration of times, i.e.
Action Units (FAUs). FAUs can represent facial expression- morethan3seconds.Thisfeatureiscalculatedbydetermining
related movements in facial muscle groups. In the first stage, the Euclidean distances from both ears to nose tip, which
they employed CNN for detecting FAUs. The second stage buildsatriangle,andthedifferenceofbothdistancesisrelated
utilized an Extreme Gradient Boosting (XGBoost) classifier to side looking. Side looking face will cause an increase in
for drowsiness detection. To model user-specific behavior, this difference measure compared to frontal view. To evaluate
individual classifiers were trained. This approach achieved the proposed method, experiments were conducted on a self-
high accuracy in real-time using only a small amount of data collecteddatasetcontaining50subjects.Resultsshowedapre-
and short training time. cision,recall,andF1-scoreof0.89,0.98,and0.93respectively.
Liu’s work [7] focused on the drowsiness detection of
Most vision-based detection methods primarily focus on
crane operators by using deep neural networks leveraging
frontalfacesandstruggletohandlevariousheadposesencoun-
both spatial features and temporal features. They combined
teredinrealdrivingscenarios.Chenetal.[116]dealtwiththe
the spatial feature extraction with CNN and temporal feature
challenge by proposing a network to accurately detect driver
extraction with a Long-short-term-memory (LSTM) network.
drowsiness from various viewing angles combining transfer
The authors collected facial videos from licensed crane oper-
learning and population-based sampling strategy (TLPSN).
ators under simulated crane operation scenarios and created a
The population-based sampling strategy is adopted to curate
large and public fatigue dataset especially tailored for crane
a new training set from data captured in a driver-in-the-loop
operators. They trained their model on three public vehicle
platform. The results demonstrated that the proposed method
driverdatasets,NTHU-DDD,UTA-RLDD,andYawnDD,with
has strong robustness to the variation of pose while maintain-
human-verified labelsat the frameand minutesegment levels.
ing high accuracy. In addition, transfer learning significantly
Ahmed et al. [70] proposed an approach combining visual
improves the generalizability of the model.
featuresfrombotheyesandmouthregionsextractedfromtwo
separateCNNsfordriverdrowsinessdetection.Theweightsof Lu et al. [117] recently introduced a novel network also
each stream are further trained on a single-layer perceptron to designed for detecting driver yawning across arbitrary poses
outputthefinalpredictionofdrowsinessornon-drowsinessde- in video. The network comprises three key components: a
tection.Thestrengthoftheensemblestructureisdemonstrated Geometric-based Key-frame Selection Module (GK-Module),
oversingle-streamprocessingusingoneofthetwofaceareas. a Face Frontalization with Warp Attention Module (FF-
This model is evaluated on the NTHU-DDD video dataset Module),andadual-channelclassifierforHeadPose&Facial
[112] with an accuracy of 97.1% and showed robustness over Action Fusion Module (HF-Module). Extensive experiments
variations in pose and illumination. More recent multi-stream demonstrate that the proposed JHPFA-Net achieves SOTA
classification networks combining both spatial and spatio- performance compared to several representative methods on
temporal features is proposed by Pandey et al. [113]. the public YawDD benchmark. Moreover, it exhibits excellent
Krishna et al. [114] proposed to build a driver drowsiness performance in real-time applications.
detection framework by fusion object detection and using
globalattention.Thus,theauthorsleveragedvisiontransform- Table III summarizes the works using images or video
ers and YoloV5 detectors in their proposed framework. This data for drowsiness detection in various application scenar-
work aims to capture more complicated driver behaviour fea- ios. Vision-based drowsiness detection approaches are non-
tures from images compared to current CNN-based methods intrusiveandremote,focusingmostlyonfacialclues,eyeblink
in this field. The framework is evaluated on the public dataset rate, or head positions. References to the public databases
UTA-RLDD and further validated on a custom dataset of 39 used as benchmarks are provided in the footnote. From Table
participants collected under various light conditions. On both III, we noticed that there exist more public databases for
datasets, the proposed method showcased promising results in the development and evaluation of vision-based drowsiness
terms of high accuracy. The authors claimed the significance detection schemes compared to physiological signals. A sim-
oftheirproposedframeworkforpracticalapplicationsinsmart ilar trend from traditional machine learning to deep learning-
transportation systems. based methods for drowsiness detection can be observed over
Tamanani et al. [115] proposed a new driver’s vigilance time. Sequence models and attention-based vision transform-
detection system based on deep learning methods on facial ers represent the latest advancements in deep learning-based
region diagnosis using the Haar-cascade method and CNN drowsiness detection schemes.11
TABLEIII
SUMMARIZESRECENTWORKSPERFORMINGDROWSINESSDETECTIONBASEDONVISION.
work year areaofuse algorithm database subjects/session performance remarks
face,eye,pupildetection 10subjects,30h Specificity=92.23%
Garciaetal.[4] 2012driverdrowsiness illuminationadaptation private driving,1296awake Sensitivity=79.84% underrealdriveconditions
heuristic min.,504fatiguemin.Recall=90.68%
representationlearning,
Yuetal.[111] 2017driverdrowsiness sceneunderstanding, NTHU-DDD5 36subjects validationAcc=88% featuresparsityinfusionmodel,
F1-score=0.712 frameworkmaynotgeneralize
featurefusion
Dengetal.[3] 2019driverdrowsiness imrovedfacetracking, YawDD6 107subjects Acc=92% real-timesystem,
featuresfromfaceregions applicabletodifferentcircumstances
Bakheetetal.[109] 2021driverdrowsiness HOGfeature NTHU-DDD5 36subjects Acc=85.62% limitationofgeneralizability,
NaiveBayesianClassifier needmorediversedatasets
CNNforFacialAction
Vijayetal.[110] 2021driverdrowsiness Units,ExtremeGradient NTHU-DDD5 36subjects Acc=96% subject-specificclassification
BoostingClassifier
NTHU5,UTA4, simulatedcraneoperation,
Liuetal.[7] 2021craneoperator LSTM+CNN - -
YawnDD6,Custom madetheirdatabasepublic
Ahmedetal.[70] 2021driverdrowsiness twostreamsCNNs NTHU-DDD5 36subjects Evaluationdataset robustovervariations
Acc=97.1% inposeandillumination
NTHU-DDD5 36subjects Acc=93.71% pretrainonMRLdataset7+NTHU-DDD5
Mouetal.[118] 2021driverdrowsiness IsoSSL-MoCo
YawDD6 107subjects Acc=98.65% leveragingself-supervisedlearning
UTA-RLDD4 60subjects, trainAcc=96.2% attention-basedmodel+objectdetection
Krishnaetal.[114] 2022smarttransportation visiontransformers+Yolov5 validAcc=97.4%
Custom 39subjects vigilent/drowsydetection
customAcc=95.5%
multipleviewingangle simulateddriving,
Acc=97.5%
Chenetal.[116] 2022driverdrowsiness samplingstrategyfor private 5subjects sleepdeprivatedsubjects
F1=97.5%
dataaugmentation small-scaledataset
avgAcc=0.918
facialregiondiagnosis UTA-RLDD4, 60subjects, precision=0.928 authorsevaluatedtheirmethod
Tamananietal.[115]2023publictransportation(withHaar-cascade),
private 10subjects recall=0.920 onacustomizeddataset
CNNclassification
F1-score=0.920
Precision=0.89
handcraftedfeatures, 50subjects IoT-basedNon-Intrusive
Khanetal.[72] 2023publictransportation private Recall=0.98
heuristics (33M,17F) toenhanceRoadSafety
F1-score=0.93
Spatio-temporalfeature;
Pandeyetal.[113] 2023driverdrowsiness mutlistreamclassifcation UTA-RLDD4 60subjects Acc=97.5% TransGAN;YOLOv3
YoLov3+LSTM
Temporalfeature;LSTM
Acc=86.7%
Luetal[117] 2023driverdrowsiness DLwith3modules YawDD6 107subjects Precision=91% targetsarbitraryheadposes
F1-score=88.8%
V. WIDELYUSEDDATABASES device, and also accessories like glasses, facial hair and
Thissectionsummarizespopulardatabasesusedfordrowsi- differentviewinganglesindifferentreal-lifeenvironmentsand
ness detection based on visual, mutli-channel EEG, and ECG backgrounds. The position of the acquisition device is placed
signals.Thisdiscussionstressedonavailabledatabasesandput such that both eyes are visible and the device is within one
less focus on small-scale private databases. Table IV contains arm length away from the subject. This database is often used
an overview of these publicly available databases for drowsi- to evaluate algorithms for driver’s drowsiness detection with
ness detection research. A link to the individual database is vision-based approaches [115].
given in the footnote for easier access. In Table IV, we target The academic NTHU-DDD dataset5 [112] was collected
this tabular representation from various aspects, including the by NTHU Computer Vision Lab at National Tsing Hua
database name, year of publication (chronologically ordered), University. This is another video dataset for detecting driver’s
detection modality, number of subjects/sessions included, its drowsiness. They used active infrared illumination to alleviate
label annotation, application area, and conclude with specific the poor illumination issue. All videos were captured by a
remarks.The majorityofthe citeddatabaseshereare usedfor stand-alone surveillance camera D-Link DCS-932L with a
driver drowsiness detection but can be extended to general resolution of 640x480 pixels. The capture device is placed on
drowsiness detection tasks because of the diversity of the thetoplefttoemulatethepositioninthecarwithoutblocking
capture environments. thedriver’sview.Eachsubjectrecordedtwodifferentsessions
The University of Texas at Arlington created the Real-Life includingday-timeandnight-timesessions.Subjectsareasked
Drowsiness Dataset4 (UTA-RLDD) [119] targeting the task toperformactionsindicatingdifferentdrowsinesslevelswhile
ofmulti-stagedrowsinessdetection.Thedatasetcontainsboth playing a plain driving game, such as normal driving, slow
easilyvisiblecasesandsubtlecaseswherethedrowsinesslevel blink rate, yawning, falling asleep and bursting out laughing.
is at an early stage and the detection is strongly related to Thedatasetincludesvariationsinillumination,scenarios,skin
subtle micro-expressions. The creators claimed that the UTA- color, gender, age and also differences in hairstyles, clothing
RLDDdatasetisthelargesttodaterealisticdrowsinessdataset. and glasses/sunglasses to cover the most realistic driving
It consists of around 30 hours of RGB videos of 60 healthy scenarios. Compared to UTA-RLDD, although this database
participants, where each participant collected three different was also recorded under indoor settings, its applications are
classes including alertness, low vigilance, and drowsiness. much more limited, because the use-case collected here is
It contains variations in gender, ethnicity, age, acquisition more controlled.
4UTA-RLDD:https://sites.google.com/view/utarldd/home 5NTHU-DDD:http://cv.cs.nthu.edu.tw/php/callforpaper/datasets/DDD/12
The YawDD dataset6 [120] is recorded by an in-car camera distracted, talking/eating scenarios while driving, talking on
capturing the driver’s facial characteristics in an actual car the phone while driving, and other abnormal driving patterns.
during talking, singing, being silent, and yawning. It contains Comparedtoothervision-baseddatabasessofar,thisdatabase
two different camera installations: (1) under the front mirror may contain footage of participants maneuvering the car for
and (2) on the driver’s dashboard. In total 322 RGB videos real. While this fact might be considered advantages, it may
were recorded with large variations in illumination, gender, include situations that endanger the driver’s safety.
ethnicity, and with and without glasses/sunglasses. Additional AnoveldatabaseisintroducedbyMartinetal.[124]called
29 videos, one for each subject, are added under second setup the Driver&Act dataset9, uniquely designated for fine-grained
containing all sequences of performed actions. Compared to recognition of driver behavior in autonomous vehicles. This
UTA-RLDD or NTHU-DDD this database is more realistic in comprehensive dataset encompasses more than 9.6 million
thedataacquisition,asthevideosarecollectedinarealvehicle frames spanning 12 hours, capturing individuals engaged in
with individuals sitting behind the wheel. This allows the distracting actions during both manual and automated driving
design of drowsiness detection algorithm under more realistic scenarios. The dataset utilizes a capture device that integrates
scenarios. The challenge in this database accounts for the RGB, IR, depth, and 3D body pose data from six different
placement of the camera under the mirror. Under this viewing perspectives. Among its objectives, this database particularly
angle face detection is much harder. aims to excel in the identification of intricate actions and
Media Research Lab from the Technical University of features a multi-modal approach to activity recognition. As
Ostrava proposed the MRL Eye Dataset7 [121] which could opposedtootherdrowsinessdetectiondatabases,thisdatabase
be used to detect eye blinking and relate this to drowsiness specificallytargettheuse-caseofautonomousdrivingandwas
detectionbycombiningeyeblinkingratetodrowsinesslevels. not originally addressed for drowsiness detection only.
This database was not originally designed for drowsiness Ortega et al. [125] proposed DMD, which is another large-
detection. But it can be leveraged to detect visual features scalemulti-modaldrivermonitoringdataset10 forattentionand
of the human eyes related to drowsiness. It is a large-scale alertness analysis. This is an extensive dataset with 37 drivers
dataset of human eye images and consists of 84,898 images which includes real and simulated driving scenarios. Targeted
from 37 individuals, while 33 male and 4 female subjects are tasks contain levels of distraction, gaze allocation, drowsiness
included. This dataset further modulated variations in capture detection,hands-wheelinteractionandcontextdata.Itcontains
devices, capture spectra (RGB + IR), lightning conditions, in total 41 hours of RGB, depth and infrared videos from 3
image resolutions and eye openness levels. Unlike previous cameras capturing face, body, and hands. Compared to other
databases, this database restricts the area of faces to only existing similar datasets, the authors motivated their proposed
the eye regions making the detection of subtle facial micro- database to be more extensive, diverse, and multi-purpose.
expressions impossible. Unlike UTA-RLDD, NTHU-DDD or YawDD, this database
The FatigueView dataset8, introduced by Yang et al. [122], does not consider drowsiness as the main focus of distraction
isalarge-scaleddatasetofvideosdesignedfordriver’sdrowsi- andconsidersmuchmorediverseactivitiescausingthedrivers
nessdetection.Thisdatasetboastspracticality,diversity,anda to shift their attention from the road, such as talking on the
wide range of environments. It encompasses images captured phone, playing with the car interface, or typing into a car
bybothRGBandinfraredcameras,positionedinfivedifferent navigation system.
angles. The dataset includes genuine instances of drowsy Recently, Yilmaz et al. [126] introduced a novel dataset,
driving and displays various visual indications of different termed SUST-DDD11, aimed at driver drowsiness detection.
drowsiness levels. Notably, the dataset features a substantial This dataset is meticulously curated and benchmarked using
17,403 instances of yawning, significantly surpassing current a range of DL techniques to effectively predict driver drowsi-
widely used datasets. The authors evaluated the dataset using ness. The dataset compilation involved 19 participants who
SOTA algorithms, therefore establishing numerous baseline were instructed to record themselves while driving using their
results that can guide future algorithm advancements. Unlike personal cell phones positioned in front of the driver’s seat.
the NTHU-DDD, this database is collected in a single office To closely replicate real-world driving scenarios, participants
environmentbysittingtheparticipantsonanupholsteredoffice were required to operate their own vehicles and utilize their
chair.Whiletheacquisitionenvironmentisnotdiverseenough individual phones. Notably, this dataset encapsulates genuine
compared to NTHU-DDD or UTA-RLDD, it covers a much driving situations encompassing diverse lighting conditions,
broader viewing angle. distinct video sizes, and varying resolutions due to each
The National Cheng Kung University Driver Drowsiness participant’s unique phone specifications. This database is
Dataset (NCKUDD) [123] consists of videos from a total of most similar to YawDD and NCKUDD, however with the
25 participants captured during a normal driving condition. differencethatbothYawDDandSUST-DDDuseuser-specific
The camera is placed in front of the driver to unobtrusively cell phones, while only SUST-DDD includes real driving
capturethedriver’sfacialexpression.Recordingscontainboth scenarios.ThedifferencebetweenNCKUDDandSUST-DDD
daylight and dark environments and include normal, sleepy, isthatNCKUDDusesacamerainstalledinfrontofthedriver,
6YawDD:https://traces.cs.umass.edu/index.php/Mmsys/Mmsys 9ProjectpageDrive&Act:https://driveandact.com/
7ProjectpageMRLEyeDataset:http://mrl.cs.vsb.cz/eyedataset 10ProjectpageDMDdataset:https://dmd.vicomtech.org/
8ProjectpageFatigueViewDataset:https://fatigueview.github.io/#/ 11SUST-DDD:https://www.kaggle.com/datasets/esrakavalci/sust-ddd13
TP
whileinSUST-DDDcustomcellphonesareusedasrecording
Recall= , (2)
devices within custom vehicles to simulate a more natural TP +FN
driving experience.
precision×recall
The ULg Multimodality Drowsiness Database12 (DROZY) F1−score=2× , (3)
precision+recall
[77] is a database which is not only based on vision capture
to detect drowsiness. Here, a total of 14 subjects (3 males, where TP stands for true positive accounting for the number
11 females) have participated in the data collection process. of correct drowsiness predictions, FP stands for false positive
Experimentswereconductedinaquiteandisolatedlaboratory accounting for the number of incorrect drowsiness predictions
environment. Participants have no sleeping disorders and a (type I error), TN stands for true negative accounting for the
sleepdiarywaskeptindividually.Teaandcoffeewereavoided number of correct non-drowsiness predictions and finally, FN
during the acquisition process to keep the subjects really stands for false negative accounting the number of incorrect
drowsy instead of faking it. In this database, four different non-drowsiness prediction (type II errors). Detailed results in
electrical bio-signals such as electroencephalogram (EEG), termsofaccuracyandF1-score[109]arecalculatedforassess-
electroculography (EOG), electrocardiogram (EKG) and elec- ing the detection performance. The mathematical formulation
tromyogram (EMG) were acquired. Similar to UTA-RLDD, of accuracy is given as:
this database was also not specifically designated to target (cid:32) (cid:33)
TP +TN
driver’s drowsiness detection but includes much more sensory
Accuracy = . (4)
inputsespeciallymeasuringphysiologicalentitiescomparedto TP +FN +TN +FP
UTA-RLDD.
In the works investigated in section IV, accuracy is used as
Last but not least, another EEG-based database is proposed
the primary performance measure. However, caution should
by Zhao et al. [92] in Multichannel EEG2. They collected
be taken with unbalanced class distributions between drowsi-
32-channelEEGdataduringasustained-attentiondrivingtask
ness and alert labels. In cases where the evaluation data is
fordrivers’drowsinessdetection.InTableIV,wereferredthis
imbalanced with respect to these labels, we advocate the use
database to the Multi-channel EEG recordings. It consisted of
ofthebalancedaccuracythattakesthisimbalanceintheclass
more than 62 sessions for 27 subjects. Each session includes
distribution into account. The mathematical equation is given
a 90-minute sustained-attention task in which an immersive
by:
driving scenario is simulated. The participants were asked to
drive on a four line highway and keep the car in the center (cid:32) TP TN (cid:33)
of the lane. Random car drifts are induced expecting the Balanced−Accuracy =0.5∗ + .
TP +FN TN +FP
participantstorespondaccordingly.Thedriver’sdrowsinessis
(5)
inferred from the required response time in this lane-keeping
Further metrics include area under the receiver operating
task. This dataset is specifically collected for targeting the
characteristic (ROC) Curve (AUC-ROC) [139], [140] which
driver’s drowsiness detection task.
evaluatesthe classifier’sability todistinguish betweendrowsy
In this section, we have seen a wide range of databases
and non-drowsy instances across different threshold values
that motivate research on drowsiness detection. Both visual
and Mean Squared Error (MSE) [141], [142] or Root Mean
and biosignal-based databases are investigated here. While
Squared Error (RMSE) [143], [144] which quantifies the av-
most databases, such as NTHU-DDD, YawDD, FatigueView,
eragesquareddifferencesbetweenpredicteddrowsinesslevels
NCKUDD,Drive&Act,DMD,andSUST-DDD,areintended
andactuallevels.Duaetal.[145]reportedtheirresultsfurther
fordriverdrowsinessdetection,otherdatabases,suchasUTA-
in terms of a confusion matrix. This tabular representation
RLDD, MRL Eye Dataset, and ULg Dataset, are targeting the
comprises all four metrics (TP, TN, FP, and FN) representing
more general drowsiness detection tasks. Especially the UTA-
the performance of the binary drowsiness detection classifier.
RLDD database is collected under unconstrained real-world
Based on the four metrics, the authors also provide evaluation
indoor scenarios, which can be used to develop drowsiness
metrics such as sensitivity, specificity, precision, and F1-
detection applications more general for smart environments.
score. The mathematical formulation for specificity is given
But also NHU-DDD collected under indoor scenarios while
in equation (6) as:
sitting can be extended to build general drowsiness detection
(cid:32) (cid:33)
applications for smart environments as well. TN
Specificity = . (6)
VI. PERFORMANCEANDEVALUATIONMETRICS TN +FP
Inthissection,wepresentcommonevaluationmetricsused
It is noteworthy, that the term sensitivity is commonly used
to compare SOTA drowsiness detection algorithms. Popular
as a synonym to the term recall and thus there is no need
evaluation metrics for this classification task include accuracy
to duplicate the equation. Some works also simply reported
(Acc) [3], [109], [110], precision [4], [72], [115], recall [4],
the ”Accuracy” of their algorithm. Accuracy in this sense is
[72], [115], and F1-score [72], [109], [111], [115] defined as
dependent on the FN and FP, but unlike F1-score, does not
follows:
consider the possible imbalance in the data. Even though it is
TP
Precision= , (1) notreportedindetailinmostworks,theaccuracycanbegiven
TP +FP
simply by the ratio of misclassified samples to all evaluated
12ProjectpageDROZY:http://www.drozy.ulg.ac.be/ samples, regardless of their ground-truth label balance.14
VIELBAT
NOITCETEDSSENISWORDLARENEGOTDEDNETXEYLISAEEBNACTUBNOITCETEDSSENISWORDREVIRDROFDESUERAMEHTFOTSOM.NOITCETEDSSENISWORDROFDESUSESABATADSEZIRAMMUS
.SOIRANECSROODNISUOIRAVREDNUDETCELLOCERAYEHTSA,STNEMNORIVNETRAMSROFKROWEMARF
skramer cfiiceps
sessalc
snoisses
stcejbus
noitacilppa
fo
aera
gnisnes
setubirtta
gnursaem
raey
esabatad
ytiladom
euqinhcet
,gninway
dekrap
lautca na ni dedrocer
,gnignis/gniklat
,lamron
soediv
BGR
243
92
ssenisword
revird
etomer
desab-noisiv
4102
6DDwaY
htuom
nepo
rac
,]7[
,]3[
ni
desu ,gniway
]021[
]211[
,ssenisword
revird
,esop
daeh
,soiranecs
roodni dellortnoc
dna
ssenisword
soediv
BGR
063
22
a
no
gnittis
elihw
etomer
,gninway
desab-noisiv
7102
-UHTN
sniatnoc
,snoitalumis rednu
ni
desu
,ssenisword-non
roodni
riahc
erusolc
eye
5DDD
citsilaer
tsom rof snoitairav
]111[–]901[
,]07[
]211[
soiranecs gnivird
,ssenisword
revird
tnereffid
00058
,knilb
eye
ton snoiger
eye ylno sniatnoc
,noitcerid
ezag
73
ssenisword
lareneg
etomer
desab-noisiv
8102
eyE LRM
snoiger
eye
ssenepo
eye
tceted
ot elbissopmi ,secaf
]821[
,]721[
ni
desu
7tesataD
snoisserpxe laicaf
]121[
ssenisword
lareneg
,redneg
ni snoitairav sniatnoc
,ecnaligiv
wol
,trela
soediv
BGR
081
06
etomer
snoisserpxe
laicaf
desab-noisiv
9102
-ATU
ssenisword
revird
noitisiuqca
,ega ,yticinhte
]511[
ni
desu
,ssenisword
eltbus
ot emertxe
4DDLR
eb nac
,seirossecca dna ecived
]911[
ssenisword
lareneg rof
desu
noitceted
-KCN
gnivird laer sniatnoc,detcartsid
,ypeels
,lamron
stneve
latot
346
52
ssenisword
revird
etomer
,noisserpxe
laicaf
desab-noisiv
9102
]321[ DDU
ylbissop snoitidnoc
rehto
suoirav
dna
htuom
,ssenepo
eye
srevird eht gniregnadne
,gnivird
elihw
seitivitca
nepo
]031[
,]921[
ni
desu
-eugitaF
,roodni
tnemnorivne ecfifo
,gniddon
,lamron
,ysword
stes
gninway
30471
-
ssenisword
revird
etomer
eye
,esop
daeh
desab-noisiv
2202
]221[ 8weiV
,sriahc ecfifo no gnittis
ni
desu
,gnihcterts
dna
htuom
,ssenepo
noitalumis
]431[–]131[
desolc
suomonotua rof cfiiceps
gnitcartsid
esrevid
,BGR
fo sruoh
21
51
,gnivird
suomonotua
etomer
,noisserpxe
laicaf
desab-noisiv
0202
& evirD
revird
rof cfiiceps ton gnivird
htob
gnirud
seitivitca
D3
,soediv
RI
,htped
revird
sedulcni
,nepoeye,esopdaeh
]421[
9tcA
erom
si esabataD .ssenisword
detamotua
dna launam
6 morf
esop
ydob
ssenisword
nepo
htuom
dna ,esrevid ,evisnetxe
desu
,snoitidnoc
gnivird
sweiv
tnereffid
.esoprup-itlum
]531[
ni
rof tesatad ladomitlum
ezag
,noitcartsid
fo
slevel
,BGR
fo sruoh
14
73
,noitcartsid
revird
etomer
,noisserpxe
laicaf
desab-noisiv
0202
01DMD
toN .soiranecs
revird tnereffid
leehw-sdnah
,noitacolla
soediv
RI
,htped
sedulcni
noitingocer
seye
,nepo
htuom
]521[
eht sa
ssenisword gniredisnoc
txetnoc
dna
,noitcaretni
rof
ylno
ton
tub
,esop
daeh
,nepo
rof
rotcaf noitcartsid
ylno
]731[
,]631[
ni desu
,atad
noitceted
ssenisword
gninway
srevird
gnivird
laer rednu dedrocer
dna
ssenisword
soediv
BGR
4702
91
ssenisword
revird
etomer
,noisserpxe
laicaf
desab-noisiv
2202
-TSUS
riehtesustnapicitrap,soiranecs
ssenisword-non
htuom
,ssenepo
eye
11DDD
ot
senohp dna elcihev
nwo
nepo
]621[
dna larutan tsom cimim
noitidnoc
gnivird elbatrofmoc
desab-noisiv
gnivird laer ni dedrocer
dna
ssenisword
selpmaxe
4603
41
ssenisword
revird
,etomer
,noisserpxe
laicaf
6102
21YZORD
lacigoloisyhp
riehtesustnapicitrap,soiranecs
ni
desu
,ssenisword-non
deriw
ytilibairav
taebtraeh
]77[
ot
senohp dna elcihev
nwo
]831[
,]42[
dna larutan tsom cimim
noitidnoc
gnivird elbatrofmoc
itluM
devired
snoisses
26
rednu GEE lennahc-32
esnopser
,tesno
noitaived
72
ssenisword
revird
deriw
desab-GEE
lacigoloisyhp
9102
lennahc
ksat
.nim
09
morf
noitidnoc
gnivird detalumis
,tesffo
esnopser
,tesno
TR
ni noitaived
]29[ 2GEE
]87[ ni
desu
gnipeek-enal
gnirud
ksat15
Anotherperformancemetric,whendriverdrowsinessdetec- [112], [119], [120], [122]. However, a major limitation is
tionisconsideredasaregressiontaskinsteadofaclassification that these databases often contain only simulation data or
task, is the case to predict the accuracy of continuous drowsi- were collected under strictly controlled environments, such
ness level. Such a performance measure proposed by Wei et as indoors or in parked vehicles as reviewed in [5]. This
al. [146] is called the drowsiness index (DI). They measured makes developing solutions that would work in real life
the difference between the individual response time (RT) and scenarios more challenging. Additionally, it makes estimating
the true alert state (alert RT) in a simulated lane-keeping task. the performance in real deployment questionable as the data
The formulation is given by equation (7) as: does not represent all the variations in such scenarios. To
alleviate this problem, the trend moves from simulation data
(cid:18) 1−e−α(τ−τ0)(cid:19)
DI =max 0, , (7) to real-world data. Additional databases have been curated
1+e−α(τ−τ0)
that have been collected under real driving conditions and
where τ denotes the RT of the given lane-departure event, a incorporated various aspects of the real environment, such
is a constant, and τ denotes the true alert RT. In their work, as different lightening and road physics [123], [124], [126].
0
they continuously predict this score and related this measure However, it is not only tedious but also risky to collect data
to the continuous driver’s drowsiness level. in a moving vehicle and it is difficult to capture all variability
Paulo et al. [80] also used a leave-one-subject-out cross- mimicking a real environment [126]. In addition, problems
validation strategy to validate their proposed classification such as occlusion-free capturing and accurate labeling also
method.Becausetheauthorsintendedtoperformclassification play an important role, which lead to works as in [119], [147]
without individual-dependent calibration from EEG signals, dealingwithcapturingofrealisticanddiversedrowsinessdata.
they first carried out the validation at the subject level to b) From the algorithmic perspective: Most vision-based
understand the individual contribution. By further selecting driver drowsiness detection schemes focus on observing the
groupsofsubjectswithmajorindividualcontributions,abetter individual’s facial attributes, such as face expression [148]–
cross-subject generalizable model is created. [153], head position [154], pupil diameter state, eye blink
Thesemetricsinthissectionhelptoassesstheeffectiveness, and eye movement (PERCLOS) [4], [155], [156]. With the
accuracy, and reliability of drowsiness detection systems and advancement of deep learning, more accurate and efficient
algorithms, enabling researchers and developers to improve extraction of face and facial landmarks becomes possible,
their models for better real-world applicability and safety. making the drowsiness detection on facial features more ac-
The performance metrics used are also reported in Table I, curate and real-time [70], [157], [158]. Popular face detection
II and III, which show the achieved performance on bench- methods include MTCNN [159] and RetinaFace [160] that
markingdatasetsforeachofthethreemeasurementtechniques allow more precise and accurate face detection under more
considered. challenging environments. Other approaches like accurate fa-
ciallandmarkdetectioninthewild[161]alsohelptoimprove
VII. TECHNICALANDPRACTICALLIMITATIONS the detection of fine-grained facial expressions under varying
and challenging situations. For integrating face recognition
Application areas of drowsiness detection are broad. It
on devices with limited hardware resources, previous works
is of paramount importance across diverse domains due to
leveraged extremely lightweight face recognition networks
its profound impact on safety [18]–[20], productivity [30],
from knowledge distillation or model quantization [162],
and healthcare [10]. As extensively studied in this survey,
[163]. To overcome the limitation of occlusion in vision-
whether on the road, in workplaces, or in critical operational
baseddrowsinessdetection,researchcanbenefitfrommethods
environments, the ability to accurately identify and mitigate
developed for improving face detection performance under
drowsiness can have far-reaching implications. In this section,
masked faces as in [164], [165]. Working on robust vision-
we focus on identifying certain weaknesses in current algo-
based algorithms coping with variety of challenges faced
rithms and uncovering limitations in existing research. We do
under real life scenarios is thus a very promising future
thiswithrespecttotwomaincategories,i.e.,vision-basedand
research direction. Multi angles processing [116] and key
physiological signal-based approaches.
frames selection [117] are also the upcoming challenges for
video processing in vision-based drowsiness detection.
A. Limitations on vision-based technique
c) From the biased data perspective: Proper datasets
a) From the database perspective: The increasing num- play a pivotal role in the training of deep neural networks.
ber of public benchmark databases for driver drowsiness When datasets lack representativeness, trained models can
detection is partially due to the rising number of fatal traffic become biased and struggle to generalize to real-world sce-
accidents, but also following the trend towards autonomous narios. This concern is particularly pronounced in models
driving [124]. The National Highway Traffic Safety Admin- trained within specific cultural contexts, potentially leading to
istration (NHTSA) published the Drowsy Driving Research inadequategeneralizationduetolimitedracialdiversityrepre-
and Program Plan [6] in 2016 estimating that 2% to 20% of sentation. This challenge is amplified in the context of driver
annual traffic deaths are attributable to driver drowsiness. As drowsiness detection, where publicly available vision-based
we have observed in previous Section V, there are several datasets often focus on specific ethnic groups, resulting in an
vision-baseddatabasesthatcanbeleveragedasbenchmarking incomplete picture. Ngxande et al. [166] addressed this issue
systems for developing driver drowsiness detection solutions byutilizingaGAN-basedmethodfordataaugmentation.They16
used a population bias visualization strategy to group similar specifically linked to the nature of physiological signal based
facial attributes and highlight the model weaknesses in such technique.
samples. The approach involved fine-tuning the CNN model a) From motion artifacts perspective: Multiple studies
usingasamplingtechniqueforfaceswithsubparperformance. have investigated the correlation between EEG and driving
Experimental outcomes demonstrated the effectiveness of this behavior [16], [17], [76], [78], consistently highlighting EEG
approach in enhancing driver drowsiness detection for ethnic as the most predictive physiological indicator of drowsiness.
groups that were underrepresented. Under the same context The fluctuation in band activities within EEG signals in the
of data, studies [167], [168] dealing with how to induce spectral-frequency domain offers dominant insights into vary-
drowsiness and collecting realistic drowsy driving data both ing levels of drowsiness. In contrast to vision-based detection
inrealtrafficandundersimulationarethusveryimportantfor methodsthatoftenidentifydrowsinessaftertheonsetofactual
developing robust detection algorithms. sleep or during advanced drowsiness stages, technologies
d) From on-site hardware limitation perspective: The based on physiological signals enable the early alerting of
requirement for a real-time and on-site driver monitoring drivers [5], averting potentially catastrophic accidents. How-
system is crucial to avert motor vehicle accidents attributed ever, a challenge arises from relevant signal extraction from
to driver inattentiveness or drowsiness. However, onboard motion artifacts by capturing biological signals either due to
hardware often possesses limited computational resources. the motion of vehicles, individuals, or remote capture. This
Recent advancements in deep learning, particularly model makes developing robust solutions what would work in real
compression and distillation techniques, have made it feasible driving scenarios more challenging. Therefore, there are ex-
toconstructcompactyethighlyaccuratemodelsonembedded tensiveapproachesdealingwiththeremovalofmotionartifacts
systems [169], [170], such as those integrated into vehicles. from EEG recordings. Relevant works include using methods
Reddy et al. [24] proposed employing model compression likesignaldecomposition[174],waveletdecomposition[175],
to transition from a resource-intensive baseline model to a [176], and detrended fluctuation analysis [177].
lightweight model suitable for deployment on an embedded b) From data transmission perspective: Physiological
board device. The suggested model based on facial landmarks signals have demonstrated their stability, reliability and pre-
achieved an accuracy of 89.5% for a 3-classes classification cision, as they are less influenced by external factors like
task, operating at a speed of 14.9 frames per second (FPS) e.g., occlusions or variability in lightening, resulting in fewer
on the Jetson TK1 platform. With the European Union (EU) falsepositivedetections[178]–[180].Nevertheless,suchphys-
mandating the introduction of driver drowsiness and alert- iologicalsensingmethodsinvolvingcablesorwiredelectrodes
ness warning (DDAW) systems for all new vehicles from can be obtrusive and inconvenient for signal capture. Conse-
2024 [167], the development and installation of accurate and quently, there is a noticeable trend towards wireless sensing
resource-efficient algorithms to detect drowsiness in real time and communication to alleviate these issues [94], [97], [101].
in the vehicle is becoming an urgent issue. The hurdle lies in maintaining consistent connectivity and
e) From data synthesis perspective: Because of the con- addressing weak signal strength in wireless setups. These
siderable expenses associated with dataset acquisition and the challengesevenexistunderlaboratorysetupandbecomeeven
lack of adequate datasets discussed earlier, we propose to use more pronounced in uncontrolled environments, particularly
syntheticdatatostudythecommoncharacteristicsandthevar- when utilizing wearable platforms with a limited count of dry
ious hidden impacts in data for drowsiness detection. Inspired electrodes as stated by Gerwin Schalk [181], a neuroscientist
by the insights gained from the synthetic data, we can further atNewYorkStateDepartmentofHealth’sWadsworthCenter.
extend to other downstream tasks. This also allows us to Stable wireless data transmission and communication are thus
uncoverdifferentcausalaspectsfordrowsinessdetection.Most a necessary requirement for developing high performance
works focus on finding the correlations in signal variability to solutions. Signal imputation in case of data leakage is another
the different states of drowsiness, but less on the causality solution to address the issue besides implementing fusion
aspects. We consider this to be a very promising research techniques. It is known that deep learning based models are
direction with regard to explainability. Kong et al. [171] often used to detect outliers or handle missing data both in
proposed to use Granger Causality Network to investigate handling image data or time-series [182]–[184].
driver fatigue and alertness state in EEG signals in 2015. c) From the multimodal perspective: Often drowsiness
The whole experiment included twelve young and healthy detection scheme based on only one modality is not robust
participants by recording their mental states under different enoughandthusafusionofseveralcomplementarymodalities
simulated driving conditions and the data was analyzed by or methods would lead to a better overall system performance
usingGranger-Causality-basedbraineffectivenetworks.Using [111], [185]–[187]. Samiee et al. [188] introduced data fusion
such foundation models for other tasks, such as training face using image-based features and driver-vehicle interaction as
recognition solutions, have already gained increased interest a strategy to address the issue of signal loss and boost the
[172], [173]. overall resilience of the driver drowsiness detection system.
Theoutcomeunderlinedthesystem’sprimarystrengths,which
B. Limitations on physiological signal based technique
encompass dependable and reliable detection and a capacity
Physiological signal based techniques shares, to some de- to withstand input signal losses effectively. Sedik et al. [188]
gree, most of the limitations related to vision based tech- investigated sensor fusion techniques in their research. Their
niques discussed above. Here, we focus on these limitations approach involves integrating EEG, EOG, ECG, and EMG17
TABLEV
BENCHMARKDROWSINESSDETECTIONSYSTEMWITHRESPECTTOFEATURES.LABELANNOTATIONS:XNEGATIVE,ONEUTRAL,AND+POSITIVE.WE
NOTETHATTHISASSESSMENTISBASEDONCURRENTEXISTINGRESEARCHANDTHENEGATIVITYINANYASPECTOFANYCATEGORYDOESNOT
REPRESENTTHEPOTENTIALOFTHISCATEGORYBUTISSEENASAFUTURERESEARCHCHALLENGE.THEREFORE,THISTABLEISDYNAMICANDCANBE
CHANGEDWITHFUTURERESEARCHEFFORTS.
data processing calibration noise motion transmission detection
unobstrusive occlusion practability
accessability complexity complexity coupling artifect stability accuracy
EEG o x x x + x + + + x
-wearable o o o x x x + x x o
ECG x x x o + x + + + x
-wearable x o o o x x + x x o
Vision + + + + + + x + + +
TABLEVI
THEDIAGRAMHIGHLIGHTSTHESENSORTYPESUTILIZEDFORVARIOUSDROWSINESSDETECTIONAPPLICATIONSREPORTEDINPREVIOUSWORKS.THIS
ALLOWSUSTOPROMPTLYPINPOINTAREASWHERESPECIFICSENSORTYPESAREABSENT,PROMOTINGFUTURERESEARCHINTHOSEDOMAINS.THIS
TABLEDOESNOTLIMITTHERESEARCHINTHEFIELDOFDROWSINESSDETECTIONANDISTHUSDYNAMICANDCANBECHANGEDWITHFUTURE
RESEARCHEFFORTS.
Applicationareas Publictransportation Aviationtransportation DriverMonitoring WorkplaceSafety Healthcare SmartHomes
EEG ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
ECG ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
Vision ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓ ✓
signals,resultinginenhancedsystemaccuracy,fasterdetection limitation of electrode-based applications of the EEG and
time, and a robust drowsiness detection scheme. Signal pro- EOGapproachestocertainextent.However,headphone-based
cessing techniques fuse FFT and Discrete Wavelet Transform devices [90] including the biosignal measurements are also
that are applied for feature extraction and noise reduction. not practicable for real world driving scenarios. Drivers are
Various machine learning and deep learning classifiers are not safe wearing headphone devices while driving. Therefore,
utilized for both multi-class and binary-class classifications. future research directions involve the development of more
Theproposedmethodologiesarevalidatedthroughsimulations robust algorithms mitigating these motion artifacts (e.g., by
intwoscenariosaddressingtheseclassificationtasks.Theout- using de-trending, or signal decomposition techniques) or
comesdemonstratethattheproposedmodelsexhibithighper- require more appropriate setups without affecting the drivers
formance in detecting drowsiness state from medical signals, while driving under real world scenarios. This can include
achieving detection accuracy of 90% and 96% for the multi- automaticlearnableaugmentation[189]techniquesthatwould
class and binary-class scenarios, respectively. Recent works enrich the training data with more realistic variation.
on multi-modal drowsiness detection systems also focused on
Confusionmayarisebetweenthetermsdriverfatiguedetec-
the explainability of the algorithms it used as in [108]. The
tionanddriverdrowsinessdetection[190],[190].Fatiguestate
interpretability of such models would strengthen confidence
describes the degree of fatigue, which may not necessarily
in the detection systems and increase their reliability, which
involvedrowsinessorsubjectfallingasleep.Manyindividuals
is particularly important as the EU will make the installation
can experience fatigue while still remaining cognitive vigilant
of DDAW systems in new vehicles a legal requirement from
andarestillcapableofdrivingsafely.Therefore,itisessential
2024 [167].
to prioritize the detection of drowsiness, as drivers in this
state are unconscious while driving. To tackle this issue, heart
VIII. POTENTIALDIRECTIONSFORRESEARCH rate variability (HRV) derived from ECG-signals are often
employed as a feature for detection. However, ECG signals in
TableVsummarizesthelimitationsdescribedinsectionVII
relationtowardsdrowsinessareoftenhardtodraw.Changesin
and provides a better overview of the relative strengths and
the parasympathetic and sympathetic activity of the body can
weaknesses of the current sensing modalities and algorithms
be related to different biological processes beyond drowsiness
for drowsiness detection. It’s important to emphasize that this
detection.Severalworks[95],[96],[107]investigatedthedis-
assessmentreliesoninvestigatedresearchworksinthissurvey.
criminative power of ECG-based features towards drowsiness
Anynegativeaspectidentifiedwithinacategoryshouldnotbe
and future trends hint towards more complex fusion methods
interpreted as a reflection of its potential; rather, it’s viewed
[85], [191] or more generalized self-learning models [85],
as a future research challenge.
[118].
Biosignals captured with EEG and EOG measurements
are more precise [107], but less appropriate for use-cases as Table V indicates a clear advantage of vision-based solu-
driver’sdrowsinessdetection.Bothvehicleandsubjectmotion tions over a wide range of challenges faced by other two
would strongly affect the performance and the accuracy of investigatedmeasures,butalsoemphasizedthatsuchsolutions
the feature extraction process of most proposed methods in are strongly affected by any application scenario where the
the literature. Trends towards wearable sensors reduced the measured subject might be occluded or under less favorable18
capture conditions [109]. Features considered like the PER- of Higher Education, Research, Science and the Arts within
CLOS indicates the percentage of eye closures. This features theirjointsupportoftheNationalResearchCenterforApplied
stronglyrelatestotheaccuracyandefficiencyoffacedetection Cybersecurity ATHENE.
and facial landmark detection. Video-based approaches of
drowsiness detection often combine techniques for keyframe
REFERENCES
selectionsandfinaldrowsinessstateclassification[117].Other
worksintendtofacethechallengeofvariationinheadposesas
[1] X. Qin, Y. Niu, H. Zhou, X. Li, W. Jia, and Y. Zheng, “Driver
in [116]. Therefore, we believe that future research directions drowsinessEEGdetectionbasedontreefederatedlearningandinter-
in vision-based approaches should consider these relevant pretablenetwork,”Int.J.NeuralSyst.,vol.33,no.3,pp.2350009:1–
2350009:17,2023.
topics, such as accurate and fast keyframe selections and
[2] H. Lee, J. Lee, and M. Shin, “Using wearable ECG/PPG sensors
creating more robust algorithms dealing with the dynamic for driver drowsiness detection based on distinguishable pattern of
challenges posed in a real-world setting. recurrenceplots,”Electronics,vol.8,no.2,2019.
[3] W. Deng and R. Wu, “Real-time driver-drowsiness detection system
Finally, Table VI shows the investigated measuring modal-
usingfacialfeatures,”IEEEAccess,vol.7,pp.118727–118738,2019.
ities successfully associated with different application areas. [4] I.G.Daza,S.Bronte,L.M.Bergasa,J.Almaza´n,andJ.J.Y.Torres,
Thisallowsresearcherstohaveaclearerviewtopositiontheir “Vision-baseddrowsinessdetectorforrealdrivingconditions,”in2012
IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium, IV 2012, Alcal de Henares,
future research in the missing areas of drowsiness detection.
Madrid,Spain,June3-7,2012,pp.618–623,IEEE,2012.
However,thistableshouldnotlimittheresearchinthefieldof [5] A. Sahayadhas, K. Sundaraj, and M. Murugappan, “Detecting driver
drowsiness detection and is thus dynamic and can be changed drowsiness based on sensors: A review,” Sensors, vol. 12, no. 12,
pp.16937–16953,2012.
with future research efforts.
[6] National Highway Traffic Safety Administration, “NHTSA drowsy
drivingresearchandprogramplan.”https://www.nhtsa.gov/sites/nhtsa.
IX. CONCLUSION gov/files/drowsydriving strategicplan 030316.pdf, 2016. DOT publi-
cationHS812252.Accessed:(Februar2,2024).
Detectingdrowsinessisofhighsignificanceinguaranteeing
[7] P.Liu,H.-L.Chi,X.Li,andJ.Guo,“Effectsofdatasetcharacteristics
safety in various domains such as in workplaces requiring
on the performance of fatigue detection for crane operators using
highconcentrationofemployees,underrealdrivingsituations, hybrid deep neural networks,” Automation in Construction, vol. 132,
in public transportation, and for aviation. Alert and well- p.103901,2021.
[8] J. Geiger-Brown, V. E. Rogers, A. M. Trinkoff, R. L. Kane, R. B.
rested employees also lead to enhanced productivity and
Bausell,andS.M.Scharf,“Sleep,sleepiness,fatigue,andperformance
better personal healthcare. This work is a pioneering work of 12-hour-shift nurses,” Chronobiology international, vol. 29, no. 2,
covering a wide application area of drowsiness detection pp.211–219,2012.
[9] M.Mantzanas,D.Chrysikos,I.Giannakodimos,G.Chelidonis,P.Dry-
with its modern applications and methods. We categorized
mousi, E. Pechlivanidou, E. Pikoulis, N. Basios, C. G. Zografos,
our researched works into three measuring techniques, with G.C.Zografos,etal.,“Subjectivesleepqualityanddaytimesleepiness
multi-channel EEG signals, ECG signals, and vision-based amonggreeknursingstaff:Amulticentercross-sectionalstudy,”Health
&ResearchJournal,vol.8,no.3,pp.214–224,2022.
detection schemes. We summarized and compared popular
[10] C.Juan-Garc´ıa,M.Plaza-Carmona,andN.Ferna´ndez-Mart´ınez,“Sleep
benchmarking databasesand common evaluationmetrics used analysis in emergency nurses’ department,” Revista da Associac¸a˜o
to assess the performance of the developed drowsiness detec- Me´dicaBrasileira,vol.67,pp.862–867,2021.
[11] K. Woodard, J. Adornetti, J. M. Nogales, M. Foster, L. Leask,
tion algorithms.
R. McGee, M. Carlucci, S. Crowley, and A. Wolfson, “0064 youth
We identified strengths and weaknesses in current al- sleep-wakeexperienceinjuvenilejusticefacilities:Adescriptiveanal-
gorithms and discussed the limitations of current research ysis,”Sleep,vol.45,no.Supplement 1,pp.A29–A30,2022.
[12] M. A. Kamran, M. M. N. Mannan, and M. Y. Jeong, “Drowsiness,
categorized under both physiological-based and vision-based
fatigueandpoorsleep’scausesanddetection:Acomprehensivestudy,”
approaches. We pinpointed challenges in accurate and real- IEEEAccess,vol.7,pp.167172–167186,2019.
time detection, in stable data transmission using wireless [13] C.Papadelis,Z.Chen,C.Kourtidou-Papadeli,P.D.Bamidis,I.Chou-
varda, E. Bekiaris, and N. Maglaveras, “Monitoring sleepiness with
sensingtechnologies,andinbuildingabias-freesystemamong
on-boardelectrophysiologicalrecordingsforpreventingsleep-deprived
others. We provide possible solutions like mitigating the bias trafficaccidents,”ClinicalNeurophysiology,vol.118,no.9,pp.1906–
by using synthetic, adversarial data [166] or data augmenta- 1922,2007.
tion [192] techniques. Overcoming the hardware limitations [14] L.N.Boyle,J.Tippin,A.Paul,andM.Rizzo,“Driverperformancein
themomentssurroundingamicrosleep,”Transportationresearchpart
requires model compression techniques to build small-scale
F:trafficpsychologyandbehaviour,vol.11,no.2,pp.126–136,2008.
but still highly accurate models, and leveraging the fusion [15] H.SharmaandK.K.Sharma,“Analgorithmforsleepapneadetection
of complementary modalities, methods, or sensors to lead to from single-lead ECG using hermite basis functions,” Comput. Biol.
Medicine,vol.77,pp.116–124,2016.
more robust and accurate detection resilient to noise or data
[16] C. Wang, B. Guragain, A. K. Verma, L. Archer, S. Majumder,
loss. Finally, we believe that drowsiness detection remains an A.Mohamud,E.Flaherty-Woods,G.Shapiro,M.Almashor,M.Lenne´,
actively evolving field with abundant opportunities to explore, R. Myers, J. Kuo, S. Yang, N. Wilson, and K. Tavakolian, “Spectral
analysisofEEGduringmicrosleepeventsannotatedviadrivermonitor-
both when it comes to sensing technology and algorithmic
ingsystemtocharacterizedrowsiness,”IEEETrans.Aerosp.Electron.
development. The primary goal of this work is to provide an Syst.,vol.56,no.2,pp.1346–1356,2020.
initial comprehensive survey of drowsiness detection within [17] J.-H. Jeong, B.-W. Yu, D.-H. Lee, and S.-W. Lee, “Classification of
drowsinesslevelsbasedonadeepspatio-temporalconvolutionalbidi-
contemporary applications and methodologies.
rectional lstm network using electroencephalography signals,” Brain
sciences,vol.9,no.12,p.348,2019.
ACKNOWLEDGMENT [18] X.Zhang,J.Li,Y.Liu,Z.Zhang,Z.Wang,D.Luo,X.Zhou,M.Zhu,
W. Salman, G. Hu, and C. Wang, “Design of a fatigue detection
ThisresearchworkhasbeenfundedbytheGermanFederal
systemforhigh-speedtrainsbasedondrivervigilanceusingawireless
Ministry of Education and Research and the Hessian Ministry wearableEEG,”Sensors,vol.17,no.3,p.486,2017.19
[19] J. Chen, H. Li, L. Han, J. Wu, A. Azam, and Z. Zhang, “Driver O.Salvetti,M.Larsson,T.Stro¨mberg,L.Randeberg,A.Bjorgan,G.A.
vigilance detection for high-speed rail using fusion of multiple phys- Giannakakis,M.Pediaditis,F.Chiarugi,E.Christinaki,K.Marias,and
iological signals and deep learning,” Appl. Soft Comput., vol. 123, M. Tsiknakis, “Mirror mirror on the wall... an unobtrusive intelligent
p.108982,2022. multisensory mirror for well-being status self-assessment and visual-
[20] Z. Zhou, Z. Fang, J. Wang, J. Chen, H. Li, L. Han, and Z. Zhang, ization,”IEEETrans.Multim.,vol.19,no.7,pp.1467–1481,2017.
“Drivervigilancedetectionbasedondeeplearningwithfusedthermal [41] V. Kumar, N. Badal, and R. Mishra, “Elderly fall due to drowsiness:
image information for public transportation,” Eng. Appl. Artif. Intell., Detection and prevention using machine learning and iot,” Modern
vol.124,p.106604,2023. PhysicsLettersB,vol.35,no.07,p.2150120,2021.
[21] Y. Fan, Z. Li, J. Pei, H. Li, and J. Sun, “Applying systems thinking [42] B. Bacˇic´ and J. Zhang, “Towards real-time drowsiness detection for
approachtoaccidentanalysisinchina:Casestudyof“7.23”yong-tai- elderlycare,”in20205thInternationalConferenceonInnovativeTech-
wen high-speed train accident,” Safety science, vol. 76, pp. 190–201, nologiesinIntelligentSystemsandIndustrialApplications(CITISIA),
2015. pp.1–6,2020.
[22] M.Ramzan,H.U.Khan,S.M.Awan,A.Ismail,M.Ilyas,andA.Mah- [43] M.Teplanetal.,“FundamentalsofEEGmeasurement,”Measurement
mood,“Asurveyonstate-of-the-artdrowsinessdetectiontechniques,” sciencereview,vol.2,no.2,pp.1–11,2002.
IEEEAccess,vol.7,pp.61904–61919,2019. [44] D.Jiang,Y.Lu,Y.Ma,andY.Wang,“Robustsleepstageclassification
[23] M.S.D.PandilwarandM.More,“Surveypaperforrealtimecardriver withsingle-channelEEGsignalsusingmultimodaldecompositionand
drowsinessdetectionusingmachinelearningapproach,”International hmm-based refinement,” Expert Syst. Appl., vol. 121, pp. 188–203,
JournalforResearchinAppliedScienceandEngineeringTechnology, 2019.
p.4318–4323,Jul2022. [45] T.L.T.daSilveira,A.J.Kozakevicius,andC.R.Rodrigues,“Auto-
[24] B. Reddy, Y. Kim, S. Yun, C. Seo, and J. Jang, “Real-time driver mateddrowsinessdetectionthroughwaveletpacketanalysisofasingle
drowsiness detection for embedded system using model compression EEGchannel,”ExpertSyst.Appl.,vol.55,pp.559–565,2016.
of deep neural networks,” in 2017 IEEE Conference on Computer [46] B. A. GEERING, P. ACHERMANN, F. EGGIMANN, and A. A.
Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, CVPR Workshops 2017, BORBE´LY,“Period-amplitudeanalysisandpowerspectralanalysis:a
Honolulu, HI, USA, July 21-26, 2017, pp. 438–445, IEEE Computer comparisonbasedonall-nightsleepeegrecordings,”Journalofsleep
Society,2017. research,vol.2,no.3,pp.121–129,1993.
[25] A.Othmani,A.Q.M.Sabri,S.Aslan,F.Chaieb,H.Rameh,R.Alfred, [47] F. K. Onay and C. Ko¨se, “Power spectral density analysis in alfa,
andD.Cohen,“EEG-basedneuralnetworksapproachesforfatigueand beta and gamma frequency bands for classification of motor EEG
drowsinessdetection:Asurvey,”Neurocomputing,p.126709,2023. signals,”in27thSignalProcessingandCommunicationsApplications
[26] A. Sahayadhas, K. Sundaraj, and M. Murugappan, “Detecting driver Conference,SIU2019,Sivas,Turkey,April24-26,2019,pp.1–4,IEEE,
drowsiness based on sensors: A review,” Sensors, vol. 12, no. 12, 2019.
pp.16937–16953,2012. [48] Z. Mardi, S. N. M. Ashtiani, and M. Mikaili, “Eeg-based drowsiness
[27] S.A.El-Nabi,W.El-Shafai,E.-S.M.El-Rabaie,K.F.Ramadan,F.E. detection for safe driving using chaotic features and statistical tests,”
Abd El-Samie, and S. Mohsen, “Machine learning and deep learning Journalofmedicalsignalsandsensors,vol.1,no.2,p.130,2011.
techniques for driver fatigue and drowsiness detection: a review,” [49] Y. Jiao, Y. Deng, Y. Luo, and B.-L. Lu, “Driver sleepiness detection
Multimedia Tools and Applications, vol. 83, no. 3, pp. 9441–9477, fromEEGandEOGsignalsusingganandlstmnetworks,”Neurocom-
2024. puting,vol.408,pp.100–111,2020.
[28] J.A.Caldwell,J.L.Caldwell,L.A.Thompson,andH.R.Lieberman, [50] J.L.Cantero,M.Atienza,andR.M.Salas,“Humanalphaoscillations
“Fatigue and its management in the workplace,” Neuroscience & inwakefulness,drowsinessperiod,andremsleep:differentelectroen-
BiobehavioralReviews,vol.96,pp.272–289,2019. cephalographic phenomena within the alpha band,” Neurophysiologie
[29] S. E. Lerman, E. Eskin, D. J. Flower, E. C. George, B. Gerson, Clinique/ClinicalNeurophysiology,vol.32,no.1,pp.54–71,2002.
N.Hartenbaum,S.R.Hursh,andM.Moore-Ede,“Fatigueriskman- [51] R.D.Ogilvie,“Theprocessoffallingasleep,”Sleepmedicinereviews,
agementintheworkplace,”vol.54,no.2,pp.231–258,2012. vol.5,no.3,pp.247–270,2001.
[30] K. Sadeghniiat-Haghighi and Z. Yazdi, “Fatigue management in the [52] H. Blake, R. W. Gerard, and N. Kleitman, “Factors influencing brain
workplace,”Industrialpsychiatryjournal,vol.24,no.1,p.12,2015. potentials during sleep,” Journal of Neurophysiology, vol. 2, no. 1,
[31] A.Astaras,P.D.Bamidis,C.Kourtidou-Papadeli,andN.Maglaveras, pp.48–60,1939.
“Biomedicalreal-timemonitoringinrestrictedandsafety-criticalenvi- [53] C.Heinze,C.Hu¨tterer,T.Schnupp,G.Lenis,andM.Golz,“Drowsi-
ronments,”Hippokratia,vol.12,no.Suppl1,p.10,2008. nessdiscriminationinanovernightdrivingsimulationonthebasisofrr
[32] P.M.Ramos,C.B.Maior,M.C.Moura,andI.D.Lins,“Automatic andqtintervals,”CurrentDirectionsinBiomedicalEngineering,vol.3,
drowsinessdetectionforsafety-criticaloperationsusingensemblemod- no.2,pp.563–567,2017.
els and EEG signals,” Process Safety and Environmental Protection, [54] A. U. Viola, E. Tobaldini, S. L. Chellappa, K. R. Casali, A. Porta,
vol.164,pp.566–581,2022. andN.Montano,“Short-termcomplexityofcardiacautonomiccontrol
[33] S.Natnithikarat,S.Lamyai,P.Leelaarporn,N.Kunaseth,P.Autthasan, duringsleep:Remasapotentialriskfactorforcardiovascularsystem
T. Wisutthisen, and T. Wilaiprasitporn, “Drowsiness detection for inaging,”PloSone,vol.6,no.4,p.e19002,2011.
office-based workload with mouse and keyboard data,” in 2019 12th [55] R. Cabiddu, S. Cerutti, G. Viardot, S. Werner, and A. M. Bianchi,
BiomedicalEngineeringInternationalConference(BMEiCON),pp.1– “Modulation of the sympatho-vagal balance during sleep: frequency
4,IEEE,2019. domain study of heart rate variability and respiration,” Frontiers in
[34] K. Kaida, M. Takahashi, T. A˚kerstedt, A. Nakata, Y. Otsuka, physiology,vol.3,p.45,2012.
T.Haratani,andK.Fukasawa,“Validationofthekarolinskasleepiness [56] M. AlGhatrif and J. Lindsay, “A brief review: history to understand
scaleagainstperformanceandEEGvariables,”Clinicalneurophysiol- fundamentals of electrocardiography,” Journal of community hospital
ogy,vol.117,no.7,pp.1574–1581,2006. internalmedicineperspectives,vol.2,no.1,p.14383,2012.
[35] S. Ummul and K. Rao, “Shift work and fatigue,” Journal of Environ [57] M.Hammad,A.Maher,K.Wang,F.Jiang,andM.Amrani,“Detection
SciToxicolFoodTechnol,vol.1,no.3,pp.17–21,2012. ofabnormalheartconditionsbasedoncharacteristicsofECGsignals,”
[36] B. J. Thompson, M. S. Stock, and V. K. Banuelas, “Effects of Measurement,vol.125,pp.634–644,2018.
accumulatingworkshiftsonperformance-basedfatigueusingmultiple [58] W. J. Brady, A. D. Perron, M. L. Martin, C. Beagle, and T. P.
strengthmeasurementsindayandnightshiftnursesandaides,”Hum. Aufderheide, “Cause of ST segment abnormality in ED chest pain
Factors,vol.59,no.3,pp.346–356,2017. patients,”TheAmericanjournalofemergencymedicine,vol.19,no.1,
[37] T. A˚kerstedt, “Sleepiness as a consequence of shift work,” Sleep, pp.25–28,2001.
vol.11,no.1,pp.17–34,1988. [59] A. Kumar and D. M. Lloyd-Jones, “Clinical significance of minor
[38] R. D. Chervin, “Sleepiness, fatigue, tiredness, and lack of energy in nonspecific ST-segment and T-wave abnormalities in asymptomatic
obstructivesleepapnea,”Chest,vol.118,no.2,pp.372–379,2000. subjects: a systematic review,” Cardiology in review, vol. 15, no. 3,
[39] E. Q. Wu, C. Lin, L. Zhu, Z. Tang, Y. Jie, and G. Zhou, “Fatigue pp.133–142,2007.
detectionofpilots’brainthroughbrainscognitivemapandmultilayer [60] K.E.Trinkley,R.LeePage,H.Lien,K.Yamanouye,andJ.E.Tisdale,
latent incremental learning model,” IEEE Trans. Cybern., vol. 52, “QTintervalprolongationandtheriskoftorsadesdepointes:essentials
no.11,pp.12302–12314,2022. forclinicians,”Currentmedicalresearchandopinion,vol.29,no.12,
[40] P.Henr´ıquez,B.J.Matuszewski,Y.Andreu,L.Bastiani,S.Colantonio, pp.1719–1726,2013.
G. Coppini, M. D’Acunto, R. Favilla, D. Germanese, D. Giorgi, [61] D.G. Straussand R.H. Selvester, “TheQRS complex—a biomarker
P. Marraccini, M. Martinelli, M. Morales, M. A. Pascali, M. Righi, that“images”theheart:Qrsscorestoquantifymyocardialscarinthe20
presence of normal and abnormal ventricular conduction,” Journal of [81] Y. Jiang, Y. Zhang, C. Lin, D. Wu, and C. Lin, “EEG-based driver
electrocardiology,vol.42,no.1,pp.85–96,2009. drowsiness estimation using an online multi-view and transfer TSK
[62] R.Kheretal.,“Signalprocessingtechniquesforremovingnoisefrom fuzzy system,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 22, no. 3,
ECGsignals,”J.Biomed.Eng.Res,vol.3,no.101,pp.1–9,2019. pp.1752–1764,2021.
[63] P.K.SteinandY.Pu,“Heartratevariability,sleepandsleepdisorders,” [82] J.Cui,Z.Lan,O.Sourina,andW.Mu¨ller-Wittig,“EEG-basedcross-
Sleepmedicinereviews,vol.16,no.1,pp.47–66,2012. subject driver drowsiness recognition with an interpretable convolu-
[64] T. Penzel, J. W. Kantelhardt, R. P. Bartsch, M. Riedl, J. F. Kraemer, tional neural network,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Networks and
N. Wessel, C. Garcia, M. Glos, I. Fietze, and C. Scho¨bel, “Modula- LearningSystems,2022.
tions of heart rate, ECG, and cardio-respiratory coupling observed in [83] Z. Zhuang, Y.-K. Wang, Y.-C. Chang, J. Liu, and C.-T. Lin, “A
polysomnography,”Frontiersinphysiology,vol.7,p.460,2016. connectivity-awaregraphneuralnetworkforreal-timedrowsinessclas-
[65] A. H. Khandoker, M. Palaniswami, and C. K. Karmakar, “Support sification,” IEEE Transactions on Neural Systems and Rehabilitation
vectormachinesforautomatedrecognitionofobstructivesleepapnea Engineering,vol.PP,pp.1–1,112023.
syndrome from ECG recordings,” IEEE Trans. Inf. Technol. Biomed., [84] M. Duvinage, T. Castermans, M. Petieau, T. Hoellinger, G. Cheron,
vol.13,no.1,pp.37–48,2009. and T. Dutoit, “Performance of the emotiv epoc headset for p300-
[66] G.B.Papini,P.Fonseca,J.Margarito,M.M.vanGilst,S.Overeem, basedapplications,”Biomedicalengineeringonline,vol.12,pp.1–15,
J.W.M.Bergmans,andR.Vullings,“OnthegeneralizabilityofECG- 2013.
based obstructive sleep apnea monitoring: merits and limitations of [85] M.Golz,D.Sommer,M.Chen,U.Trutschel,andD.Mandic,“Feature
the apnea-ecg database,” in 40th Annual International Conference of fusion for the detection of microsleep events,” The Journal of VLSI
theIEEEEngineeringinMedicineandBiologySociety,EMBC2018, Signal Processing Systems for Signal, Image, and Video Technology,
Honolulu,HI,USA,July18-21,2018,pp.6022–6025,IEEE,2018. vol.49,pp.329–342,2007.
[67] A. Dharma, P. Sihombing, H. Mawengkang, S. Efendi, and A. R. [86] M. A. Carskadon, Encyclopedia of sleep and dreaming. Macmillan
Crispin, “Development and evaluation of a portable ECG monitoring PublishingCo,Inc,1993.
systemforautomatedclassificationofnormalandabnormalECGsignal [87] A.A.ofSleepMedicineetal.,“Economicburdenofundiagnosedsleep
usingrandomforestwithxgboost,”in29thInternationalConferenceon apneainusisnearly$150bperyear,”2016.
Telecommunications,ICT2023,Toba,Indonesia,November8-9,2023, [88] R. L. DeHart, “The twenty-four hour society: Understanding human
pp.1–5,IEEE,2023. limitsinaworldthatneversleeps,”JAMA,vol.270,no.18,pp.2230–
[68] S.RamasamyandA.Balan,“WearablesensorsforECGmeasurement: 2230,1993.
areview,”SensorReview,vol.38,no.4,pp.412–419,2018. [89] M. Golz, D. Sommer, A. Seyfarth, U. Trutschel, and M. Moore-Ede,
[69] H.Li,Z.An,S.Zuo,W.Zhu,Z.Zhang,S.Zhang,C.Zhang,W.Song, “Application of vector-based neural networks for the recognition of
Q. Mao, Y. Mu, E. Li, and J. D. P. Garc´ıa, “Artificial intelligence- beginningmicrosleepepisodeswithaneyetrackingsystem,”Computa-
enabled ECG algorithm based on improved residual network for tionalIntelligence:Methods&Applications,pp.130–134,2001.
wearableECG,”Sensors,vol.21,no.18,p.6043,2021. [90] N.Pham,T.Dinh,Z.Raghebi,T.Kim,N.Bui,P.Nguyen,H.Truong,
[70] M.Ahmed,S.Masood,M.Ahmad,andA.A.A.El-Latif,“Intelligent F.Banaei-Kashani,A.Halbower,T.Dinh,etal.,“Wake:abehind-the-
driver drowsiness detection for traffic safety based on multi CNN ear wearable system for microsleep detection,” in Proceedings of the
deepmodelandfacialsubsampling,”IEEETrans.Intell.Transp.Syst., 18th International Conference on Mobile Systems, Applications, and
vol.23,no.10,pp.19743–19752,2022. Services,pp.404–418,2020.
[71] M. C. Uchida, R. Carvalho, V. D. Tessutti, R. F. P. Bacurau, H. J. [91] A. Chougule, J. Shah, V. Chamola, and S. Kanhere, “Enabling safe
Coelho-Ju´nior, L. P. Capelo, H. P. Ramos, M. C. d. Santos, L. F. M. ITS:EEG-Basedmicrosleepdetectioninvanets,”IEEETransactionson
Teixeira, and P. H. Marchetti, “Identification of muscle fatigue by IntelligentTransportationSystems,vol.24,no.12,pp.15773–15783,
trackingfacialexpressions,”PLoSOne,vol.13,no.12,p.e0208834, 2023.
2018. [92] Z.Cao,C.-H.Chuang,J.-K.King,andC.-T.Lin,“Multi-channelEEG
[72] M.A.Khan,T.Nawaz,U.S.Khan,A.Hamza,andN.Rashid,“IoT- recordings during a sustained-attention driving task,” Scientific data,
Based Non-Intrusive automated driver drowsiness monitoring frame- vol.6,no.1,p.19,2019.
work for logistics and public transport applications to enhance road [93] K. T. Chui, K. F. Tsang, H. R. Chi, B. W. Ling, and C. K. Wu,
safety,”IEEEAccess,vol.11,pp.14385–14397,2023. “An accurate ECG-based transportation safety drowsiness detection
[73] R.Katmah,F.Al-Shargie,U.Tariq,F.Babiloni,F.Al-Mughairbi,and scheme,”IEEETrans.Ind.Informatics,vol.12,no.4,pp.1438–1452,
H.Al-Nashash,“Areviewonmentalstressassessmentmethodsusing 2016.
EEGsignals,”Sensors,vol.21,no.15,p.5043,2021. [94] T.Takalokastari,S.-J.Jung,D.-D.Lee,andW.-Y.Chung,“Realtime
[74] I.Stancin,M.Cifrek,andA.Jovic,“AreviewofEEGsignalfeatures drowsiness detection by a WSN based wearable ecg measurement
andtheirapplicationindriverdrowsinessdetectionsystems,”Sensors, system,”JournalofSensorScienceandTechnology,vol.20,112011.
vol.21,no.11,p.3786,2021. [95] C. Meyer, J. F. Gavela, and M. Harris, “Combining algorithms in
[75] Y.Ming,D.Wu,Y.Wang,Y.Shi,andC.Lin,“EEG-baseddrowsiness automaticdetectionofQRScomplexesinECGsignals,”IEEETrans.
estimation for driving safety using Deep Q-Learning,” IEEE Trans. Inf.Technol.Biomed.,vol.10,no.3,pp.468–475,2006.
Emerg.Top.Comput.Intell.,vol.5,no.4,pp.583–594,2021. [96] N.R.Ada˜oMartins,S.Annaheim,C.M.Spengler,andR.M.Rossi,
[76] S. Chaabene, B. Bouaziz, A. Boudaya, A. Ho¨kelmann, A. Ammar, “Fatigue monitoring through wearables: A state-of-the-art review,”
andL.Chaaˆri,“Convolutionalneuralnetworkfordrowsinessdetection FrontiersinPhysiology,vol.12,2021.
usingEEGsignals,”Sensors,vol.21,no.5,p.1734,2021. [97] T.SherbakovaandO.Osipova,“Theanalysisofanelectrocardiosignal
[77] Q. Massoz, T. Langohr, C. Franc¸ois, and J. G. Verly, “The ULg inasystemofdatatransmissionincontroloffice,”in2015International
multimodality drowsiness database (called DROZY) and examples of ConferenceonAntennaTheoryandTechniques(ICATT),pp.1–2,2015.
use,” in 2016 IEEE Winter Conference on Applications of Computer [98] J.AchtenandA.E.Jeukendrup,“Heartratemonitoring:applications
Vision,WACV2016,LakePlacid,NY,USA,March7-10,2016,pp.1–7, andlimitations,”Sportsmedicine,vol.33,pp.517–538,2003.
IEEEComputerSociety,2016. [99] S.Weise,J.Ong,N.A.Tesler,S.Kim,andW.T.Roth,“Worriedsleep:
[78] J. Cui, Z. Lan, T. Zheng, Y. Liu, O. Sourina, L. Wang, and 24-h monitoring in high and low worriers,” Biological psychology,
W. Mu¨ller-Wittig, “Subject-independent drowsiness recognition from vol.94,no.1,pp.61–70,2013.
single-channel EEG with an interpretable CNN-LSTM model,” in [100] V. A. Zernov, E. V. Lobanova, E. V. Likhacheva, L. R. Nikolaeva,
International Conference on Cyberworlds, CW 2021, Caen, France, D.D.Dymarchuk,D.S.Yesenin,N.V.Mizin,A.S.Ognev,andM.Y.
September 28-30, 2021 (A. Sourin, C. Rosenberger, and O. Sourina, Rudenko, “Cardiometric fingerprints of various human ego states,”
eds.),pp.201–208,IEEE,2021. Cardiometry,2019.
[79] C. Lee and J. An, “LSTM-CNN model of drowsiness detection from [101] K.Ke,M.R.Zulman,H.Wu,Y.Huang,andJ.Thiagarajan,“Drowsi-
multiple consciousness states acquired by eeg,” Expert Systems with ness detection system using heartbeat rate in android-based handheld
Applications,vol.213,p.119032,2023. devices,”inFirstInternationalConferenceonMultimediaandImage
[80] J.R.Paulo,G.Pires,andU.J.Nunes,“Cross-subjectzerocalibration Processing, ICMIP 2016, Bandar Seri Begawan, Brunei Darussalam,
driver’sdrowsinessdetection:Exploringspatiotemporalimageencod- June1-3,2016,pp.99–103,IEEE,2016.
ing of EEG signals for convolutional neural network classification,” [102] K. Fujiwara, E. Abe, K. Kamata, C. Nakayama, Y. Suzuki, T. Ya-
IEEETransactionsonNeuralSystemsandRehabilitationEngineering, makawa, T. Hiraoka, M. Kano, Y. Sumi, F. Masuda, M. Matsuo, and
vol.29,pp.905–915,2021. H.Kadotani,“Heartratevariability-baseddriverdrowsinessdetection21
anditsvalidationwithEEG,”IEEETrans.Biomed.Eng.,vol.66,no.6, [121] R.Fusek,“Pupillocalizationusinggeodesicdistance,”inAdvancesin
pp.1769–1778,2019. VisualComputing-13thInternationalSymposium,ISVC2018,LasVe-
[103] F. L. Mannering and L. L. Grodsky, “Statistical analysis of motor- gas,NV,USA,November19-21,2018,Proceedings(G.Bebis,R.Boyle,
cyclists’ perceived accident risk,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, B. Parvin, D. Koracin, M. Turek, S. Ramalingam, K. Xu, S. Lin,
vol.27,no.1,pp.21–31,1995. B. Alsallakh, J. Yang, E. Cuervo, and J. Ventura, eds.), vol. 11241
[104] H.Ospina-Mateus,L.A.Q.Jime´nez,F.J.Lo´pez-Valde´s,S.B.Garcia, ofLectureNotesinComputerScience,pp.433–444,Springer,2018.
L. H. Barrero, and S. S. Sana, “Extraction of decision rules using [122] C. Yang, Z. Yang, W. Li, and J. See, “Fatigueview: A multi-camera
genetic algorithms and simulated annealing for prediction of severity video dataset for vision-based drowsiness detection,” IEEE Trans.
of traffic accidents by motorcyclists,” J. Ambient Intell. Humaniz. Intell.Transp.Syst.,vol.24,no.1,pp.233–246,2023.
Comput.,vol.12,no.11,pp.10051–10072,2021. [123] C. Chiou, W. Wang, S. Lu, C. Huang, P. Chung, and Y. Lai, “Driver
[105] F.Fahrurrasyid,G.I.Hapsari,L.Meisaroh,andG.A.Mutiara,“Smart monitoring using sparse representation with part-based temporal face
helmet GPS-based for heartbeat drowsiness detection and location descriptors,”IEEETrans.Intell.Transp.Syst.,vol.21,no.1,pp.346–
tracking,” Journal of Biomimetics, Biomaterials and Biomedical En- 361,2020.
gineering,vol.55,pp.226–235,42022. [124] M. Martin, A. Roitberg, M. Haurilet, M. Horne, S. Reiß, M. Voit,
[106] S.Heydari,A.Ayatollahi,A.Najafi,andM.Poorjafari,“Detectionof and R. Stiefelhagen, “Drive&act: A multi-modal dataset for fine-
drowsinessusingthepulseratevariabilityoffinger,”SNComput.Sci., graineddriverbehaviorrecognitioninautonomousvehicles,”in2019
vol.3,no.5,p.359,2022. IEEE/CVFInternationalConferenceonComputerVision,ICCV2019,
[107] G. Lenis, P. Reichensperger, D. Sommer, C. Heinze, M. Golz, and Seoul,Korea(South),October27-November2,2019,pp.2801–2810,
O. Do¨ssel, “Detection of microsleep events in a car driving simula- IEEE,2019.
tion study using electrocardiographic features,” Current Directions in [125] J. D. Ortega, N. Kose, P. Can˜as, M. Chao, A. Unnervik, M. Nieto,
BiomedicalEngineering,vol.2,no.1,pp.283–287,2016. O.Otaegui,andL.Salgado,“DMD:Alarge-scalemulti-modaldriver
[108] M.M.Hasan,C.N.Watling,andG.S.Larue,“Validationandinterpre- monitoring dataset for attention and alertness analysis,” in Computer
Vision-ECCV2020Workshops-Glasgow,UK,August23-28,2020,
tationofamultimodaldrowsinessdetectionsystemusingexplainable
machinelearning,”ComputerMethodsandProgramsinBiomedicine, Proceedings,PartIV(A.BartoliandA.Fusiello,eds.),vol.12538of
vol.243,p.107925,2024.
LectureNotesinComputerScience,pp.387–405,Springer,2020.
[126] E. K. Yılmaz and M. A. Akcayol, “Sust-ddd: A real-drive dataset
[109] S.BakheetandA.Al-Hamadi,“Aframeworkforinstantaneousdriver
for driver drowsiness detection,” in Conference of Open Innovations
drowsiness detection based on improved HOG features and na¨ıve
Association(FRUCT),vol.6,2022.
bayesianclassification,”BrainSciences,vol.11,no.2,2021.
[127] S.A.El-Nabi,W.El-Shafai,E.M.El-Rabaie,K.F.Ramadan,F.E.A.
[110] M. Vijay, N. N. Vinayak, M. Nunna, and N. Subramanyam, “Real-
El-Samie,andS.Mohsen,“Machinelearninganddeeplearningtech-
time driver drowsiness detection using facial action units,” in 25th
niquesfordriverfatigueanddrowsinessdetection:areview,”Multim.
InternationalConferenceonPattern Recognition,ICPR2020,Virtual
ToolsAppl.,vol.83,no.3,pp.9441–9477,2024.
Event / Milan, Italy, January 10-15, 2021, pp. 10113–10119, IEEE,
[128] S. Saurav, P. S. Gidde, R. Saini, and S. Singh, “Real-time eye
2020.
state recognition using dual convolutional neural network ensemble,”
[111] J.Yu,S.Park,S.Lee,andM.Jeon,“Representationlearning,sceneun-
Journal of Real Time Image Process., vol. 19, no. 3, pp. 607–622,
derstanding,andfeaturefusionfordrowsinessdetection,”inComputer
2022.
Vision-ACCV2016Workshops-ACCV2016InternationalWorkshops,
[129] Z.Hu,C.Lv,P.Hang,C.Huang,andY.Xing,“Data-drivenestimation
Taipei,Taiwan,November20-24,2016,RevisedSelectedPapers,Part
ofdriverattentionusingcalibration-freeeyegazeandscenefeatures,”
III(C.Chen,J.Lu,andK.Ma,eds.),vol.10118ofLectureNotesin
IEEETrans.Ind.Electron.,vol.69,no.2,pp.1800–1808,2022.
ComputerScience,pp.165–177,Springer,2016.
[130] Y.Ed-Doughmi,N.Idrissi,andY.Hbali,“Real-timesystemfordriver
[112] C. Weng, Y. Lai, and S. Lai, “Driver drowsiness detection via a
fatiguedetectionbasedonarecurrentneuronalnetwork,”J.Imaging,
hierarchical temporal deep belief network,” in Computer Vision -
vol.6,no.3,p.8,2020.
ACCV2016Workshops-ACCV2016InternationalWorkshops,Taipei,
[131] F. Song, X. Tan, X. Liu, and S. Chen, “Eyes closeness detection
Taiwan, November 20-24, 2016, Revised Selected Papers, Part III
from still images with multi-scale histograms of principal oriented
(C. Chen, J. Lu, and K. Ma, eds.), vol. 10118 of Lecture Notes in
gradients,”PatternRecognit.,vol.47,no.9,pp.2825–2838,2014.
ComputerScience,pp.117–133,Springer,2016.
[132] T. Drutarovsky and A. Fogelton, “Eye blink detection using variance
[113] N. N. Pandey and N. B. Muppalaneni, “Dumodds: Dual modeling
of motion vectors,” in Computer Vision - ECCV 2014 Workshops -
approachfordrowsinessdetectionbasedonspatialandspatio-temporal
Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-7 and 12, 2014, Proceedings, Part
features,”EngineeringApplicationsofArtificialIntelligence,vol.119,
III (L. Agapito, M. M. Bronstein, and C. Rother, eds.), vol. 8927 of
p.105759,2023.
LectureNotesinComputerScience,pp.436–448,Springer,2014.
[114] G.S.Krishna,K.Supriya,J.Vardhan,andM.R.K,“Visiontransform- [133] Y. Xie, K. Chen, and Y. L. Murphey, “Real-time and robust driver
ersandYoloV5baseddriverdrowsinessdetectionframework,”CoRR, yawning detection with deep neural networks,” in IEEE Symposium
vol.abs/2209.01401,2022. Series on Computational Intelligence, SSCI 2018, Bangalore, India,
[115] R. Tamanani, R. Muresan, and A. Al-Dweik, “Estimation of driver November18-21,2018,pp.532–538,IEEE,2018.
vigilance status using real-time facial expression and deep learning,” [134] S. Kawato and J. Ohya, “Real-time detection of nodding and head-
IEEESensorsLetters,vol.5,no.5,pp.1–4,2021. shaking by directly detecting and tracking the ”between-eyes”,” in
[116] J.Chen,Z.Fang,J.Wang,J.Chen,andG.Yin,“Amulti-viewdriver 4th IEEE International Conference on Automatic Face and Gesture
drowsiness detection method using transfer learning and population- Recognition(FG2000),26-30March2000,Grenoble,France,pp.40–
basedsamplingstrategy,”in2022IEEE25thInternationalConference 45,IEEEComputerSociety,2000.
onIntelligentTransportationSystems(ITSC),pp.3386–3391,2022. [135] M. Tan, G. Ni, X. Liu, S. Zhang, X. Wu, Y. Wang, and R. Zeng,
[117] Y. Lu, C. Liu, F. Chang, H. Liu, and H. Huan, “JHPFA-Net: Joint “Bidirectional posture-appearance interaction network for driver be-
head pose and facial action network for driver yawning detection havior recognition,” IEEE Trans. Intell. Transp. Syst., vol. 23, no. 8,
across arbitrary poses in videos,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent pp.13242–13254,2022.
TransportationSystems,vol.24,no.11,pp.11850–11863,2023. [136] T. Abbas, S. F. Ali, M. A. Mohammed, A. Z. Khan, M. J. Awan,
[118] L. Mou, C. Zhou, P. Xie, P. Zhao, R. Jain, W. Gao, and B. Yin, A. Majumdar, and O. Thinnukool, “Deep learning approach based
“Isotropicself-supervisedlearningfordriverdrowsinessdetectionwith on residual neural network and svm classifier for driver’s distraction
attention-basedmultimodalfusion,”IEEETransactionsonMultimedia, detection,”AppliedSciences,vol.12,no.13,p.6626,2022.
vol.25,pp.529–542,2021. [137] I. Kotseruba and J. K. Tsotsos, “Attention for vision-based assistive
[119] R. Ghoddoosian, M. Galib, and V. Athitsos, “A realistic dataset and and automated driving: A review of algorithms and datasets,” IEEE
baseline temporal model for early drowsiness detection,” in IEEE Trans.Intell.Transp.Syst.,vol.23,no.11,pp.19907–19928,2022.
Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition Workshops, [138] C.B.S.Maior,M.J.dasChagasMoura,J.M.M.Santana,andI.D.
CVPR Workshops 2019, Long Beach, CA, USA, June 16-20, 2019, Lins, “Real-time classification for autonomous drowsiness detection
pp.178–187,ComputerVisionFoundation/IEEE,2019. usingeyeaspectratio,”ExpertSyst.Appl.,vol.158,p.113505,2020.
[120] S. Abtahi, M. Omidyeganeh, S. Shirmohammadi, and B. Hariri, [139] M.Papakostas,K.Das,M.Abouelenien,R.Mihalcea,andM.Burzo,
“YawDD: a yawning detection dataset,” in Multimedia Systems Con- “Distracted and drowsy driving modeling using deep physiological
ference2014,MMSys’14,Singapore,March19-21,2014(R.Zimmer- representations and multitask learning,” Applied Sciences, vol. 11,
mann,ed.),pp.24–28,ACM,2014. no.1,2021.22
[140] Y. Albadawi, A. A. Redhaei, and M. Takruri, “Real-time machine CVPR 2020, Seattle, WA, USA, June 13-19, 2020, pp. 5202–5211,
learning-based driver drowsiness detection using visual features,” J. ComputerVisionFoundation/IEEE,2020.
Imaging,vol.9,no.5,p.91,2023. [161] Z.Zhang,P.Luo,C.C.Loy,andX.Tang,“Faciallandmarkdetection
[141] C.J.deNaurois,C.Bourdin,A.Stratulat,E.Diaz,andJ.-L.Vercher, by deep multi-task learning,” in Computer Vision - ECCV 2014
“Detection and prediction of driver drowsiness using artificial neural - 13th European Conference, Zurich, Switzerland, September 6-12,
network models,” Accident Analysis & Prevention, vol. 126, pp. 95– 2014, Proceedings, Part VI (D. J. Fleet, T. Pajdla, B. Schiele, and
104, 2019. 10th International Conference on Managing Fatigue: T.Tuytelaars,eds.),vol.8694ofLectureNotesinComputerScience,
ManagingFatiguetoImproveSafety,Wellness,andEffectiveness”. pp.94–108,Springer,2014.
[142] G. Li and W. Chung, “Estimation of eye closure degree using EEG [162] F.Boutros,N.Damer,andA.Kuijper,“Quantface:Towardslightweight
sensors and its application in driver drowsiness detection,” Sensors, facerecognitionbysyntheticdatalow-bitquantization,”in26thInter-
vol.14,no.9,pp.17491–17515,2014. national Conference on Pattern Recognition, ICPR 2022, Montreal,
[143] Y. Cui and D. Wu, “EEG-based driver drowsiness estimation using QC,Canada,August21-25,2022,pp.855–862,IEEE,2022.
convolutional neural networks,” in Neural Information Processing: [163] F. Boutros, P. Siebke, M. Klemt, N. Damer, F. Kirchbuchner, and
24th International Conference, ICONIP 2017, Guangzhou, China, A.Kuijper,“Pocketnet:Extremelightweightfacerecognitionnetwork
November14-18,2017,Proceedings,PartII24,pp.822–832,Springer, usingneuralarchitecturesearchandmultistepknowledgedistillation,”
2017. IEEEAccess,vol.10,pp.46823–46833,2022.
[144] S. Hachisuka, “Human and vehicle-driver drowsiness detection by [164] N. Damer, F. Boutros, M. Su¨ßmilch, M. Fang, F. Kirchbuchner, and
facialexpression,”in2013InternationalConferenceonBiometricsand A. Kuijper, “Masked face recognition: Human versus machine,” IET
KanseiEngineering,pp.320–326,2013. Biom.,vol.11,no.5,pp.512–528,2022.
[145] M.Dua,Shakshi,R.Singla,S.Raj,andA.Jangra,“DeepCNNmodels- [165] F.Boutros,N.Damer,F.Kirchbuchner,andA.Kuijper,“Self-restrained
based ensemble approach to driver drowsiness detection,” Neural triplet loss for accurate masked face recognition,” Pattern Recognit.,
Comput.Appl.,vol.33,no.8,pp.3155–3168,2021. vol.124,p.108473,2022.
[146] C. Wei, Y. Lin, Y. Wang, C. Lin, and T. Jung, “A subject-transfer [166] M. Ngxande, J. Tapamo, and M. Burke, “Bias remediation in driver
framework for obviating inter- and intra-subject variability in EEG- drowsiness detection systems using generative adversarial networks,”
baseddrowsinessdetection,”NeuroImage,vol.174,pp.407–419,2018. IEEEAccess,vol.8,pp.55592–55601,2020.
[147] E. Perkins, C. Sitaula, M. Burke, and F. Marzbanrad, “Challenges of [167] J. Wo¨rle, B. Metz, and A. Prill, “How to induce drowsiness when
driverdrowsinessprediction:Theremainingstepstoimplementation,” testing driver drowsiness and attention warning (DDAW) systems,”
IEEETransactionsonIntelligentVehicles,2022. IEEETransactionsonIntelligentTransportationSystems,vol.24,no.5,
[148] S. Abtahi, B. Hariri, and S. Shirmohammadi, “Driver drowsiness pp.4758–4764,2023.
monitoring based on yawning detection,” in 2011 IEEE International [168] M.Golz,D.Sommer,M.Holzbrecher,andT.Schnupp,“Detectionand
Instrumentation and Measurement Technology Conference, pp. 1–4, predictionofdriver’smicrosleepevents,”inProc14thIntConfRoad
IEEE,2011. SafetyonFourContinents,vol.11,Citeseer,2007.
[149] A. Ghourabi, H. Ghazouani, and W. Barhoumi, “Driver drowsiness [169] R.Jabbar,K.Al-Khalifa,M.Kharbeche,W.K.M.Alhajyaseen,M.A.
detection based on joint monitoring of yawning, blinking and nod- Jafari,andS.Jiang,“Real-timedriverdrowsinessdetectionforandroid
ding,”in16thIEEEInternationalConferenceonIntelligentComputer applicationusingdeepneuralnetworkstechniques,”inThe9thInter-
Communication and Processing, ICCP 2020, Cluj-Napoca, Romania, nationalConferenceonAmbientSystems,NetworksandTechnologies
September 3-5, 2020 (S. Nedevschi, R. Potolea, and R. R. Slavescu, (ANT2018)/The8thInternationalConferenceonSustainableEnergy
eds.),pp.407–414,IEEE,2020. InformationTechnology(SEIT2018)/AffiliatedWorkshops,May8-11,
[150] E. Vural, M. C¸etin, A. Erc¸il, G. Littlewort, M. S. Bartlett, and J. R. 2018,Porto,Portugal(E.M.ShakshukiandA.Yasar,eds.),vol.130
Movellan,“Drowsydriverdetectionthroughfacialmovementanalysis,” ofProcediaComputerScience,pp.400–407,Elsevier,2018.
in Human-Computer Interaction, IEEE International Workshop, HCI [170] R.Jabbar,K.Al-Khalifa,M.Kharbeche,W.K.M.Alhajyaseen,M.A.
2007, Rio de Janeiro, Brazil, October 20, 2007, Proceedings (M. S. Jafari,andS.Jiang,“Real-timedriverdrowsinessdetectionforandroid
Lew, N. Sebe, T. S. Huang, and E. M. Bakker, eds.), vol. 4796 of applicationusingdeepneuralnetworkstechniques,”inThe9thInter-
LectureNotesinComputerScience,pp.6–18,Springer,2007. nationalConferenceonAmbientSystems,NetworksandTechnologies
[151] H. Yang, L. Liu, W. Min, X. Yang, and X. Xiong, “Driver yawning (ANT2018)/The8thInternationalConferenceonSustainableEnergy
detection based on subtle facial action recognition,” IEEE Trans. InformationTechnology(SEIT2018)/AffiliatedWorkshops,May8-11,
Multim.,vol.23,pp.572–583,2021. 2018,Porto,Portugal(E.M.ShakshukiandA.Yasar,eds.),vol.130
[152] B.Yin,X.Fan,andY.Sun,“Multiscaledynamicfeaturesbaseddriver ofProcediaComputerScience,pp.400–407,Elsevier,2018.
fatiguedetection,”Int.J.PatternRecognit.Artif.Intell.,vol.23,no.3, [171] W.Kong,W.Lin,F.Babiloni,S.Hu,andG.Borghini,“Investigating
pp.575–589,2009. driver fatigue versus alertness using the granger causality network,”
[153] X. Fan, B. Yin, and Y. Sun, “Yawning detection based on gabor Sensors,vol.15,no.8,pp.19181–19198,2015.
wavelets and LDA,” Journal of Beijing Univ Technol, vol. 35, no. 3, [172] F.Boutros,V.Struc,J.Fie´rrez,andN.Damer,“Syntheticdataforface
pp.409–413,2009. recognition: Current state and future prospects,” Image Vis. Comput.,
[154] T.Brandt,R.Stemmer,andA.Rakotonirainy,“Affordablevisualdriver vol.135,p.104688,2023.
monitoring system for fatigue and monotony,” in Proceedings of the [173] F. Boutros, J. H. Grebe, A. Kuijper, and N. Damer, “Idiff-face:
IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man & Cybernetics: The Synthetic-based face recognition through fizzy identity-conditioned
Hague,Netherlands,10-13October2004,pp.6451–6456,IEEE,2004. diffusionmodels,”inIEEE/CVFInternationalConferenceonComputer
[155] R.C.Chang,C.Wang,W.Chen,andC.Chiu,“Drowsinessdetection Vision, ICCV 2023, Paris, France, October 1-6, 2023, pp. 19593–
systembasedonPERCLOSandfacialphysiologicalsignal,”Sensors, 19604,IEEE,2023.
vol.22,no.14,p.5380,2022. [174] S. Debbarma and S. Bhadra, “Signal decomposition method with
[156] L.Wang,X.Wu,B.Ba,andW.Dong,“Avision-basedmethodtodetect sensor-fusionforreducingmotionartifactsinintra-oralEEG,”in2023
perclos features,” Computer Engineering & Science, vol. 6, p. 017, IEEESENSORS,Vienna,Austria,October29-Nov.1,2023,pp.1–4,
2006. IEEE,2023.
[157] Z. Zhao, N. Zhou, L. Zhang, H. Yan, Y. Xu, and Z. Zhang, [175] M. S. Hossain, M. E. H. Chowdhury, M. B. I. Reaz, S. H. M. Ali,
“Driver fatigue detection based on convolutional neural networks A. A. A. Bakar, S. Kiranyaz, A. Khandakar, M. Alhatou, R. Habib,
usingEM-CNN,”Comput.Intell.Neurosci.,vol.2020,pp.7251280:1– and M. M. Hossain, “Motion artifacts correction from single-channel
7251280:11,2020. EEG and fnirs signals using novel wavelet packet decomposition in
[158] L.Chen,G.Xin,Y.Liu,andJ.Huang,“Driverfatiguedetectionbased combination with canonical correlation analysis,” Sensors, vol. 22,
onfacialkeypointsandLSTM,”Secur.Commun.Networks,vol.2021, no.9,p.3169,2022.
pp.5383573:1–5383573:9,2021. [176] P. Gajbhiye, R. K. Tripathy, A. Bhattacharyya, and R. B. Pachori,
[159] K. Zhang, Z. Zhang, Z. Li, and Y. Qiao, “Joint face detection and “Novelapproachesfortheremovalofmotionartifactfromeegrecord-
alignment using multitask cascaded convolutional networks,” IEEE ings,”IEEESensorsJournal,vol.19,no.22,pp.10600–10608,2019.
SignalProcess.Lett.,vol.23,no.10,pp.1499–1503,2016. [177] J.-M.Lee,D.-J.Kim,I.-Y.Kim,K.-S.Park,andS.I.Kim,“Detrended
[160] J. Deng, J. Guo, E. Ververas, I. Kotsia, and S. Zafeiriou, “Reti- fluctuationanalysisofeeginsleepapneausingmit/bihpolysomnogra-
naface: Single-shot multi-level face localisation in the wild,” in 2020 phydata,”Computersinbiologyandmedicine,vol.32,no.1,pp.37–
IEEE/CVF Conference on Computer Vision and Pattern Recognition, 47,2002.23
[178] Q. Ji, Z. Zhu, and P. Lan, “Real-time nonintrusive monitoring and FadiBoutrosisascientificresearcherattheFraun-
predictionofdriverfatigue,”IEEETrans.Veh.Technol.,vol.53,no.4, hofer IGD and a principal investigator at the Na-
pp.1052–1068,2004. tional Research Center for Applied Cybersecurity
[179] H. U. R. Siddiqui, A. A. Saleem, R. Brown, B. Bademci, E. Lee, ATHENE, Germany. Fadi received his Ph.D. in
F. Rustam, and S. E. M. Dudley, “Non-invasive driver drowsiness computersciencefromTUDarmstadt(2022)anda
detectionsystem,”Sensors,vol.21,no.14,p.4833,2021. master’s degree in ”Distributed Software Systems”
[180] E. Zilberg, D. Burton, M. Xu, M. Karrar, and S. Lal, “Methodology fromTUDarmstadt(2019).Also,heisparticipating
and initial analysis results for development of non-invasive and hy- in the Software Campus program, a management
brid driver drowsiness detection systems,” in Advances in Broadband program of the German Federal Ministry of Edu-
CommunicationandNetworks,pp.309–328,RiverPublishers,2022. cationandResearch(BMBF).Heauthoredandco-
[181] G. Schalk, “Decoding details of human functions using electrocor- authoredseveralconferenceandjournalpapers.His
ticography,”in4thInternationalWinterConferenceonBrain-Computer main research interests lie in the fields of biometrics, machine learning,
Interface,BCI2016,GangwonProvince,SouthKorea,February22-24, syntheticdata,andefficientdeeplearning.Forhisscientificwork,hereceived
2016,pp.1–2,IEEE,2016. severalawards,includingtheCAST-Fo¨rderpreis2019award,theIJCB2022
[182] J.Ma,Y.L.Murphey,andH.Zhao,“Realtimedrowsinessdetection QualcommAudienceChoiceAward,andthe2022EABBiometricsIndustry
basedonlateraldistanceusingwavelettransformandneuralnetwork,” Award from the European Association for Biometrics (EAB) for his Ph.D.
inIEEESymposiumSeriesonComputationalIntelligence,SSCI2015, dissertation.
CapeTown,SouthAfrica,December7-10,2015,pp.411–418,IEEE,
2015.
[183] J. Zhao, C. Rong, C. Lin, and X. Dang, “Multivariate time series
data imputation using attention-based mechanism,” Neurocomputing,
vol.542,p.126238,2023. Chin-Teng Lin (Fellow, IEEE) received the
[184] S.Ryu,M.Kim,andH.Kim,“Denoisingautoencoder-basedmissing B.Sc. degree from National Chiao-Tung University
value imputation for smart meters,” IEEE Access, vol. 8, pp. 40656– (NCTU), Taiwan in 1986, and holds Master’s and
40666,2020. PhDdegreesinElectricalEngineeringfromPurdue
[185] I. G. Daza, L. M. Bergasa, S. Bronte, J. J. Yebes, J. Almaza´n, and University, USA, received in 1989 and 1992, re-
R. Arroyo, “Fusion of optimized indicators from advanced driver spectively.Heiscurrentlyadistinguishedprofessor
assistancesystems(ADAS)fordriverdrowsinessdetection,”Sensors, atSchoolofComputerScienceandDirectorofthe
vol.14,no.1,pp.1106–1131,2014. HumanCentricAI(HAI)CentreandCo-Directorof
[186] B.Cheng,W.Zhang,Y.Lin,R.Feng,andX.Zhang,“Driverdrowsi- theAustralianArtificialIntelligenceInstitute(AAII)
nessdetectionbasedonmultisourceinformation,”HumanFactorsand within the Faculty of Engineering and Information
Ergonomics in Manufacturing & Service Industries, vol. 22, no. 5, TechnologyattheUniversityofTechnologySydney,
pp.450–467,2012. Australia.HeisalsoanHonoraryChairProfessorofElectricalandComputer
[187] J.Gwak,A.Hirao,andM.Shino,“Aninvestigationofearlydetection Engineering at NCTU. For his contributions to biologically inspired infor-
ofdriverdrowsinessusingensemblemachinelearningbasedonhybrid mation systems, Prof Lin was awarded Fellowship with the IEEE in 2005,
sensing,”AppliedSciences,vol.10,no.8,p.2890,2020. and with the International Fuzzy Systems Association (IFSA) in 2012. He
[188] S.Samiee,S.Azadi,R.Kazemi,A.Nahvi,andA.Eichberger,“Data receivedtheIEEEFuzzySystemsPioneerAwardin2017.Hehasheldnotable
fusiontodevelopadriverdrowsinessdetectionsystemwithrobustness positionsaseditor-in-chiefofIEEETransactionsonFuzzySystemsfrom2011
tosignalloss,”Sensors,vol.14,no.9,pp.17832–17847,2014. to 2016; seats on Board of Governors for the IEEE Circuits and Systems
[189] Z.Yang,R.O.Sinnott,J.Bailey,andQ.Ke,“Asurveyofautomated (CAS)Society(2005-2008),IEEESystems,Man,Cybernetics(SMC)Society
data augmentation algorithms for deep learning-based image classi- (2003-2005),IEEEComputationalIntelligenceSociety(2008-2010);Chairof
fication tasks,” Knowledge and Information Systems, vol. 65, no. 7, theIEEETaipeiSection(2009-2010);ChairofIEEECISAwardsCommittee
pp.2805–2861,2023. (2022, 2023); Distinguished Lecturer with the IEEE CAS Society (2003-
[190] B. P. Nayak, S. Kar, A. Routray, and A. K. Padhi, “A biomedical 2005)andtheCISSociety(2015-2017);ChairoftheIEEECISDistinguished
approach to retrieve information on driver’s fatigue by integrating Lecturer Program Committee (2018-2019); Deputy Editor-in-Chief of IEEE
eeg, ecg and blood biomarkers during simulated driving session,” in Transactions on Circuits and Systems-II (2006-2008); Program Chair of the
2012 4th International Conference on Intelligent Human Computer IEEEInternationalConferenceonSystems,Man,andCybernetics(2005);and
Interaction(IHCI),pp.1–6,IEEE,2012. GeneralChairofthe2011IEEEInternationalConferenceonFuzzySystems.
[191] K.T.Chui,K.F.Tsang,H.R.Chi,B.W.K.Ling,andC.K.Wu,“An Heistheco-authorofNeuralFuzzySystems(Prentice-Hall)andtheauthorof
accurateecg-basedtransportationsafetydrowsinessdetectionscheme,” NeuralFuzzyControlSystemswithStructureandParameterLearning(World
IEEETransactionsonIndustrialInformatics,vol.12,no.4,pp.1438– Scientific). He has published more than 450 journal papers including about
1452,2016. 210 IEEE journal papers in the areas of neural networks, fuzzy systems,
[192] G. M. Mohamed, S. S. Patel, and N. Naicker, “Data augmentation brain-computerinterface,multimediainformationprocessing,cognitiveneuro-
fordeeplearningalgorithmsthatperformdriverdrowsinessdetection,” engineering, and human-machine teaming, that have been cited more than
InternationalJournalofAdvancedComputerScienceandApplications, 36,000times.Hiscurrenth-indexis94,andhisi10-indexis436.
vol.14,pp.233–248,022023.
X. BIOGRAPHYSECTION
Naser Damer (Senior Member, IEEE) received
the Ph.D. degree in computer science from TU
BiyingFureceivedtheB.Sc.degreeandtheM.Sc. Darmstadt in 2018. He is a Senior Researcher
degree in electrical engineering and information with Fraunhofer IGD. He is a Research Area Co-
technologyfromUniversityofKarlsruhe,Germany, Coordinator and a Principal Investigator with the
in 2011 and 2014 respectively. She finished her National Research Center for Applied Cybersecu-
Ph.D. in 2020 in informatics at Technical Univer- rity ATHENE, Germany. He lectures on Human
sity of Darmstadt, Germany, on the topic ”Sensor and Identity-Centric Machine Learning with TU
Applications for Human Activity Recognition in Darmstadt, Germany. His main research interests
Smart Environments”. From 2014 till today, she is lie in the fields of biometrics and human-centric
workingwiththeFraunhoferInstituteforComputer machinelearning.HeservesasanAssociateEditor
Graphics(IGD),Germany.Sheiscurrentlyworking for Pattern Recognition (Elsevier), the Visual Computer (Springer), and the
in the department for Smart Living & Biometric IEEETransactionsonInformationForensicsandSecurity.Herepresentsthe
Technologies.Startingfrom2022,shealsoworksasahalf-timeProfessorin GermanInstituteforStandardization(DIN)intheISO/IECSC37International
InformaticsatHochschuleRheinMainwiththemajor”SmartEnvironments”. Biometrics Standardization Committee. He is a member of the organizing
Herresearchinterestincludesintelligenthumanmachineinteraction,machine teamsofseveralconferences,workshops,andspecialsessions,includingbeing
learning,anddeeplearningforhumanactivityrecognitionwithsensordata. the program co-chair of BIOSIG and a member of the IEEE Biometrics
CouncilservingonitsTechnicalActivitiesCommittee.