1
Antitrust, Amazon, and Algorithmic Auditing
by
Abhisek Dash, Abhijnan Chakraborty, Saptarshi Ghosh, Animesh Mukherjee,
Jens Frankenreiter, Stefan Bechtold and Krishna P. Gummadi∗
March 28, 2024
In digital markets, antitrust law and special regulations aim to ensure that markets
remain competitive despite the dominating role that digital platforms play today in
everyone’slife.Unliketraditionalmarkets,marketparticipantbehavioriseasilyobserv-
able in these markets. We present a series of empirical investigations into the extent
towhichAmazonengagesinpracticesthataretypicallydescribedasself-preferencing.
Wediscusshowthecomputersciencetoolsusedinthispapercanbeusedinaregula-
toryenvironmentthatisbasedonalgorithmicauditingandrequiresregulatingdigital
marketsatscale.
Keywords:Amazon,antitrust,self-preferencing,DigitalMarketsAct,regulatingatscale
JEL classification code: K21,L40,L42
1 Introduction
In digital markets, a small number of digital platforms often mediate transac-
tionsbetweenalargenumberoffirmsontheonesideandmillionsofconsumers
on the other side. The platforms typically benefit from network effects that en-
ablethemtonavigateintwo-sidedmarketsinaprofit-maximizingway.Overthe
last years, policymakers around the world have discussed the extent to which
such platforms should be regulated in order to preserve competition in digital
markets, maintain a free discourse on the Internet, protect the privacy inter-
ests of consumers, and secure the intellectual property rights of authors and
inventors.
∗Dash&Gummadi(correspondingauthors):MaxPlanckInstituteforSoftwareSystems,
Saarbrücken, Germany; Chakraborty: Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, India; Ghosh &
Mukherjee:IndianInstituteofTechnologyKharagpur,India;Frankenreiter:WashingtonUni-
versityinSt.Louis,USA;Bechtold:ETHZurich,Switzerland.Thisresearchissupportedin
part by a European Research Council (ERC) Advanced Grant for the project “Foundations
for Fair Social Computing”, funded under the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Framework
Program(grantagreementno.789373),andbyagrantfromtheMaxPlanckSocietythrough
aMaxPlanckPartnerGroupatIITKharagpur.A.Dashwassupportedbyafellowshipfrom
Tata Consultancy Services for major duration of this research. Excellent research assistance
bySimonaRamenspergerisgratefullyacknowledged.
4202
raM
72
]YC.sc[
1v32681.3042:viXra2
Regulating digital platforms can be challenging. One reason is the fact that
theInternethastorndownnationalbordersandfacilitatedcommunicationand
trade across the globe. While, in principle, the transnational scope of plat-
form activities seems to require a global response, international coordination
mechanisms have often proven ineffective. Against this background, individual
countriesandregionshaveincreasinglyenactedlegalregimestogovernthedig-
ital economy, even though such regulatory activity raises challenging questions
about regulatory “spillovers” (Bradford, 2012, 2020; Frankenreiter, 2022; Peuk-
ert et al., 2022; Davis and Marotta-Wurgler, 2024).
Maybeevenmoreimportantly,regulatorsfaceaproblemofscale.Digitalplat-
forms facilitate billions of transactions between firms and consumers. Google,
for example, processes billion searches and billion advertisement auctions every
day;Facebookconnectsover3billionpeopleeverymonth(Statista,2023a);and
users stream almost 1 billion hours of video on YouTube every day (CloudIn-
come,2023).Thereareabout3.5millionmobileappsontheGooglePlaystore,
about 1.6 million apps on the Apple App store, and about 200 million active
websites (Tambe and Jain, 2024; Statista, 2023b). In this environment, keeping
track of the actions of digital platform can be challenging. While digitization
has led to a drastic decrease in transaction costs and a drastic increase in scale
efficiencies for companies, public authorities have not benefited from similar
efficiency gains when enforcing digital regulations against these companies.
Besides, various characteristic features of digital platforms pose particular
challenges for regulators endeavoring to prevent harmful business practices.
Platformsdonotonlyestablishtherulesgoverninguserinteractions.Theyalso
design the underlying architecture facilitating these interactions. As Lawrence
Lessig famously proclaimed about 25 years ago: “Code is Law” (Lessig, 1999).
On digital platforms, the “code” governing the platforms is written by private
companies, not by the legislator. If a regulator wants to influence digital plat-
forms, it has to deal with these privately created “codes” and often resort to
indirect ways of regulation.
Fromtheperspectiveofindividualusers,digitalplatformsserveasbothgate-
waystoinformationandarchitectsoftheirinteractionspaces.Digitalplatforms
wield considerable influence over what is commonly termed “choice architec-
tures” (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008), the environments in which users navigate
decision-making processes. Extensive research in psychology and related fields
has demonstrated that the ability to manipulate choice architectures can pro-
foundlyshapeuserbehaviorandoutcomes(ThalerandSunstein,2008).Digital
platforms may use technical choice architectures expressed in algorithms to
shape consumer preferences, search behavior and purchase patterns.
These features make it challenging for regulators to tame digital platforms.
For one, designing choice architectures lies at the heart of platforms’ core func-
tions.Choicearchitecturesexistprimarilytofacilitateinteractionsamongplat-
formusers,andaplatform’scommercialsuccessoftenhingesontheeffectiveness
of these choice architectures in engaging and retaining users. Regulators must
therefore carefully consider interventions in platform design and operation, as3
heavy-handedapproachescouldimpedeinnovationandhinderplatforms’agility
in responding to shifting user preferences and market dynamics.
For another, assessing whether a platform utilizes a specific choice archi-
tecture to advance its own interests in improper ways poses a considerable
challenge in its own right, a topic we explore in detail throughout this article.
As we will demonstrate, comparing user interactions within existing choice ar-
chitectures to hypothetical “neutral” alternatives is often impractical, as such
alternatives might simply not exist. In the context of digital marketplaces, for
instance,whatisthebenchmarkagainstwhichtoassesstheplatform’sdecision
to include, among the information displayed to consumers, the total number
of transactions a seller has completed–a feature that may favor larger sellers,
particularlythoseassociatedwiththeplatformprovider?Andevenwhenacom-
parison between an existing choice architecture and a “neutral” alternative is
feasible, distinguishing between design features serving legitimate business ob-
jectives and those potentially serving improper goals is often challenging. For
example, it is not always obvious whether a digital marketplace’s choice archi-
tecture that appears to nudge customers towards products affiliated with the
platform provider is mainly the result of a discrimination of independent com-
petitors or whether it is a response to preferences among consumers for such
products, thereby enhancing the overall customer experience.
In this context, a main challenge is that users’ expressed preferences can be
shaped by and fluctuate with the choice architectures in which users express
and act upon their preferences. Put simply, a way to determine the “true” pref-
erences of consumers might not always be available, as their preferences may
evolve in response to the design of the platforms they interact with. As a con-
sequence of this endogenoneity, assessing whether a design feature aligns with
these preferences can be elusive.
A related aspect is the pervasive role of algorithms in mediating interactions
on online platforms. These algorithms dictate which information is presented
tousersandcansignificantlyinfluencetheiractionspaceatanygivenmoment.
Digital platforms employ a variety of algorithmic systems to facilitate inter-
actions among their diverse user groups. Posts visible to users on social media
platforms,thepriceofferedtodriversacceptingridesonaride-sharingplatform,
or the products displayed to shoppers on Amazon are all determined by such
complex computer programs. Usually, digital platforms keep the precise nature
of the factors that influence the algorithms’ decisions, as well as the way they
are combined, a closely guarded secrets. This opacity renders it challenging for
regulators to understand the factors that shape user experiences and behav-
iors on these platforms, hindering their ability to effectively assess and address
potential risks or harms.
Despite these challenges, the digital nature of the transactions mediated by
digital platforms also offers new avenues for regulatory enforcement. Compared
to traditional markets, market participant behavior is often easier to observe
in these markets. Many digital marketplaces can be accessed by everyone, and
legislators are increasingly establishing data access rights for regulators, re-4
searchersandthewiderpublicthatofferopportunitiestogenerateinsightsinto
the business models of these platforms.
Thatsaid,obtaininginformationaboutbusinessmodelsisusuallynottrivial.
As a first step, a regulator or researcher seeking to assess the operations of a
digital platform with the help of digital tools would typically try to access the
platform through a regular web interface or engage in automated scraping of
the platform’s content. However, interfaces of digital platforms have become
more interactive, oftentimes rendering simple web access insufficient to capture
the inner workings of a digital platform. Digital platforms and markets enabled
by these platforms are also growing more complex, making it harder to gain a
proper understanding of platforms’ business practices.
Inresponse,empiricallyorientedcomputerscienceresearchhasdevelopedvar-
iousapproachestoauditdigitalplatformsoverthelastfewyears.Sandvigetal.
(2014) distinguish between “code audits” (where researchers directly inspect a
copy of the relevant algorithm), “noninvasive user audits” (where users inter-
acting with the platform answer questions about what they did online), “scrap-
ing audits” (where researchers query a platform repeatedly, observing results),
“sockpuppetaudits” (whereresearchersusecomputerprogramstoimpersonate
users), and “crowdsourced audits” (where researchers employ users as testers).
This development points towards a future of algorithmic auditing, where po-
tential adverse effects of algorithmic systems are investigated and evaluated
using algorithmic auditing tools (Sandvig et al., 2014; Bandy, 2021; Metaxa
et al., 2021). “The Answer to the Machine is in the Machine", as Charles Clark
pronounced in the 1990’s (Clark, 1999): As digital platforms are increasingly
relying of algorithmic systems to govern their digital platforms, regulators will
have to resort increasingly to algorithmic systems to audit compliance on these
platforms.
This article explores some of the opportunities and challenges of algorithmic
enforcement, using Amazon as an example. Recently, Amazon’s business poli-
cies and deployed algorithmic systems have come under intense scrutiny due
to Amazon’s vertical integration, or in other words, its involvement in multiple
stages of the production and distribution process for its products and services.
In this article, we present a series of empirical investigations into the extent to
which Amazon engages in practices that are typically described as “preferential
treatment” or “self-preferencing.” In these investigations, we analyze different
features of various choice architectures that Amazon presents to its customers.
We investigate how the service decides the offer that is featured in its Buy Box
(nowcalled“FeaturedOffer”);thedesignfeatureofitspagelistingvariousoffers
for the same product; how it selects products offered to customers that use the
conversational product search technology available through its virtual assistant
technology Alexa; and how it displays results in its related-item recommenda-
tion system.
The purpose of this analysis is not to determine whether all or some of the
practicesweobserveconstituteviolationsofantitrustlawsorspecializedregimes
suchastheEuropeanUnion’sDigitalMarketsAct.Conductingafulllegalanal-5
ysis of Amazon’s business practices is beyond the scope of this paper. Our aim
is to demonstrate how empirical methods originating in computer science can
empowerpolicymakers,regulators,andresearcherstotrackdigitalplatformbe-
havior at a granular level, thereby generating empirical evidence that could
contribute to discussions on how to effectively regulate digital markets. Con-
currently, our discussion underscores how various features of digital platforms
can pose challenges for researchers and regulators in deducing anti-competitive
intent or impact from observed patterns of platform behavior. Specifically, the
case studies presented highlight the considerable challenges involved in assess-
ing whether a platform utilizes a specific choice architecture to advance its own
interests in improper ways.
Our article proceeds as follows. Section 2 introduces the design of Amazon’s
digitalmarketplaceandseveralchoicearchitecturesgoverningthismarketplace.
Section 3 provides an overview of how Amazon’s vertical integration relates
to antitrust and digital market regulation doctrines in the European Union
and the United States. 4 Section presents our empirical observations on four
distincttypesofchoicearchitectures:BuyBox,listingpages,Alexasearch,and
recommendation systems. Section 5 discusses our findings. Section 6 concludes.
2 Amazon and Its Marketplace
Overthelastyears,Amazonhasemergedasthelargestonlinee-commerceplat-
form by connecting millions of sellers across the world to billions of customers
(Saqib, 2023). On the Amazon platform, the different stakeholders can be pri-
marily classified into three categories: (a) sellers on the platform: they rely on
Amazon to sell their products to consumers; (b) customers of the platform:
they rely on Amazon for fulfilling their purchase needs; and (c) the platform
organizationitself:itmediatestheinteractionbetweenthesellersandcostumer.
Due to the enormity and scale at which Amazon operates, Amazon can fa-
cilitate these interactions only by relying on mass-scale automation and on
countless deliberate design choices that determine how sellers can present their
products to customers, and how customers express their preferences in the face
of these results. These design choices result in choice architectures (Johnson
et al., 2012; Mota et al., 2020). Originating from debates about behavioral
policy-making, the term choice architecture refers to a deliberate organizing of
context in which people make decisions (Thaler and Sunstein, 2008, 3). As in
the behavioral policy making context, choice architectures on digital platforms
are the result of conscious design decisions that should be subject to scrutiny
by policy makers and regulators. As indicated in the introduction, digital plat-
forms are environments in which the platform provider has full control over the
platform’s choice architectures. As a result, if a digital platform raises compe-
tition problems, these problems can often be traced back to choice architecture
decisions the platform provider made.6
InSection4.4,weinvestigateseveralchoicearchitecturesunderthecontrolof
Amazon.First,whenmultiplesellersoffertosellthesameproductonAmazon,
one of the sellers is selected by default by the deployed Buy Box algorithm to
feature on the product page (Chen, Mislove, and Wilson, 2016; Dash et al.,
2024). Which seller will end up in the Buy Box arguably has significant impact
on consumer choice, as consumer may simply buy from the seller appearing
in the default Buy Box, rather than comparing competing offers in detail. We
explore the implications of Amazon’s Buy Box design in Section 4.1.
Second, in addition to the seller featured in the Amazon Buy Box, all other
sellers are listed on a separate offer listing page (Dash et al., 2024). This page
includes seller performance metrics such as average user ratings, percentage of
positivefeedback,orthenumberofratings.Thisenablesconsumerstocompare
the sellers from whom they would like to purchase the product. We investigate
the choice architecture of these offer listing pages in Section 4.2.
Third, Amazon has designed its platform not only for consumers accessing
the platform through a computer with a web browser. The platform can also
be navigated using voice control: Amazon provides conversational voice search
through its smart speakers (Echo devices) powered by the in-house voice assis-
tant Alexa (Dash et al., 2022). As consumers accessing Amazon through voice
control can only process limited amounts of information, Amazon’s choice ar-
chitecture for voice access presents a drastically reduced version of Amazon’s
interface to consumers. We explore the implications of some of Amazon’s deci-
sion in this choice architecture in Section 4.3.
Finally,Amazonprovidesvariousrecommendationsystemsguidingconsumer
searchandprovidingadditionalinformationaboutproductsandseller(Sorokina
and Cantu-Paz, 2016; Dash et al., 2021). We explore some of the choice archi-
tectures underlying these recommendation systems in Section 4.4.
While Amazon uses these and other choice architectures to design its plat-
form, Amazon’s role is not restricted to a platform designer. In addition, Ama-
zon sells directly to consumers in most of its marketplaces – for example, in
the United States, France, or Germany – making it one of the major sellers on
its own marketplace. This puts Amazon in direct competition with indepen-
dent sellers for many products that are sold on Amazon. In some countries –
for example, India – Amazon is not allowed to sell products on its marketplace
directly.Asaresponse,AmazoncreatedjointventuresinIndiaincollaboration
withotherretailerstosellproductsonAmazon.in.CloudtailIndiaandAppario
private limited, for example, were two joint ventures which emerged as two of
the biggest sellers on Amazon India.1
Apart from operating the marketplace and being a seller, Amazon also pro-
videsfulfillmentandlogisticalservices.Forexample,Amazonstoresthird-party
products in its fulfillment centers and packs and ships them to different cus-
tomers upon arrival of orders. This service is usually known as Fulfillment By
1While Cloudtail ceased to offer products on Amazon in 2022, Appario remains in the
businessofsellingproductsonAmazon.BothcompaniesweresellersonAmazonIndiawhile
thedatapresentedinthisarticlewascollected.7
Amazon (FBA) (Amazon, 2020). For instance, sellers can opt for the full range
of services offered in the Fulfillment by Amazon program; they can choose to
store their products at their own warehouse and merely rely on Amazon’s de-
livery service; or they can select to store, pack and ship their products either
on their own or through other third-party services. By opting to use Amazon’s
subsidiary services (fulfillment and/or delivery), sellers (with whom Amazon
competes on its marketplace) also become Amazon’s customers for logistical
services.
The intricate relationship between Amazon and sellers on Amazon Market-
place also plays out at the product level. Amazon manufactures its own private
label products and sells them under different brand names (for example, Ama-
zonBasics, Presto, or Solimo (Dash et al., 2021). Note that only Amazon sells
Amazon’s private label products on Amazon. This policy is known as gating
(Edelman, 2019).
In addition to Amazon’s role as a platform organizer, a seller, a fulfillment
and logistical service provider, and a product manufacturer, Amazon finally
maintains an advertising platform. When a customer looks for a product on
Amazon,theplatformpresentsorganicandsponsoredrecommendations.While
organic recommendations refer to the results that the algorithmic system pro-
duces in the desired context based on previous customer behavior, sponsored
recommendations are sponsored product advertisements which are the result
of second price auctions. On Amazon Marketplace, Amazon interleaves organic
resultswithsponsoredones.Ifconsumerswereunabletosufficientlydistinguish
between both types of results, they might end up accidentally selecting adver-
tisedresults,implicitlyassumingthattheywerepopularwithotherconsumers.
Moreover, as Amazon acts as both a product manufacturer and a seller on the
platform, it may also utilize its own ad space to promote its own products.
This arrangement could create incentives for Amazon to reserve particularly
well-positioned recommendations for itself (Dash et al., 2021).
3 Amazon’s Vertical Integration and Antitrust Laws
As the preceding section has shown, Amazon fulfills multiple roles on its dig-
ital platform, acting as a platform designer and operator, seller and product
manufacturer, provider of fulfillment and logistical services, and operator of an
advertising platform. The way how sellers and customers interact on Amazon’s
platform is heavily influenced by Amazon’s choice architectures, which deter-
mines the context in which customers identify products and make purchase
decisions.
ThecomplexinteractionsbetweenmultipleplayersonAmazonarearesultof
continuous product development and innovation by Amazon over the last three
decades. Originally, Amazon emerged as a book seller, entering the business
of selling products via the Amazon platform itself only later. Similarly, major
online travel agencies such as Booking.com or Expedia over time became ver-8
tically integrated with meta-search platforms, enabling these travel agencies to
compete with independent competitors on these platforms (Cure et al., 2022).
When a digital platform such as Amazon sells own products or products
from affiliated producers on its online platform, this raises issues of vertical
integration.Canaverticallyintegratedplatformthatoperatesbothasplatform
provider and seller sufficiently distinguish between both roles? Or is there a
risk that it has incentives to bias search results and recommendations in favor
of its own or affiliated products, at the expense of products from competing
independent sellers?
Problemsofverticalintegrationarenotuniquetodigitalplatforms.Theprac-
tice of supermarkets providing preferential shelf space to their own or affiliated
products(seeTagliavini2023,202),andfinancialadviserswhoearncommissions
offering potentially biased investment recommendations (Cookson et al., 2021;
Egan, 2019), both raise similar questions. From an economic perspective, ver-
tical integration can have various effects on social welfare. Vertical integration
of digital platforms could increase consumer search costs, discourage product
innovation and prompt competitors to leave the market, as preferential treat-
ment by the platform provider for own or affiliated products may make it more
difficult for independent competitors to compete (see Farronato, Fradkin, and
MacKay 2023). However, it is not clear that such welfare-decreasing effects will
always dominate. By engaging in preferential treatment, a dominant vertically
integrated platform provider may have incentives to invest in product quality,
product design and innovation. It may also have an incentive to decrease prices
andincreaseoutputbecauseitcancapturealargerfractionofthebenefitsfrom
such actions (often referred to as the “internalization of double mark-ups,” see
European Commission 2008, 7). Therefore, whether vertically integrated plat-
form providers are beneficial or detrimental to economic welfare is a complex
question that is often impossible to answer in the abstract, based solely on the-
oretical considerations (see, for example, de Cornière and Taylor 2019; Hagiu,
Teh, and Wright 2022; Anderson and Bedre-Defolie 2022).
These insights from industrial organization research have had an influence
on competition law’s treatment of vertical integration. With the increasing
influence of the Chicago School in antitrust, many jurisdictions have become
reluctant to condemn cases of vertical integration as such. Rather, antitrust
authorities investigate potential violations of antitrust laws in vertical relation-
shipsaspartofarule-of-reasonanalysis.Underrule-of-reasonanalysis,antitrust
agencies and courts examine both the positive and negative effects of a certain
conduct on competition in order to determine whether the conduct violates
antitrust laws. For example, U.S. courts have shifted from a per-se prohibi-
tionofresalepricemaintenance2 andterritorialrestrictions3 toarule-of-reason
2CompareDr.MilesMedicalCo.v.JohnD.Park&SonsCo.,220U.S.373(1911)(treating
a vertical price fixing scheme as per se illegal) with Leegin Creative Leather Prods., Inc. v.
PSKS, Inc., 551 U.S. 877 (2007) (holding that all vertical distribution restraints – non-price
andprice–shouldbeanalyzedundertheruleofreason).
3Compare United States v. Arnold, Schwinn & Co., 388 U.S. 365 (1967) (holding that
vertical restraints limiting distributors to exclusive sales areas is per se illegal) with Cont’l9
analysis that focuses on the economic effects of vertical restraints. Relatedly,
self-preferencing by a dominant firm is not a per se violation of European com-
petitionlaw(Art.102oftheTreatyontheFunctioningoftheEuropeanUnion,
TFEU),butsubjectstoaneffectstest(Crémer,Montjoye,andSchweitzer,2019,
7, 66).
This effects-based approach to assessing vertical integration under antitrust
laws has influenced the way the authorities have addressed alleged preferential
treatment by digital platforms. The General Court of the European’s recent
Google Shopping decision provides an example. In this decision, the court re-
viewed the European Commission’s finding that Google had promoted its own
comparisonshoppingserviceonitsgeneralsearchengineattheexpenseofrival
services(seeGeneralCourt,CaseT-612/17,Nov.10,2021,ECLI:EU:T:2021:763).
In its decision, the court pointed out that not all foreclosure is detrimental to
competition,andthatthemereextensionofadominantpositiontoaneighbour-
ing market is not necessarily anti-competitive (General Court, Case T-612/17,
Nov.10,2021,ECLI:EU:T:2021:763,para.157,162).Whilethecourtultimately
confirmedtheEuropeanCommission’sdecision,thedecisiondemonstratesthat
whether self-preferencing violates European competition law can only be de-
cided on a case-by-case basis. This analysis involves various different compe-
tition doctrines such as duty to deal, tying, margin squeeze, general abuse, or
discrimination (see Colangelo 2023).
Antitrust’s rule-of-reason analysis indicates an important feature of this area
of the law: antitrust law traditionally focuses on ex-post regulation. Antitrust
agenciesandcourtsenforcerules,buttheytypicallydothisinareactivemanner.
Theyinvestigatefirmbehaviorandissuedecisionstoholdfirmsaccountablefor
past non-compliance and to ensure compliance in the future.
Over the recent years, digital platforms have become subject to increased
scrutiny with regard to their vertical integration. This includes their role as a
platform provider, product manufacturer and seller, logistical service provider,
and advertising platform operator. There has been a growing concern that an-
titrustlaw’sfocusonex-postinterventionmaynotbesufficienttoensureviable
competition in platform markets. In particular, network effects and switching
costs might make it effectively impossible for sellers and customers on plat-
form to switch to a competing platform, thereby preventing competition in the
market for digital platforms: it may just not be profitable for a competitor to
Amazon and other digital platforms to create a competing marketplace.
In this environment, calls to introduce an ex-ante regulatory regime gained
prominence. In such a regime, rules and standards are established by the regu-
lator before issues arise, and firms have to obey them when they become active
in the market. When a particular conduct is prohibited, the regulator does not
allow agencies or courts to take countervailing evidence into account, as is typ-
ical in rule-of-reason analysis. Once the regulator has determined that certain
T.V., Inc. v. GTE Sylvania, Inc., 433 U.S. 36 (1977) (applying a rule of reason analysis to
non-pricedistributionrestraintsprotectinginterbrandcompetition).10
firmconductisharmful,forexample,thisconductisprohibited,evenifthefirm
could show that the conduct also had beneficial effects on economic welfare.
Along these lines, the European Union introduced a regulatory system of
digital markets that is based on an ex-ante approach where efficiency defenses
raised by firms play a very limited role. With the Digital Markets Act (DMA),
whichcameintofullforcein2024,theEuropeanUnionaimstomakekeydigital
marketsfairerandmorecontestablebypreventinglargecompaniesfromabusing
their market power and lowering barriers to the entry and expansion of smaller
players. The DMA targets large digital platforms – so-called “gatekeepers” –
such as Alphabet, Amazon, Apple, Meta, or Microsoft and imposes various
obligations on them.
Article 6(5) of the DMA, for example, includes an explicit prohibition ac-
cording to which gatekeepers “shall not treat more favourably, in ranking and
related indexing and crawling, services and products offered by the gatekeeper
itself than similar services or products of a third party. The gatekeeper shall
applytransparent,fairandnon-discriminatoryconditionstosuchranking.” Im-
portantly, this provision does not allow gatekeepers to provide justifications
showing that any economic disadvantages created by self-preferencing are out-
weighed by pro-competitive effects. Efficiency defenses play no role in such ex-
ante regulatory approach.
Article6(2)DMAprohibitsdigitalplatformsfromusing,incompetitionwith
othersellers,anynon-publicdatathatisgeneratedorprovidedbythosesellers.
This prohibition is intended to countervail the ability of vertically integrated
digital platforms to observe sales data from independent sellers with whom the
platformscompete.TheDigitalMarketsActalsoincludesprohibitionsoncom-
bining data from different services belonging to the same company, provisions
protecting advertisers and publishers using the gatekeeper against monopoliza-
tiontrends,provisionsforensuringinteroperabilityanddataaccessforbusiness
and individual users of platforms, and many others. If gatekeepers fail to abide
bytheseobligations,theEuropeanCommissionmayimposefinesofupto10%
of the gatekeeper’s annual worldwide turnover (Art. 30(1) DMA). The Digital
Market Act also empowers the Commission to monitor the effective compliance
ofdigitalplatformswiththeobligationsoftheDMA,potentiallyusingindepen-
dent external experts, auditors and member state authorities (Art. 26 DMA).
Article 21 DMA entitles the European Commission to require access to data
and algorithms of digital platforms.
GoingbeyondtheDigitalMarketsAct,theEuropeanUnionalsoenactedthe
DigitalServicesAct(DSA),whichcameintoeffectin2024aswell.Thisregula-
tion provides a comprehensive framework regarding illegal content, transparent
advertising, and disinformation of online platform providers. Article 26 of the
DSA,forexample,requiresonlineplatformstobetransparentaboutthenature
and origin of advertisements. This obligation also applies to “sponsored links”
displayedbydigitalplatforms.Articles25and27oftheDSAincludeobligations
ononlineinterfacedesignandrecommendersystemtransparency.TheEuropean
Commissionmayimposefinesofupto6%oftheannualworldwideturnoverof11
very large online providers (Art. 74(1) DSA), which includes Amazon, Alibaba,
Apple, Google Shopping, and Zalando, among other providers.4
4 Amazon and Preferential Treatment
The effectiveness of regulatory action against platforms such as Amazon will
always depend on the extent to which their behavior can be observed. While
public discussions about these platforms often rely on individual cases or on
anecdotes, algorithmic enforcement tool might open up a way to investigate
potentialself-preferencingbehaviorinasystematic,quantifiablemanner.Doing
so requires tools to observe Amazon’s choice architectures and their effects on
costumer behavior in an automated, scalable manner.
In the following section, we present the results of several empirical investi-
gations into various of Amazon’s choice architectures. The underlying analysis
was conducted by several co-authors of this article. The purpose of this section
istosummarizetheirfindingsanddistillimportantinsightsaboutthepromises
and challenges of algorithmic enforcement of platforms.
4.1 Amazon Buy Box
WestartourexplorationofAmazon’smarketpracticesbyinvestigatinghowthe
service decides the offer that is featured in its Buy Box (now called “Featured
Offer”). A typical Amazon product page has a rectangular box on the top-right
corner, right next to the title of the product. This box is popularly known as
the Buy Box. Figure 1 shows an example of such a Buy Box. The box contains
the price of the product, a delivery estimate, and two buttons that read: ‘Add
to Cart’ and‘Buy Now’.Theboxalsoliststhenameofaseller.IntheBuyBox
depicted in Figure 1, the seller is Appario Retail Private Ltd.
Inprinciple,therearevariouswaysthroughwhichcustomerscanbuyproducts
on Amazon. However, given the prime positioning of the Buy Box (and the
prominently displayed buttons inside the box), it accounts for more than 80%
sales on Amazon (Lanxner, 2021).
GiventheimportanceoftheBuyBoxfortransactionsonAmazon’splatform,
Amazon exerts considerable power over customers’ purchase decisions through
its algorithm that selects the seller that appears in the Buy Box. This deci-
sion is trivial if there is only one seller that offers a given product. However,
in practice, multiple sellers can and often do offer the same product. In this
scenario, Amazon selects the seller to be featured in the Buy Box through a
proprietary algorithm known as the Featured Offer Selection algorithm, also
commonly known as the Buy Box algorithm. The precise structure of this al-
gorithm is unknown, making it a subject of speculation (and concern) among
sellers on Amazon (Kaneshiro, 2020). Amazon presents some clues and recom-
mendations on its seller interface regarding what factors sellers should consider
4ForalistofverylargeonlineplatformsasdesignatedbytheEuropeanCommission,see
https://digital-strategy.ec.europa.eu/en/policies/list-designated-vlops-and-vloses.12
Figure 1
Example of a Buy Box on Amazon
towintheBuyBox.Thesefactorsinclude,forexample,competitivepricingand
seller performance metrics.
Amazon’s Buy Box algorithm has been at the center of multiple antitrust
investigations. A main concern is that Amazon might design the algorithm in
a way that amounts to self-preferencing. To understand what that means, re-
member that Amazon directly competes with other business users for selling
products on its marketplace. As discussed in Section 2, Amazon also provides
paid logistical services to sellers who opt for it, raising the question whether
sellers that purchase Amazon’s services receive preferential treatment.
WestartourinvestigationbyanalyzinghowfrequentlyAmazon(oritsspecial
merchantsinIndia,seeSection2)wintheBuyBox.Toanswerthisquestion,we
collecteddataforover70,000buyboxcompetitionsinAmazon’sIndian,Amer-
ican, German and French marketplaces. Specifically, we recorded the top-100
popularqueriesonAmazonandsearchedforthemoneachofthemarketplaces.
We then recorded, for each marketplace, all the products that appeared on the
firstpageofthesearchresultpage.Forallproducts,weproceededtotheproduct
page and checked whether multiple sellers offered the corresponding product.
If the answer this question was yes, we collected information about the sellers
and the winner of the Buy Box. Since Buy Box winners can potentially change
between different queries, we collected the data for a span of two weeks.
During our period of observations and across all the countries analyzed, we
observe that Amazon won upwards of 80% of the Buy Box competitions where
it was involved as a seller. At the same time, only 11%, 13.22%, 17.74%, and
26.23% of the sellers competing with Amazon got to win at least one Buy Box
competition throughout our data collection period in the Indian, US, German
and French marketplaces, respectively. Interested readers can find more details
about the data collection and analyses in Dash et al. (2024).
Of course, the fact that Amazon won most Buy Box competitions on its own
does not prove self-preferencing behavior on the part of the platform. After all,
it appears possible that Amazon’s own offers are preferred by its customers. If
that was the case, the Buy Box algorithm would simply give customers what13
they want, not nudge them towards purchase decisions that benefit Amazon at
the expense of its customers and competing sellers.
Toinvestigatethisquestion,wefirstcomparethepriceofferedbyAmazonand
rival sellers in cases in which Amazon won the Buy Box. We find considerable
numbers of instances in which Amazon won the Buy Box despite offering the
product at a price that is higher than that offered by at least one rival seller:
In the US and in India, 25% of the Buy Boxes won by Amazon and its special
merchants are cases where Amazon did not offer the corresponding product at
thelowestprice.IntheEuropeanmarketplaces,thesenumbersareslightlylower
(12.45% for France and 13.91% for Germany).
However, information on offer prices cannot exclude the possibility that the
results of the Buy Box algorithm, despite its apparent preference for Amazon
over other sellers, produces results that map to consumer preferences. If the
outcomes of Buy Box competitions usually match with consumer preferences,
Amazon’s choice architecture might be designed in a welfare-maximizing way.
Determining consumer preferences in digital markets in a reliable and re-
producible manner is a challenging task. In particular, the data available to us
fromourempiricalinvestigationofAmazonisinsufficienttoanswerthequestion
whether the Buy Box algorithm’s results correspond to consumer preferences.
Wethereforeturntoadifferentempiricalmethodthatallowsustogaininsights
into consumers preferences: Using the Prolific crowdsourcing platform, we con-
ducted a survey among 200 respondents (50 from each of the four countries).
Inthe survey,weshowedsurvey participantsfrom each countrythe fourbest
offers for a product and elicited their preference regarding the different sellers.
We started by randomly selecting, for each country, 15 products from among
the products for which Amazon, even though it did not offer the lowest price,
won the Buy Box in the first iteration of the data collection. For each product,
we showed our survey participants the four offers with the lowest price and
delivery charges. For each of the four selected offers, we displayed the name
of the seller, the price offered (including delivery charges, if any), the average
user rating of the seller, the percentage of positive feedback of the seller, the
number of ratings received, and delivery options.5 We then asked participants
the following question: “Suppose you are willing to buy a ‘<product name>’
on Amazon and these are the offers from different sellers for the same product.
Which one would you prefer to buy?”
Out of a total of 3,000 evaluations, participants chose the offer from Amazon
as their first preference in only 31%. This preference varied across countries
(as shown in Figure 2), with 54% in India, 21% in the USA, 20% in Germany
and 28% in France. In contrast, if we consider the winner of the Buy Box for
the 60 products surveyed at different time points that we observed during our
data collection, more than 80% of the times the Buy Box had been won by the
5We obtain this information from the offer listing page for that product, which will be
discussed in greater length in Section 4.2. For the present context, it suffices to say that
Amazon displays all competing sellers on a separate page, together with information about
theseller,productpriceanddeliverycharges.14
Figure 2
Amazon Buy Box and Survey Participants
Respondents
Buy Box algorithm
100
80
60
40
20
0
Note: ThisfigureshowshowoftensurveyparticipantsandAmazon’sBuyBoxalgorithmselected
anofferfromAmazonforthesurveyedproducts.Weobserveasignificantgapinsurvey
participants’preferenceasopposedtothatofthealgorithm’s.
Amazon(90%inIndia,92%intheUSA,74%inGermany,and83%inFrance).
ThissuggestsaconsiderablemismatchbetweenthefrequencyatwhichtheBuy
BoxalgorithmselectedanofferfromAmazonandthefrequencyatwhichsurvey
participants selected the same (Dash et al., 2024).
Thisresultraisesdoubtsaboutwhetherconsumerpreferencesalignwithseller
choices determined by Amazon’s Buy Box competitions. By contrast, it might
suggest a potential pattern of self-preferencing in the Buy Box algorithm in
scenariosinwhichothersellersoffertheproductatalowerpricethanAmazon.
In these scenarios, the Buy Box algorithm might nudge consumers towards
Amazon as a seller.
4.2 Offer Listing Pages
We continue our exploration of Amazon’s market practices by investigating its
offer listing page, another choice architecture in the Amazon ecosystem. As de-
scribed in the previous section, product pages on Amazon include a Buy Box
that allows for quick product purchases and for which Amazon, if necessary,
selects a seller from among the competing sellers offering a product. However,
consumers are not bound to use the Buy Box. Amazon offers consumers a sep-
arate page which lists all the available offers for a product. Figure 3 displays
an example of such an offer listing page. To get to the offer listing page, con-
sumerscanclickalinkthatappearsinasecondrectangularboxdisplayedbelow
the Buy Box, see Figure 1. The offer listing page shows the offers from all the
competing sellers in the increasing order of price and delivery charges. It also
shows some seller performance metrics including its average user rating, the
percentage of positive feedback, or the number of ratings.
Inourempiricalinvestigation,wefocusontwospecificcharacteristicsrelated
to how Amazon displays seller performance metrics (Dash et al., 2024). First,
while some metrics provide an indication of the (average) quality of service
offered by a seller, the number of ratings (#Ratings) reflects the total feedback
detceles
semit
fo
%
nozamA
morf
reffo
na
aidnI ASU ynamreG ecnarF15
ratingsreceivedbyasellerthroughouttheirtenureonAmazon.Theinclusionof
such metrics could potentially sway customers towards larger, more established
sellers. It is important to recognize that inferring anti-competitive intent solely
from this design choice is challenging, as consumers may naturally gravitate
towards proven sellers for a sense of reliability and trustworthiness.
Second,weturntoaspecificfeatureofAmazon’sapproachtodisplayingcus-
tomerratingsontheofferlistingspagethatmightbelessinnocuous,specifically
because it might offer advantages to sellers who use its subsidiary fulfillment
and/ordeliveryservices(seeSection2).Forthesesellers,undercertaincircum-
stances, Amazon reserves the right to “strike through” negative feedback by
consumers. For example, Amazon may strike through a seller feedback if “the
entire comment relates explicitly to delivery experience for an order fulfilled
by Amazon ” or “the entire comment is related to a delayed or undelivered or-
der, which you shipped on time by using Buy Shipping” Amazon Seller Central
(2022b).Inbothcases,inadditiontothestrikethrough,Amazonputsupames-
sagetakingresponsibilityfortheinconveniencefacedbythecustomer.Figure4
shows examples of struck-through reviews. Amazon also states in its Fulfilled-
by-Amazon and Amazon Shipment advertisements that negative reviews which
havebeenstruckthroughwillnotimpactsellers’performancemetrics(Amazon
Seller Central, 2022a,c). Importantly, this policy is unavailable for independent
sellers that do not use Amazon’s fulfillment or delivery services. Hence, for the
same customer inconvenience, sellers might be treated differently by Amazon
depending on whether they purchase services from Amazon or not.
To investigate the impact of the strike-through policy on Amazon seller per-
formance metrics, we collected feedback data for the top-1000 active sellers in
Amazon’s Indian, US, German and French marketplaces. Our dataset consists
of a total of 4 million seller feedback reviews for these 4,000 sellers. The data
collectedincludethefeedbacktext,associatedratingsandwhetheritwasstruck
through or not by Amazon. More details on the data collection can be found in
Dash et al. (2024).
Figure 3
Offer Listing Page on Amazon: Example16
We categorize the sellers in our dataset into three main groups: (1) Amazon
Fulfilled, (2) Amazon Shipped, and (3) Merchant Fulfilled. The determination
of seller membership in the first two groups was based on the text displayed
when Amazon strikes through reviews. Sellers falling into the third group were
identified if none of their reviews in the dataset were struck through. Subse-
quently, we conducted a manual inspection of their product pages to ascertain
how they fulfill their orders.
We then assessed how often Amazon strikes through seller feedback pertain-
ing to members of the first group, and how the striking through of feedback
affected the relative ratings of Amazon Fulfilled sellers as opposed to Merchant
Fulfilled sellers. Notably, more than half of the reviews in which Amazon Ful-
filledsellersreceivedonlythreestarsorlesswasstruckthroughineverycountry
we investigated. For Amazon Shipped sellers, the numbers hover between 22%
and 4% dependent on the country. Reviews for Merchant Fulfilled Sellers are
never struck through.
The exclusion of struck-through feedback markedly changes how different
typesofsellersperforminratings.Forexample,whenexcludingstruck-through
reviews,theoverallratingswerebestforAmazonFulfilledsellers.Whenstruck-
throughreviewsareincludedintheevaluation,AmazonFulfilledappeartohave
lower rankings than Merchant fulfilled sellers in India, the US, and Germany.
Consistent with our previous findings, these findings suggest that Amazon’s
choice architecture favors sellers affiliated with Amazon. Different from the in-
clusionofthenumberofratingsasaperformancemetric,itseemslesslikelythat
the decision to exclude certain disfavorable ratings for Amazon-affiliated sellers
fromthecalculationofsellerperformanceisalignedwithconsumerpreferences.
At the very least, it results in the display of ratings that are not compara-
ble across different types of sellers, thereby reducing their informativeness to
consumers. At worst, it could distort consumers’ purchase decisions.
But do these design decisions have a real impact on consumer’s purchase be-
havior? To investigate this question further, we again conducted a survey, this
Figure 4
Review Striking Through: Example
Note: Thisfigureprovidesanexampleofreviewstrikethroughs:thesecondandthelastreviews
havebeenstruckthrough.AmessagefromAmazonismentionedtakingresponsibilityoftheissue.17
Table 1
Preferences by Survey Participants
% of 1st Preference Votes Amazon Metrics Rectified Metrics
Amazon Special Merchants
With#Ratings 54.26% 28.53%
Without#Ratings 14.53% 6.93%
Amazon Fulfilled
With#Ratings 81.20% 64.53%
Without#Ratings 72.13% 54.6%
Note: ThistableshowsthepercentageoffirstpreferencevotesaggregatedbyAmazonSpecial
MerchantsandAmazonFulfilledsellersinthedifferentsurveysettings.Weobservethatthe
percentagesdropwhenweshowrectifiedmetricsasopposedtometricsshownbyAmazonorwhen
weomitthe#Ratingsfeature.
time with participants in India. In the survey, we exposed participants to sev-
eral counterfactual settings. We showed them (a) the Amazon-reported seller
metrics with number of ratings (# Ratings), (b) the Amazon reported-metrics
sellerwithout#Ratings,(c)therectifiedmetrics(includingthestruck-through
feedback) with # Ratings and, finally, (d) rectified metrics without # Ratings.
We recorded the percentage of times respondents selected the offers from Ama-
zon special merchants or Amazon fulfilled sellers in each of the settings. The
results are listed in Table 1.
The results of this survey suggest that when participants saw the rectified
seller metrics, their preference toward sellers using Amazon’s logistical services
reduced significantly in all cases. Similarly, when the number of ratings were
withheld, the participant’s preference toward Amazon special merchants re-
duced by nearly 40%.
In summary, the observations in this section indicate that various aspects of
Amazon’s offer listings page, including its strike-through policy for negative re-
views,haveadivergentimpactondifferenttypesofsellers,withthoseaffiliated
with Amazon receiving preferential treatment. Additionally, our findings sug-
gest that these design choices can significantly influence consumers’ purchase
decisions.
4.3 Alexa Search
Next, we shift our focus to product selections facilitated by Amazon’s virtual
assistant, Alexa. While many consumers traditionally purchase products from
Amazon through its website, there exists an alternative avenue: Alexa enables
consumers to make purchases through voice commands, interacting with smart
speakers.
Figure 5 (a) graphically depicts a query and a typical response from Amazon
Alexa. When a consumer asks a smart speaker powered by the Alexa virtual
assistanttopurchaseaproductonline,thetypicalresponseshastwomainparts:
(1) an audio response describing a chosen product with a brief explanation, and18
(2)astatusquoordefaultaction.Aspartofitsproductdescription,Alexaspells
out relevant product details, including its title, price and delivery information.
Often,theresponsealsocontainsabriefexplanationofwhythevirtualassistant
has chosen the corresponding product. Explanations provided by the virtual
assistantincludethattheproductis“Amazon’sChoice” or“atopresult.” Alexa’s
default action is to add the product to the customer’s cart for further review
or purchase. In addition, the virtual assistant asks the consumer whether she
wants to make the purchase immediately.
Figure 5
Amazon Alexa
(a) SearchthroughAlexa (b) DataCollectionPipeline
Audio Response
<Explanation> is
<Product Title>. Step 2(a)
Step 3(a): Details of
<Price product added to cart
information>.
<Delivery
information>.
Step 2(b)
Default Action Step 3(b): Details of SERP
I added it to your and products shown
Alexa!!! Buy A wm hea rz eo yn o c ua crt a n Step 1: gTTS
me a review product
<query-string> and seller details
before checkout.
Step 4: Download transcript from
T 'oo r dp eu rr ic th na os we, ' .say <query-string> Amazon cloud
Panel(a)showstheresponsetoaproductsearchthroughAlexa:Inresponsetoapurchasequery,
(i)thevirtualassistantspellsoutanaudioresponseexplainingaproductinformation,and
(ii)addstheproducttocartforfurtherexploration.Panel(b)showsthedatacollectionpipeline:
aquerystringgetsconvertedtoanaudiosignalbyGoogleText-To-Speech.Theaudiosignaland
thetextualqueryareprovidedtoAlexaanddesktopsearchrespectively.Finally,theproductpage
detailsoftheretrievedproductsandthetranscriptsoftheconversationarecollected.
Compared to consumers interacting with Amazon on a website, consumers
enjoyasignificantlysmalleractionspacewheninteractingwithAmazonthrough
avirtualassistantsuchasAlexa.Ratherthanpresentingalistofsearchresults,
Alexaspellsoutthedetailsofasingleproductandaddsittotheconsumer’scart.
By reducing consumer choice, Amazon’s default choices can have a particular
strong influence on consumer decisions, even stronger than the selection of a
seller in the Buy Box.
Similartoourpreviousinvestigations,westartourinvestigationbycollecting
information on the products that Alexa selects in response to searches and how
these products compare with the search results of a similarly worded search
on Amazon’s webpage. Overall, we collected search results for 1,000 different
queriesfrombothAmazonAlexaandfromAmazon’swebsite.Wealsocollected
themetadata(includingproducttitle,ratings,price,andsellerinformation)for
the products added to the cart by Alexa and for products appearing among19
the search results on Amazon’s website. The exact data collection framework is
shown in Figure 5 (b).6
We then conducted surveys with 100 participants to elicit consumers’ pref-
erences between the product added to cart by Alexa and the top search result
(appearing in the first position) from a desktop search. We selected the top
search result for comparison because Amazon identified it as the most relevant
product for the query at the time for the customer. We showed our survey par-
ticipants the titles of the two products, their prices, their average user ratings
and the number of ratings received by each of the two products, information
we obtained from the Amazon results page during our data collection. We then
asked participants the following question: Suppose you are looking for “query
string”. Which of the following would you prefer to buy?
All 100 participants evaluated ten such queries. Out of the 1000 evaluations
we received (100 respondents × 10 queries), 732 survey participants (73.2%)
chose the top desktop search result over the product added to cart by Alexa
for the corresponding queries. Analogous to what we find in our investigations
of Amazon’s Buy Box algorithm, this might offer suggestive evidence that a
majorityofparticipantspreferproductofferingsthatdifferfromAlexa’schoices.
Overall, we found that Alexa’s product selection mechanism often selected
products that were different from the top search results on Amazon’s webpage,
andthat,inamajorityofcases,consumerswouldhavepreferredthetopsearch
result over Alexa’s product choice. Depending on the identity of the products’
sellers, these choices might constitute another example of self-preferencing or a
preferential treatment of Amazon-affiliated sellers.
4.4 Recommendation Systems
ThissubsectionturnstoyetanotherchoicearchitecturebywhichAmazonmay
engage in self-preferencing: recommendations on Amazon.
Figure 6
Related Item Recommendations on Amazon
Note: Thisfigureprovidesanexampleofrelated-itemrecommendationsonAmazon.
6MoredetailsonthedatacollectioncanbefoundinDashetal.(2022).20
As an e-commerce marketplace, Amazon provides basic product recommen-
dation functions on its platform (see Section 2). It seems reasonable to assume
that the results of such recommendations displayed in conjunction with article
listings willoften be arelevantdeterminantsfor consumers’ purchase decisions.
These functions may offer Amazon yet another opportunity to “push” its prod-
ucts at the expense of products manufactured and/or sold by others.
Figure 6 shows a screenshot of related item recommendations on Amazon.
These related item recommendations appear towards the bottom of almost all
Amazonproductpages.Naturally,thenumberofproductsAmazoncandisplay
in this context is limited, and a crucial question is how Amazon’s algorithms
decide which products a customer can see.
Amazon displays both (a) organic results, which appear to be determined
on the basis of prior customer behavior, and (b) sponsored results, with the
items displayed determined through second price auctions in which sellers can
participate.7 When Amazon displays sponsored results, it marks those with a
tag that reads, on its English language platform, “sponsored.”
In recent years, Amazon appears to have given more room in its related item
recommendationstosponsoredresults.Forexample,considertheuppercarousel
in Figure 6: although the title reads “products related to this item,” there is a
small text in gray color toward the top left of the carousel that reads “spon-
sored.” Thisessentiallymeansthattheentirecarouseldoesnotconsistoforganic
recommendations, but that these are all sponsored product advertisements.
Of course, Amazon is not the only platform that shows sponsored results
alongsideorganicresults.Also,giventhatsponsoredresultsareselectedthrough
adifferentmechanismthanorganicresults,itistobeexpectedthattheinclusion
of sponsored results among related item recommendations will result in fewer
organicresultsshowntothecustomer,whichmightbeperceivedasdeprivingthe
customerofvaluableinformation.However,givenAmazon’sverticalintegration,
we are specifically interested in whether Amazon uses the sponsored results
architecture to promote its private label products.
To analyze this question, we investigate the products shown on Amazon’s
websites as related product recommendations for batteries (Dash et al., 2021).
Wecollectedmorethan100,000relateditemrecommendationsfromtheproduct
pagesof5,352productsinthebatterycategoryofAmazonusingabreadthfirst
searchcrawler(Dashetal.,2021).Outofthese5,352products,only17products
(0.3%) were Amazon private label products.
We focus on demonstrating a disparity in recommendations that Amazon
private label products receive as opposed to third-party products in sponsored
vs. organic recommendations. Figure 7 demonstrates that Amazon private la-
7Fortheexampleofrelateditemrecommendations,seethelowercarouselofrecommenda-
tionsinFigure6.Thetitleofthecarouselreads“customerwhoviewedthisitemalsoviewed.”
Asthetitlesuggests,theitemsinthecarouselareessentiallysimilartotheproductonwhose
productpagestheyappearbasedonhowcustomersviewedtheitemsinpriorexplorationses-
sions.Ashasbeendescribedelsewhere,theseresultsarecuratedfromitem-itemcollaborative
filteringprocesses(Linden,Smith,andYork,2003;SmithandLinden,2017)).21
bel products on average received a much higher number of recommendations
amongsponsoredresults(520)ascomparedwithorganicproductrecommenda-
tions (46). In other words, Amazon private-label batteries were recommended
almost 11 times (520 sponsored recommendations compared to 46 organic rec-
ommendations on average) as frequently in the context of sponsored results
than in the context of organic results. Third-party products do not experience
a similar increase in appearances as recommended products among sponsored
recommendations. Such products were recommended, on average, 11 times in
organic results. This number does not change much for sponsored results. In
fact, a large number (4,357 out of 5,335) of third party products do not receive
any sponsored recommendations, thus dragging the mean number of recom-
mendationsto9.Bycontrast,almostallprivatelabelproducts(allbutone)are
featured among sponsored recommendations.
Panel (b) shows that, even if one limits the analysis to products that are fea-
tured in the sponsored recommendations, the increase in recommendations is
biggerforprivatelabelproductsthanitisforthirdpartyproducts.Theaverage
number of recommendations for the former is 46 among organic recommenda-
tions and 553 among sponsored recommendations. For the latter, the number
increases from 13 for organic recommendations to 46 among recommendations.
Another way to look at these numbers is to compare how often private-label
productsappearasrecommendedproductsinthecontextoforganicrecommen-
dations vs. sponsored results. Amazon’s own organic recommendation engine
recommended the Amazon private-label products from approximately 15% of
the product base. Simultaneously, they received recommendations from almost
50% of the product base in the sponsored recommendations.
(a) AllProducts (b) SponsoredProductsOnly
3P PLP 3P PLP
1000 1000
500 500
0
0
Org Sp Org Sp Org Sp Org Sp
Figure 7
Note: This figure shows the distribution of inward recommendations toward
Amazon private label products (PLP) and third party (3P) products. Panel
(a) depicts distributions for all products, panel (b) for products that appear at
least once as sponsored results.
Accordingly, it appears that Amazon, by virtue of the sponsored recommen-
dations, made its private-label batteries much more accessible to consumers
noitadnemmocer
drawnI
noitadnemmocer
drawnI22
looking at other products’ web pages. To the extent that the organic recom-
mendation engine captures consumer preferences regarding what other product
they consider interesting alternatives to the product they are looking at, this
could be viewed as yet another choice architecture that implements a type of
self-preferencing.
5 Discussion
In this article, we explore unique design features of digital platforms, focusing
on those that depend heavily on algorithms and choice architectures. We ad-
dressregulatorychallengesthatemergewhensuchplatformsintegratevertically
across various stages of their product and service production and distribution.
Throughfourempiricalcasestudies,wedemonstratehowcombininglarge-scale
analysis with consumer surveys can uncover issues such as preferential treat-
ment by platforms and discrepancies between platform offerings and consumer
preferences.
Wewanttohighlightfourkeyfindingsfromourresearch.First,ourempirical
casestudiesshowthatevaluatingself-preferencingondigitalplatformsdemands
adetailed,case-by-caseanalysis.Theseplatformsuseavarietyofcomplexchoice
architectures,eachofwhichmayincludeself-preferencingelements.Athorough
analysis is essential for regulators and researchers to identify such elements,
a task made difficult by the often opaque nature of platform design decisions.
Distinguishingbetweenbeneficialanddetrimentaleffectsofchoicearchitectures
can be challenging, and it remains to be seen whether data access rights and
reporting duties, as established under the European Union’s Digital Markets
Act and Digital Services Act, will be sufficient to overcome this challenge.
Second, our empirical case studies demonstrate how comparing choice ar-
chitectures with consumer preferences can allow for insights into which choice
architectures may be problematic. They also showcase how surveys can provide
an avenue for comparing the impact of product offering choice architectures
with consumer preferences. For instance, if a choice architecture nudges con-
sumers towards product A over product B, but surveys show a clear preference
forproductB,thisdiscrepancycouldpointtowardsamismatchbetweenchoice
architectures and consumer preferences.
It is important to stress that we do not view consumer surveys as flawless
or the sole method for understanding consumer preferences. Browser exten-
sionsandclick-streamdatapresentalternativemethodsforcapturingconsumer
preferences, enabling researchers and regulators to directly observe consumer
searchandpurchasingactivities.Consumerpanels,oftenequippedwithcustom
browser extensions, have previously been employed for algorithmic auditing,
particularlytoobservesearchresultsandproductfeatures(Farronato,Fradkin,
and MacKay, 2023). Observing actual consumer behavior through click-stream
data could be another avenue to explore consumer preferences (Bechtold and
Tucker, 2014). While a detailed exploration of these tools is beyond this arti-
cle’s scope, they could enable precise comparisons between choice architectures23
and consumer preferences on digital platforms. As such, these tools could pro-
vide an important ingredient in regulators’ enforcement actions against digital
platforms.
Empirical investigations such as those explored in this article are no substi-
tute for a thorough legal analysis of platform behavior under applicable legal
standards. They should be considered as one component of a broader enforce-
ment strategy, potentially relevant to a range of legal issues. In this article, we
deliberately avoid making definitive statements about legal compliance, as a
comprehensive legal analysis would encompass factors beyond the scope of the
tools and methods discussed here.
Third, as Section 4.4 has shown, choice architectures influence consumer be-
havior in multiple ways. How product searches are processed and search results
presented can influence not only consumer purchasing decisions. It can also
shapeconsumerpreferencesfromtheoutset.Withdigitalplatformsbecomingan
integralpartofourdailylives,establishinganeutral“groundtruth” –determin-
ingwhataconsumerwouldchooseintheabsenceofthesearchitectures–poses
a significant challenge. This may complicate future regulatory efforts that seek
to base interventions on a deviation of a platform architecture from an objec-
tively defined “ground truth.” For example, uncertainty over whether consumer
preferencesareinfluencedbyaspecificchoicearchitecturecouldpresentregula-
torswithdifficultquestionswhencontemplatinginterventionsagainstplatforms
for perceived self-preferencing practices that seem contrary to consumers’ best
interests.
Fourth,ourcasestudiesonAmazon’schoicearchitecturesunderscoretheneed
for caution in addressing digital platform issues solely through ex-ante regula-
tion. Regulating choice architectures involves intervening in the core functions
ofdigitalplatforms,amovethatcouldblurthelinesbetweencompetitionpolicy
and market design. This does not mean that ex-ante regulation is always inap-
propriate for digital markets. However, it comes with its own set of challenges.
In some instances, fine-grained regulatory interventions may become so costly
in terms of design, audit, and compliance that a regulator should refrain from
such interventions.
On a more general level, our empirical case studies suggest a future where
algorithmic auditing becomes a key part of regulating the digital economy. By
employing algorithmic auditing tools, regulators and researchers could uncover
new forms of self-preferencing previously undetectable without the aid of au-
tomated, large-scale analysis. Although our focus here has been on Amazon’s
choice architecture and its impact on consumers, similar methodologies could
investigate its effects on independent sellers, delivery logistics providers, and
fulfillment centers. Importantly, the tools discussed in this article have impli-
cations beyond regulatory and research interests. Digital platforms themselves
couldleveragethesetoolstoproactivelyidentifyandaddresspotentiallegaland
societal risks they might otherwise inadvertently contribute to.
Movingtowardsafutureofalgorithmicauditingandcompliancerequiresreg-
ulations that are relatively easy to audit in an algorithmic, large-scale manner.24
In such a future, it may be particularly important for policy makers to design
regulations in a way that allows for easy algorithmic auditing (Sandvig et al.,
2014; Metaxa et al., 2021). This might involve not just granting data access
rights to regulators and researchers and adopting standardized data formats,
but also designing regulatory obligations that are straightforward to encode
and monitor algorithmically. Additionally, clarifying the legal permissions for
researcherstousewebscrapingandothertoolsforcomplianceassessmentcould
significantly enhance the effectiveness of these regulations.
6 Conclusion
In this article, we have explored how digital platforms whose architecture are
characterized by algorithmic systems and deliberate choice architectures can
be investigated utilizing large-scale algorithmic audits and consumer surveys.
While our empirical case studies focused on Amazon, our approach could be
applied to other online platforms that act as an intermediary among various
stakeholders as well. We believe that our case studies demonstrate how empir-
ical methods originating in computer science can equip policymakers, regula-
tors, and researchers with the tools necessary for detailed monitoring of digital
platform operations. This, in turn, provides valuable empirical evidence to in-
formtheongoingdebateoneffectivedigitalmarketregulation.Additionally,our
analysishighlightsthedifficultiesresearchersandregulatorsfacewhentryingto
identifyanti-competitivebehaviorsorimpactsfromobservedplatformconduct.
Specifically, our case studies shed light on the significant challenges in deter-
mining whether a platform’s choice architecture is designed to unfairly benefit
its own interests or to genuinely enhance service quality.
In a future world of regulating digital markets through algorithmic auditing,
we envision tools enabling computer scientists, economists and legal scholars
to analyze firm behavior under digital regulations, to empirically identify un-
intended consequences of such regulations, and to predict, ex ante, the effects
of further or alternative regulatory interventions. We envision tools that, at
leastpartially,automatetheauditingandcomplianceprocesses,therebyreduc-
ing compliance costs for firms while offering regulators automated enforcement
mechanisms. Such tools could find applicability beyond antitrust law, extend-
ingtoprivacylaw(seeManandhar,Singh,andNadkarni2024;Zacetal.2024),
content moderation, intellectual property law, and many other legal domains.
Regulating digital markets through algorithmic auditing could not be accom-
plishedbyoneortwoofthedisciplinesontheirown.Weneedcomputerscientists
to develop new tools for large-scale data collection and automated regulation
enforcement. We need economists to build frameworks for understanding social
implications and welfare effects, alongside econometric methods for measuring
causal impacts of firm behavior. And we need legal scholars to study the nor-
mative goals of particular regulations, the trade-offs involved in achieving such
goals, and to understand the institutional specifics of enforcement mechanisms.25
In this sense, the answer to the machine may not be in the machine (Clark,
1999). It may be in more interdisciplinary research.
References
Amazon(2020),“FBAFeeStructure,” https://services.amazon.in/services/fulfilment-
by-amazon/pricing.html.
Amazon Seller Central (2022a), “Buyer Feedback for FBA Listings,”
https://amzn.to/3ecvfbd.
Amazon Seller Central (2022b), “Can Amazon Remove Buyer Feedback?”
https://amzn.to/3EiL2Pa.
Amazon Seller Central (2022c), “Use Buy Shipping Services,”
https://amzn.to/3rWhlxr.
Anderson,Simon,andÖzlemBedre-Defolie(2022),“OnlineTradePlatforms:Hosting,
Selling, or Both?” International Journal of Industrial Organization, 84, 102861.
Bandy,Jack(2021),“ProblematicMachineBehavior:ASystematicLiteratureReview
of Algorithm Audits,” Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interation,
5(CSCW1).
Bechtold, Stefan, and Catherine Tucker (2014), “Trademarks, Triggers and Online
Search,” Journal of Empirical Legal Studies, 11, 718–750.
Bradford, Anu (2012), “The Brussels Effect,” Northwestern University Law Review,
107, 1–68.
Bradford, Anu (2020), The Brussels Effect, Oxford University Press.
Chen, Le, Alan Mislove, and Christo Wilson (2016), “An Empirical Analysis of Algo-
rithmic Pricing on Amazon Marketplace,” in: WWW ’16: Proceedings of the 25th
International Conference on World Wide Web, pp. 1339–1349.
Clark, Charles (1999), “The Answer to the Machine is in the Machine,” in: P. Bernt
Hugenholtz(ed.),TheFutureofCopyrightinaDigitalEnvironment,Elsevier,Am-
sterdam, p. 139.
CloudIncome (2023), “30 Eye-Opening YouTube Facts, Figures and Statistics You
Should Know in 2023,” https://cloudincome.com/youtube-statistics.
Colangelo, Giuseppe (2023), “Antitrust Unchained: The EU’s Case Against Self-
Preferencing,” GRUR International, 72, 538–556.
Cookson, Gordon, Tim Jenkinson, Howard Jones, and Jose Vicente Martinez (2021),
“Best Buys and Own Brands: Investment Platforms’ Recommendations of Mutual
Funds,” Review of Financial Studies, 34, 227–263.
Crémer, Jacques, Yves-Alexandre de Montjoye, and Heike Schweitzer (2019), “Com-
petition Policy for the Digital Era,” https://op.europa.eu/en/publication-detail/-
/publication/21dc175c-7b76-11e9-9f05-01aa75ed71a1/language-en.
Cure,Morgane,MatthiasHunold,ReinholdKesler,UlrichLaitenberger,andThomas
Larrieu(2022),“VerticalIntegrationofPlatformsandProductProminence,” Quan-
titative Marketing and Economics, 20, 353–395.
Dash,Abhisek,AbhijnanChakraborty,SaptarshiGhosh,AnimeshMukherjee,andKr-
ishnaP.Gummadi(2021),“WhentheUmpireisalsoaPlayer:BiasinPrivateLabel
ProductRecommendationsonE-commerceMarketplaces,” in:FAccT ’21: Proceed-
ings of the 2021 ACM Conference on Fairness, Accountability, and Transparency,
pp. 873–884.26
Dash, Abhisek, Abhijnan Chakraborty, Saptarshi Ghosh, Animesh Mukherjee, and
Krishna P Gummadi (2022), “Alexa, in you, I trust! Fairness and Interpretability
IssuesinE-commerceSearchthroughSmartSpeakers,” in:WWW ’22: Proceedings
of the ACM Web Conference 2022, pp. 3695–3705.
Dash, Abhisek, Abhijnan Chakraborty, Saptarshi Ghosh, Animesh Mukherjee, and
Krishna P Gummadi (2024), “Investigating Nudges toward Related Sellers on E-
commerce Marketplaces: A Case Study on Amazon,” Proceedings of the ACM on
Human-Computer Interaction, (CSCW).
Davis, Kevin E., and Florencia Marotta-Wurgler (2024), “Filling the Void: How E.U.
Privacy Law Spills Over to the U.S.” Unpublished manuscript.
deCornière,Alexandre,andGregTaylor(2019),“AModelofBiasedIntermediation,”
RAND Journal of Economics, 50, 854–882.
Edelman, Gilad (2019), “Amazon Doesn’t Favor Its Own Brands—Except When It
Does,” https://www.wired.com/story/amazon-gating-private-labels-antitrust/.
Egan, Mark (2019), “Brokers versus Retail Investors:ConflictingInterestsand Domi-
nated Products,” Journal of Finance, 74, 1217–1260.
EuropeanCommission(2008),“GuidelinesontheAssessmentofNon-horizontalMerg-
ersundertheCouncilRegulationontheControlofConcentrationsBetweenUnder-
takings,” Official Journal of the European Union, C 265, 6–25.
Farronato,Chiara,AndreyFradkin,andAlexanderMacKay(2023),“Self-Preferencing
at Amazon: Evidence from Search Rankings,” AEA Papers and Proceedings, 113,
239–243.
Frankenreiter, Jens (2022), “Cost-Based California Effects,” Yale Journal on Regula-
tion, 39, 1155–1217.
Hagiu,Andrei,Tat-HowTeh,andJulianWright(2022),“ShouldPlatformsBeAllowed
to Sell on Their Own Marketplaces?” RAND Journal of Economics, 53, 297–327.
Johnson, Eric, Suzanne Shu, Benedict Dellaert, Craig Fox, Daniel Goldstein, Gerald
Häubl, Richard Larrick, John Payne, Ellen Peters, David Schkade, Brian Wansink,
andElkeWeber(2012),“BeyondNudges:ToolsofaChoiceArchitecture,”Marketing
Letters, 23, 487–504.
Kaneshiro, Ian (2020), “Keeping up With the Amazonians: My Observa-
tions on Amazon’s Buy Box Algorithm Modifications During the Pandemic,”
https://bit.ly/3tmditX.
Lanxner,Eyal(2021),“TheAmazonBuyBox:HowItWorksforSellers,andWhyIt’s
So Important,” https://bit.ly/3h5a21a.
Lessig,Lawrence(1999),CodeandOtherLawsofCyberspace,BasicBooks,NewYork.
Linden,Greg,BrentSmith,andJeremyYork(2003),“Amazon.comRecommendations:
Item-to-item Collaborative Filtering,” IEEE Internet Computing, 7, 76–80.
Manandhar, Sunil, Kapil Singh, and Adwait Nadkarni (2024), “Towards Automated
RegulationAnalysisforEffectivePrivacyCompliance,” in:NetworkandDistributed
Systems Security Symposium (NDSS) 2024.
Metaxa, Danaë, Joon Sung Park, Ronald E. Robertson, Karrie Karahalios, Christo
Wilson,JeffHancock,andChristianSandvig(2021),“AuditingAlgorithms:Under-
standing Algorithmic Systems from the Outside In,” Foundations and Trends in
Human–Computer Interaction, 14(4), 272–344.27
Mota, Nuno, Abhijnan Chakraborty, Asia J Biega, Krishna P Gummadi, and Hoda
Heidari (2020), “On the Desiderata for Online Altruism: Nudging for Equitable
Donations,” ProceedingsoftheACMonHuman-ComputerInteraction,4(CSCW2).
Peukert, Christian, Stefan Bechtold, Michail Batikas, and Tobias Kretschmer (2022),
“RegulatorySpilloversandDataGovernance:EvidencefromtheGDPR,” Marketing
Science, 41, 318–340.
Sandvig,Christian,KevinHamilton,KarrieKarahalios,andCedricLangbort(2014),
“Auditing Algorithms: Research Methods for Detecting Discrimination on Internet
Platforms,” DataandDiscrimination:ConvertingCriticalConcernsintoProductive
Inquiry.
Saqib,Mohammed(2023),“17MostValuableE-CommerceCompaniesintheWorld,”
https://finance.yahoo.com/news/17-most-valuable-e-commerce-171841990.html.
Smith, Brent, and Greg Linden (2017), “Two Decades of Recommender Systems at
Amazon.com,” IEEE Internet Computing, 21, 12–18.
Sorokina, Daria, and Erick Cantu-Paz (2016), “Amazon Search: The Joy of Rank-
ing Products,” in: SIGIR ’16: Proceedings of the 39th International ACM SIGIR
Conference on Research and Development in Information Retrieval, pp. 459–460.
Statista (2023a), “Facebook MAU Worldwide 2022,”
https://www.statista.com/statistics/264810/number-of-monthly-active-facebook-
users-worldwide.
Statista (2023b), “Number of Apps Available in Leading App Stores As of 3rd Quar-
ter 2022,” https://www.statista.com/statistics/276623/number-of-apps-available-
in-leading-app-stores.
Tagliavini,Michael(2023),“Self-PreferencingandtheConceptofAbuseofDominance:
Much Ado About Nothing?” European Competition Law Review, 44, 201–211.
Tambe, Nikia, and Asshika Jain (2024), “Top Website Statistics and Trends,”
https://www.forbes.com/advisor/in/business/software/website-statistics/.
Thaler,Richard,andCassSunstein(2008),Nudge:ImprovingDecisionsaboutHealth,
Wealth and Happiness, Penguin Books, New York.
Zac,Amit,PabloWey,StefanBechtold,DavidRodriguez,andJoseDelAlamo(2024),
“The Court Speaks, But Who Listens? Automated Compliance Review of the
GDPR,” https://ssrn.com/abstract=4709913.
Dr. Abhisek Dash Dr. Abhijnan Chakraborty
MaxPlanckInstituteforSoftwareSys- Indian Institute of Technology Delhi
tems India
Germany abhijnan@iitd.ac.in
adash@mpi-sws.org
Dr. Saptarshi Ghosh Dr. Animesh Mukherjee
IndianInstituteofTechnologyKharag- IndianInstituteofTechnologyKharag-
pur pur
India India
saptarshi@cse.iitkgp.ac.in animeshm@cse.iitkgp.ac.in28
Dr. Jens Frankenreiter Dr. Stefan Bechtold
Washington University in St. Louis ETH Zurich
School of Law Switzerland
USA sbechtold@ethz.ch
fjens@wustl.edu
Dr. Krishna P. Gummadi
MaxPlanckInstituteforSoftwareSys-
tems
Germany
gummadi@mpi-sws.org