Agora Elevator Bodily Sensation Study
REPORT
June 30th, 2014
Planning and implementation time period: March – April, 2014
Research supervisor: Pertti Saariluoma
Researcher: Rebekah Rousi
Research assistant: Merja LehtiharjuContents
Introduction ................................................................................................................................................................... 3
Research questions ..................................................................................................................................................... 5
The Study ........................................................................................................................................................................ 6
Questionnaire design............................................................................................................................................. 9
Participants ............................................................................................................................................................ 11
Results ........................................................................................................................................................................... 12
Emotional constructs ......................................................................................................................................... 12
Bodily sensations ................................................................................................................................................. 16
Semantic differential results ........................................................................................................................... 26
Levels of difference between Part A and Part B responses ................................................................ 37
Discussion .................................................................................................................................................................... 41
Conclusion ................................................................................................................................................................... 43
References ................................................................................................................................................................... 44Introduction
Elevator usage is an entirely embodied transaction, in which a user (traveller), requests the
elevator traditionally by pressing the elevator hall call button (recently also by alternative
methods such as apps, and foyer-based destination controls), enters, and controls the
elevator’s destination by pushing a numbered button. Inside the elevator cab, a human user,
their body and psyche are subject to numerous factors, both physical and social. These
qualities of elevator usage are often brought to the fore by the media, either in television
shows or movies, where they are used to demonstrate various social dynamics – tension, love,
anger, reluctance, empathy, and assistance to name a few. They are also utilized to
demonstrate and emphasise fear, through exaggerating the potential dangers of their technical
physics (height, speed, enclosure, suspension and unreliability) and exposing the
vulnerability of the body within the cab space.
At any one time humans experience phenomena and the world around them both
consciously and unconsciously. The reason being, is that although the body is constantly
receiving and perceiving information from its surrounding environment, because of
limitations in cognitive load capacity and attention, and the importance of prioritisation,
people cannot consciously represent or be aware of every detail of what they encounter
(Berridge & Winkielman 2003; Chalmers 1990). Conscious experience occurs when the
normality of systems, processes and other phenomena is interrupted (Chalmers 2004; Peirce
2009). Thus, while a great part of information received through our body’s sensory system
remains unrepresented – or not consciously experienced – irregular occurrences and
phenomena which are sensed (perceived) to be not normal, becomes represented or
experienced (Berridge & Winkielman; Chalmers 1990; Peirce 2009). This is one of the
body’s evolutionary survival mechanisms, in order to prepare the individual for necessary
action (Frijda 1988; Hekkert 2006).
There is an intricate relationship between bodily feelings or sensations and our
subsequent emotions. In human-technology interaction (HTI), the much cited appraisal theory
(Frijda 1988; Ortony & Turner 1990), explains how our emotions, and even higher order
thinking (top-down processes), are subject to the way humans evaluate phenomena in terms
of their own well-being. These appraisals are based on a mixture of both represented and
unrepresented information – the primal reactions due to immediate evaluation of the benefit
or threat perceived; and the emotions derived from higher cognitive processing, whereby
information is evaluated against further criteria instilled through processes of learning and
acculturation (Brave & Nass 2007; Jordan 2000).
Currently there is much discussion regarding the biological, social and psychological
differences between men and women, which have developed through both evolutionary and
cultural processes. One major finding in the field of neuroscience has been that of the
differences in mirror neuron activity between men and women. Mirror neuron activity, shown
through mu suppressions, or suppressions in the ventral premotor cortex has been connected
with the brain mirroring the physical and emotional activities of other people (Gaag,
Minderaa & Keysers 2007). In other words, for example when we see someone get hurt, our
brain reacts in a way that it would if we ourselves get hurt. Which would suggest a biological
basis for empathy, and given that women are found to have increased mirror neuron activity,
one possible effect would be that women possess higher levels of empathy than men. Thus, if
women have higher empathy levels than men, or are able to neurologically mirror the
emotions and physical effects of people being observed, would this mean that women couldpossibly be used as instruments to observe and report other people’s emotions? Say, in HTI
circumstances?
This study set out to examine the relationship between expressed emotions (i.e. that
what people say they are feeling – i.e. sad, angry, happy etc.) and physical sensations – the
connection between emotion and bodily experience. It additionally provided the opportunity
to investigate how the neurological findings of gender differences can be observed in practice
– what difference does it make in behaviour and judgment that we have varying levels of
mirror neuron activity? The following report documents the study, procedure, results and
findings.Research questions
Based on the issues noted in the introduction, three central research questions were
formulated. These questions guided the research design and subsequent inquiry:
1. What are the bodily sensations of travelling in an old, relatively unreliable elevator as
compared to a newly renovated elevator?
2. What is the relationship between expressed emotions and bodily sensations?
3. Does gender make a difference? If women possess a stronger ability to empathise, can
they be used as a measure for gauging the bodily experience of others?The Study
This study was designed to examine the relationship between the bodily sensations of
elevator user experience and expressed emotions. Thus, the semiotic process and physio-
semantic relationship between articulated emotions (the emotions people report as
experiencing) and what is felt within the body. For this purpose, two elevators known as
contrasting in their physical and operational characteristics were chosen for the study. Both
were KONE elevators, housed in Agora (five storey’s high). One of the elevators was
relatively new, and had been installed in 2013, and the other was a former goods-come-
passenger elevator installed during the building’s completion in 2000. The elevators can be
seen in the images below.
Fig. 1: Old elevator – outer doors on fifth floor (upper left); floor and door opening (upper
right); interior (lower left); ceiling lights (lower right)
In figure 1 the old elevator can be seen, firstly in terms of its outward appearance from
the hall call area. The image was taken on the fifth floor, however each floor is identical (a
part from the numbers on the doors). This uniformity can be seen regard the continuation of
the flooring from the main interior architectural design to the elevator flooring. The elevator
cab aligns with the floors it arrives at, yet the travel is slow and the cab tends to ‘bounce’ and
move with inconsistency. In the lower left-hand picture it can be seen that the cab is lined
with clinical-like stainless steel, and the button of one floor is covered with orange tape to
prevent pressing – this floor is currently undergoing renovations. Ceiling lights are industrial
fluorescents, giving a bright, however grey impression.Fig. 2: New elevator – outer doors on first floor (upper left); floor and door opening (upper
right); interior through mirror (lower left); interior control corner (lower right)
The new elevator, as seen in figure 2 indicates the floor on which the elevator is at via a
display located at the top of the doors, as opposed to the old elevator which displays this
information directly above the hall call button. The new elevator features a female voice
informing the passengers of the current location of the elevator. Similarly to the old elevator,
this elevator is also lined with stainless steel panels and features half wall mirrors on either
side of the cab. The hand railing is curved in the new elevator, whereas it ends in sharper
corners in the old elevator. Further, the controls take an upside-down T form, with the door
controls and emergency button alone the bottom row and the floor buttons in a logical
sequence going up. Whereas, the old elevator presents the controls in a rectangular order,
with the first floor button at the bottom and emergency button at the top.
There are several aspects that make this elevator more appealing in comparison to the
old elevator. Firstly, the stainless steel is highly polished and presented in thinner vertical
panels. As seen in the images above, the combination of these factors with the grid of small
LEDs generates a ‘light wave’ effect – a net or grid of light waves reflected off the panels
generating a diffused, ambient lighting effect. Furthermore, careful attention has been placed
on the flooring. Rather than trying to directly match the dark marbled granite flooring of the
foyer, steps have been taken to select a granite-like flooring which comprises highly
reflective greys and silvers, which adds depth to the experience, in addition to light.
The study was conducted by participants in pairs or groups of three, whereby one
participant (the control, Part A), would be told to fill out a questionnaire based on their own
perspective of the elevator experiences and the remaining participants (Part B) were told
separately to fill in the questionnaire from the perspective of Part A. The idea was to see how
well the answers provided by Part B matched those of Part A (taking into account gender).Experiments took place during March-April, 2014. It took on average 20 minutes to
conduct the experiment. Participants were required to travel in each elevator from the top
floor (fifth storey) to the ground floor and up again. Minimal discussion was encouraged, and
participants were given the instructions to feel the sensations in their body – and on behalf of
Part A. Upon exiting the elevators, participants were instructed to move to separate locations
to fill in the questionnaires. Participants could ask for help if they needed further clarification
regarding the terminology. Participants were recruited via university email lists and word-of-
mouth. They were rewarded with a small chocolate gift.Questionnaire design
The questionnaire comprised four sections: 1) background information – gender, year of
birth, nationality and professional/study field; 2) one emotional construct (word describing
the emotion); 3) the indication of where they feel the bodily sensations, by colouring a human
silhouette (yellow for the ‘hot spots’ where they felt the sensation and blue for the ‘cold
spots’ which were completely unaffected); and 4) semantic differential – a) bodily feeling
inside the elevator; b) elevator design; and c) social emotion.
Emotion and bodily sensations
The technique of asking participants to identify which areas of the body experienced feelings
or sensations during elevator travel was influenced by a study on bodily emotions by
Nummenmaa, Glerean, Hari and Hietanen (2013). Nummenmaa et al.’s study concentrated
on identifying the areas in the body which were connected to basic and non-basic emotional
states reported by participants in response to observing affective stimuli. The emotions
focused on in Nummenmaa et al.’s (2013) study were: basic - anger, fear, disgust, happiness,
sadness, surprise, and neutral; non-basic – anxiety, love, depression, contempt, pride, shame
and envy. In this study we wanted to further this examination by applying the same technique
to isolate bodily sensations in relation to the entirely embodied experience of elevator travel,
in connection to qualitative emotional constructs provided in one word. After writing an
experienced emotion (construct) down in the space provided, participants were asked to
colour in a silhouette – blue for the cold unaffected regions and yellow for the regions in
which they experienced some kind of sensation.
Semantic differential categories
Semantic differential is a method developed by Osgood, Suci and Tannenbaum (1957)
designed to test the relationship between qualitative constructs – often adjectives – and
syntactic properties generally found in product design. There are numerous forms and types
of semantic differential and visual syntactic scales (Warell 2004), a common form being a
Likert-scale like questionnaire posing sets of binary polar adjectives (e.g. good-bad). Where
in many opinion rating scales numbers represent a relationship with negative-positive
valence, in semantic differential scales the positive-negative valence is dependent on the
construct’s relationship to the evaluation subject and context, i.e., the term “traditional” may
be desired in certain contexts in connection to certain objects or properties, in others it may
mean datedness, and lagging behind the times.
The main idea is to test the meanings of the words in connection to chosen subjects.
The categories were formulated according to three dimensions of elevator experience: what is
felt in the body; how the elevator’s design portrays an experience to the user; and what is felt
socially. Based on these categories, bipolar adjective pair groupings were formulated: 1)
bodily feeling – space, movement consistency, security and safety; 2) elevator – space,
aesthetic, emotional design, and safety; and 3) social emotions – interactivity, affectivity and
self-reflexivity. The following tables detail the bipolar adjective pairs according to their
groupings (tables 1-3).TABLE 1: Bodily feeling inside the elevator
CONSTRUCT DIMENSIONS Negative constructs Positive constructs
Space crowded roomy
distanced intimate
Movement consistency bumpy smooth
swaying firm
butterflies neutral
Security and safety vulnerable protected
comfortable uncomfortable
unstable stable
dipping steady
tingling strong
TABLE 2: Elevator design
CONSTRUCT DIMENSIONS Negative constructs Positive constructs
Space claustrophobic spacious
Aesthetic ugly beautiful
dull fun
boring interesting
dated timeless
Emotional design unconvincing reassuring
stressful calming
Safety unsafe safe
TABLE 3: Social emotions
CONSTRUCT DIMENSIONS Negative constructs Positive constructs
Connectivity isolated connected
Interactivity uninviting inviting
shy outgoing
anti-social social
Affectivity anxious indifferent
uneasy easy
irritating relaxing
Self-reflexivity self-conscious confident
embarrassed*** proud***1
The adjectives were chosen from the data of previous elevator studies, in which people
described their feelings towards and inside of elevators. Some of the constructs are abstract
such as “tingling”, and “butterflies” as they attempted to describe the ‘difficult to describe’
sensations experienced during movement and interaction which are often induced by
unexpected occurrences.
1 *** please note that this construct pair was only given to Part. A’s in order to observe whether or not they
somehow sensed being observed.Participants
The study was planned and implemented during March and April, 2014. Participants were
sought through university email lists and word-of-mouth. In total, 45 participants were
recruited, 23 females and 22 males. Participants took part in the study in pairs and groups
(max. 3). For every group one participant was a Part A (basic participant) and the rest were
Part B (those who guessed Part A’s experiences). The study was implemented 20 times,
meaning that there were 20 Part As and 25 Part Bs. Of the Part As, 9 were female and 11
were male. Of the Part Bs 11 were male and 14 were female. Participants ranged in age from
24 to 64 years (average 34,7), and were either students or staff of the university in the fields
of information systems, information technology, cognitive science and music psychology.Results
The results of this experiment are multi-faceted, and comprise numerous sections. This
results chapter presents the findings in the following sections: emotional constructs; bodily
sensations and semantic differential.
Emotional constructs
In Step 2 (after the background details) of the questionnaire participants were requested to
provide one word to describe their emotions before colouring in a human silhouette to
identify the location of the bodily sensation they experienced in the elevator. In the analysis
the constructs grouped according to responses by Part As and Part Bs, and then they were
subsequently divided into categories according to common characteristics observed in each
instance. Table 4 outlines the raw constructs provided by Parts A and B in response to
experiencing the old elevator.
TABLE 4: emotional constructs provided in response to the old elevator
GROUPINGS PART A GROUPINGS PART B
Positively aroused Funny Positively aroused Curious
Anticipation Fun
Amused Happy
Exciting Amused
Negatively aroused Nervous Negatively aroused Alert
Uneasy Uneasy
Scary Nervous
Shy Tensed
Negative temporal Impatience Suspicion
Slow Uncomfortable
Boring Irritated
Waiting Negative temporal Bored
Restless Impatient
Elevator characteristics Restricted Busy
Bumpy Waiting
Uneven Positively passive OK
Grey Relaxed
Neutrality Neutralness Neutrality Calm
Normal Indifferent
Mood Thoughtful
These were sorted into the following groups: positively aroused, negatively aroused,
negative temporal (time and waiting related), elevator characteristics, neutrality, mood and
positively passive (calm, relaxed).Fig. 3 emotional constructs of the old elevator
The diagram above shows that Part As supplied a total of: 4 positively aroused and 4
negatively aroused constructs; 6 negative temporal constructs; 4 constructs pertaining
elevator characteristics; 2 related to neutrality; and 1 relating to mood. This is contrasted with
constructs provided by Part Bs, who provided: 4 positively aroused constructs; 9 negatively
aroused; 5 negative temporal; none relating to elevator characteristics or mood; and 7
related to positively passive.
When analysing the constructs by gender it is noticed that Female Part As provided: 2
positively aroused; 1 negatively aroused; 3 negative temporal; 2 about the elevator
characteristics; 1 neutrality construct; and 1 about mood. Male Part As provided very similar
constructs: 2 positively aroused; 3 negatively aroused; 3 negative temporal; 2 about the
elevator characteristics; 1 relating to neutrality. In other words, while both men and women
provided negative constructs relating to time and waiting, the men in particular had noted
negative arousal. However, for the most part sentiments shared between the genders were
quite similar.
In relation to Part Bs, female Part Bs provided: 2 positively aroused; 6 negatively
aroused; 3 negative temporal; no elevator characteristics; 1 about neutrality; none about
mood; and 6 positively passive. Male Part Bs gave: 2 positively aroused; 3 negatively
aroused; 2 negative temporal; none regarding elevator characteristics, neutrality or mood;
and 3 positively passive. While as reflected in the results, the Male Part B group was slightly
smaller than the female one, there are still similarities between what the female and male Part
Bs provide.
What is interesting to note is that Part Bs were more negative, in relation to the affect
(negative arousal) than Part As, yet Part As seemed to feel the time factor more negatively.
Female Part Bs varied quite substantially from Female As in their experience of negative
arousal. Part As did not remark on the positive passivity at all as compared to Part Bs.TABLE 5: emotional constructs provided in response to the new elevator
GROUPINGS PART A GROUPINGS PART B
Positively aroused surprised Positively aroused Emancipated
amused Mild delight
interesting Happy
prank-like Good
Negatively aroused anxiety Curious
Negative temporal restless Interested
impatience Negatively aroused Not relaxed
Elevator characteristics techy Tensed
Positively passive Relaxation Awkwardness
pleasant Uncomfortable
flowing Uneasy
Neutrality normal Mild tension
neutral Distracted
Safety Reliability safe Positively passive Calm
stable Cool
Relaxed
Easy
Comfortable
Neutrality Neutral
These emotional constructs were sorted into the following categories: positively
aroused, negatively aroused, negative temporal, elevator characteristics, positively passive,
neutrality, and safety reliability. The reason that the categories of these two elevators differ is
due to the differences and prominences of constructs supplied by the participants.
Fig. 4 Emotional constructs of the new elevator
The diagram above shows that Part As supplied a total of: 3 positively aroused and 1
negatively aroused constructs; 2 negative temporal constructs; 1 construct pertaining elevatorcharacteristics; 6 related to neutrality; 3 positively passive constructs; 1 relating to mood;
and 3 referring to safety and reliability. This is contrasted with constructs provided by Part
Bs, who provided: 7 positively aroused constructs; 6 negatively aroused; 4 referring to
negative temporal; none relating to elevator characteristics or mood; 7 related to positively
passive; and none concerning safety or reliability.
When analysing the constructs by gender it is noticed that Female Part As provided: 1
positively aroused; no negatively aroused; none regarding negative temporal; none about the
elevator characteristics; 2 neutrality constructs; 3 relating to positively passive; 1 about
mood and 2 about safety and reliability. Male Part As provided: 2 positively aroused; 1
negatively aroused; 2 negative temporal; 1 about the elevator characteristics; 4 relating to
neutrality; no positively passive or mood constructs; and 1 about safety and reliability. Here
it is noticed that there is less attention drawn towards the specific elevator characteristics and
more towards notions of neutrality and positive passive experience – i.e., the ability to relax,
enjoy and not notice the elevator travel.
In relation to Part Bs, female Part Bs provided: 3 positively aroused; 3 negatively
aroused; 2 negative temporal; none about elevator characteristics nor neutrality; none about
mood; 5 positively passive; and none about safety and reliability. Male Part Bs gave: 4
positively aroused; 3 negatively aroused; 2 negative temporal; none regarding elevator
characteristics; 1 about; 2 positively passive; and none about mood or safety and reliability.
The results were quite even in regards to positively and negatively aroused, negative temporal
and the rest. The only larger difference can be seen in relation to positively passive constructs
– females placed greater emphasis on relaxation and calmness. Yet, neither female or male
Part Bs referred to the positive experience of safety and reliability as the Part As had.
Part Bs in general, gave more positively aroused constructs than Part As, but this was
combined with an almost equal amount of negatively aroused constructs from Part Bs. What
was mostly expressed amongst Part As were sentiments of neutrality and feeling normal in
the efficient new elevator. Part Bs enhanced this notion with another strong emphasis on
positive passivity (calm and relaxed). The female Part Bs expressed the most amount of
constructs regarding positive passivity, while the male Part Bs provided the most constructs
regarding positive arousal. Overall there seemed to be an amplification in what Part Bs
mentioned in regards to how they felt Part As experienced the elevators as compared to how
Part Bs actually felt.Bodily sensations
Upon searching for methods to measure the relationship between expressed emotions and
bodily sensations, the Nummenmaa et al. (2013) body emotions study was discovered. As
explained above, participants were asked to identify, by colouring a silhouette, where they
most felt sensations in their body (yellow) and where they least felt these sensations (blue),
and likewise Part Bs were asked to colour in the body according to where they felt (i.e.
through their imagination or through their own bodily sensations) the other person was
feeling the sensations. The below figures are compilations of all of the responses for firstly
the old elevator and then the new elevator.
Fig. 5: Bodily sensation silhouettes regarding the old elevatorFig. 6: Bodily sensation silhouettes regarding the old elevator
The silhouettes have been analysed according to the parts of the body in which
participants have indicated their sensations. These body parts are: heads, shoulders, arms,
hands, chests, stomach, pelvis, thighs, shins and feet. Results of the analysis can be seen in
the tables below.Bodily sensations totals
30
25
20
15
10
5
0
Old elevator New elevator
Fig. 7: Bodily sensations totals – identified body parts per elevator
The figure above shows that the area in which people experienced the most bodily
sensations was in the head. This figure was equal (28) for both elevators. The next affected
area was the chest region which was indicated more often in relation to the new elevator (13)
than the old (9). The shins and feet were indicated 11 times in the case of the old elevator,
while in the case of the new elevator the feet were indicated 9 times and the shins 6 times.
Bodily sensations in the stomach were also experienced more often in the old elevator (10)
than in the new (8). More bodily sensations were experienced in the hands in the old elevator
(9) than in the new (7). Yet slightly more sensations were felt in the arms in the new elevator
(6) than in the old (5). Sensations were felt more in the shoulders in the old elevator (6) than
the new (2). Likewise, more sensations were felt in the knees in the old (6) than the new (4).
There were slightly more sensations experienced in the thighs in the old elevator (4) than the
new (3). Additionally, more people indicated that they felt, or believed Part A felt, sensations
in their sides in the old elevator (3) than in the new (1). Three people indicated feeling
sensations in their throats in both elevators. Finally, two indicated sensations in their pelvis in
the new elevator (2).
The next graph shows the distribution of bodily sensations according to the experiment
groups. As seen in the diagram, some groups indicated sensations, or believed sensations of
Part Bs observing Part As, more than others. But this too is an interesting point of discussion.Old elevator bodily sensations
12
10
8
6
4
2
0
head throat chest shoulders arms hands stomach
sides pelvis thighs knees shins feet
Fig. 8: Identified bodily sensation areas per group – old elevator
In the diagram it can be seen that in the case of group 1 (all females), each of the
participants (Parts A and B) identified different areas in the body in which they felt
sensations. The identified areas were concentrated towards the top half of the body. In group
2 (all females), all of the participants (3) identified sensations in their head, one in their
throat (Part B), another (Part A) thighs, one knees, shins and the two in their feet (Part A
and B). Group 3 comprised all males and in this group all the participants (3) indicated
their stomach, one head, one their thighs and knees and two (Part A and B) shins. In group
4 (all female) all participants (3) identified their heads one chest, and one hands. In group
5 (female Part A and male Part B) both participants (2) indicated sensations in their heads
and chests and one (Part B) identified their feet. In group 6 the pair (both males) identified
almost the opposite of one another. Part A identified the stomach, while Part B identified the
head, shoulders, hands, shins and feet. In group 7 (2 males and 1 female) two identified their
head (Part A and male B), one (female B) identified shoulders, and another (Part A) shins
and feet. Both participants identified their heads in group 8, then one stomach (Part A) and
one feet (Part A). In group 9 both participants (female and male) identified their
shoulders and hands, while one (Part A) identified their head and the other (Part B)
identified their feet. In group 10 (both male) both participants identified their heads, one
(Part A) in their shoulders and arms, both in their hands, and only Part A in their shins and
feet.
In group 11 (Part A male, Part B female) there were no similarities, Part A felt
sensations in his shins and Part B felt them in her head and stomach. Group 12 showed that
Part A (male) felt the sensations in his thighs, knees and feet and Part B (male) felt it in his
head. In group 13 (Part A male, Part B female) both participants felt sensations in their
chests and knees. Part A felt them in his head, thighs and shins and Part B felt them in her
stomach and feet. Group 14 (both female) is interesting in that both Parts identified their
sides, yet Part A identified them as a site of sensation and Part B identified them as ‘cold
spots’ (unaffected). In group 15 (Part A male, Part B female), both Parts identified their
heads, throats, chests and stomachs, while Part B also identified her shoulders, arms and
sides. In group 16 (Part A female, Part B male) Part A identified her stomach and Part B
identified his head. In group 17 (Part A female, Part B male) Part A identified her chest and
Part B identified his shins. Similarly to group 14, group 18 (two males) is also interesting inthat they identified the opposites to each other. Part A identified his stomach as feeling the
sensation, and the cold spots as being the shoulders and feet, while Part B identified the cold
spots as everywhere else but head and feet. In group 19 (Part A male, Part B female) both
Parts felt sensations in their heads and Part A also felt sensations in his knees. Group 20
(male Part A and female Part B) was an outstanding case, whereby Part B explained that she
had only marked sensations in the head, arms, hands, shins and thighs due to the movement
inside the elevator. Otherwise, she did not feel that Part A was experiencing any particular
emotions or sensations. Part A did not mark any areas as he told that he did not feel anything.
New elevator bodily sensations
9
8
7
6
5
4
3
2
1
0
head throat chest shoulders arms hands stomach
sides pelvis thighs knees shins feet
Fig. 9. Identified bodily sensation areas per group – new elevator
In group 1 (all female), all participants identified sensations in their throat, two
(Part A and Part B) identified the head, and one (the other Part B) identified the hands. In
group 2 (all female), all participants identified sensations in their heads and feet. In group
3 (all male), Part A and one Part B identified sensations in their stomachs, one Part B
their head, chest and sides, the other Part B their thighs, knees, shins and feet. In group 4 (all
female) all participants identified their heads, Part A her feet and one Part B her stomach.
In group 5 (Part A female, Part B male) both participants identified their chests and
stomachs, Part B their head and feet. In group 6 (both male) both participants identified
their chests, while Part B also identified his head, shoulders, arms and hands. In group 7
(Part A male and Parts B male and female), all participants identified their heads, one Part
B hands and the other Part B (male) chest. In group 8 (Part A female, Part B male), both
participants identified their heads, then Part A also identified her stomach, shins and feet.
In group 9 (Part A female, Part B male), both participants identified their stomachs, Part A
identified her pelvis and Part B identified his chest. In group 10 (both male), both
participants identified their heads and hands, Part A also identified his throat, shoulders
and shins.
In group 11 (Part A male, Part B female) only Part B identified sensations in her head
and stomach. In group 12 (both male), both participants identified sensations in their
heads. In group 13 (Part A male, Part B female), both participants reported sensations in
their chests and thighs, Part A identified sensations in his head, knees and shins, and Part B
identified sensations in her feet. In group 14 (both male), both participants noted
sensations in their heads, while Part A also indicated sensations in his chest. In group 15
(Part A male, Part B female), both participants identified sensations in their heads andchests, Part A identified their shins and feet, and Part B identified their throat, shoulders and
arms. In group 16 (Part A female, Part B male), Part A did not report sensations, but Part B
showed sensations in his head, arms and hands. In group 17 (Part A female, Part B male),
Part A identified sensations in her chest and part B identified his thighs, knees and shins. In
group 18 (both male), both participants identified sensations in their hands. Part A identified
sensations in his chest and shoulders, and Part B identified his arms, shins and feet. In group
19 (Part A male, Part B female), both participants identified their heads. And once again,
group 20 (Part A male, Part B female) was an interesting case, where neither of the
participants indicated any sensations. Part B explained (in conversation separately with the
researcher) that she was perplexed that she could not detect anything from the participant, but
Part A had noted on the questionnaire that he had not experienced any sensations.
Sensation similarity %
100
90
80
70
60
50
Sensation similarity %
40
30
20
10
0
Old elevator New elevator
Fig. 10. Comparison of the rates of similarity between the elevators
The graph above shows the rates of similarity of identified bodily sensations between
the elevators. It can be seen that in all cases, almost half of the time Parts B were able to
accurately identify where in the body Part As were experiencing sensations. However, as also
can be seen, identification in response to the new elevator was slightly more accurate. This
may indicate that the more neutral, or stable the elevator experience, the more standardised
the sensation in the body. This observation is supported by what can be seen in the tables
below which match the emotional constructs to bodily experiences.
TABLE 6: Old elevator emotional constructs with bodily sensations
BODY PARTS Part A Part A Part B Part B
female constructs male constructs female constructs male constructs
Head Anticipation Boring More boring Excitement
Slow Nervous Waiting Calm
Bumpy Restless Relaxed Alert
Restricted Funny Irritated then Unease
Exciting Shy relaxed Amusement
Waiting Calm Bored
OK Relaxed a little
Happy impatient
Fun CuriousIndifferent
Throat Bumpy Boring Anticipation Unease
Nervous Happy Curious
Funny
Shy
Chest Restricted Grey Nervous Excitement
Uneasy Restless Waiting Calm
Boredom Funny Tension suspicion
Relaxed
Happy
Shoulders Waiting Calm Alert
Happy Calm
Arms Nervous Calm
Happy Calm
Indifferent
Hands Anticipation Irritated then Alert
Waiting relaxed Calm
Happy Nervous
Indifferent Amusement
Stomach Exciting Grey OK Amused
Funny Tension suspicion Excitement
Impatience Happy Tensed
Calm
Sides Slow Happy
Pelvis Amused Tensed
Thighs Slow Scary Tensed
Restless
Knees Slow Scary Amused Tensed
Restless Tension suspicion
Shy
Slow Amused Scary Tensed
Alert Indifferent Nervous
Shins Uneven
Restless
Uncomfortable
Feet Slow Boring More boring Calm
Exciting Nervous Tension suspicion Alert
Waiting Curious
Indifferent
It can be seen that the most common part of the body affected by the elevator
experience was the head. The head was attached to both positive and negative emotional
constructs, aroused and passive. Females indicated the head slightly more often than males
and Part Bs identified the head area slight more in general. The throat was identified mostly
by male Part As – three negatively aroused emotions plus one positively aroused. Part Bs
(male and female) were equal in identifying sensations in their throats. All of the emotional
constructs were aroused, both positive and negative. All the emotional constructs Part As
identified as connected to the chest area were aroused except ‘grey’. More female Part Bs
identified the chest area than male Part Bs, and there was a mixture of emotional constructs
from positive to negative, aroused to passive. The shoulders were more commonly identified
amongst Part Bs. Again, there was a mixture of emotional constructs – two positively passive(calm) and two aroused (positive and negative). Only one Part A (female) identified the
shoulders in connection to the experience of ‘waiting’. The arms were not identified at all by
Part As. There was a mixture of emotions expressed by female Part Bs in connection with the
arms, both cases in which male Part Bs identified the arms they expressed the emotion
‘calm’.
Only female Part As identified the hands, and in both cases this related to an aspect
of time and anxiety – anticipation and waiting. Both female and male Part Bs identified the
hands, but there was a mixture of emotional constructs also present. A common thread
amongst the identification of the stomach area in relation to both Part As and Bs was
that of excitement, impatience, tension, suspicion and humour – all positively aroused.
There were also constructs among both a male Part A and Part Bs that alluded to passivity
such as grey OK and calm. The sides were indicated by two females, one Part A in reference
to ‘slow’, the other a Part B in reference to ‘happy’. The pelvis was identified by two males,
both in relation to aroused emotional constructs – amused and tensed.
From the waist down the emotional constructs are mostly negative. A female Part
A attached the word ‘slow’ to the thighs, and male Part As stated ‘scary’ and ‘restless’. The
only Part B (male) to identify the thighs stated ‘tensed’. All of these constructs are then
connected to the knees, in addition to female Part Bs stating ‘tension suspicion’ and
amusement (positive), and one Part A male stating ‘shy’. The shins were also connected to
negative arousal by those who identified them, in addition to the ‘slow’. And the feet were
connected to both similar negative notions, in addition to boredom, impatience, alertness and
indifference.
TABLE 7: New elevator emotional constructs with bodily sensations
BODY PARTS Part A Part A Part B Part B
female constructs male constructs female constructs male constructs
Head Relaxation Normal Comfortable Uncomfort
Pleasant Normal Waiting Calm
Normal Restless Interested Techy
Flowing Prank-like Cool Bored
Anxiety Awkwardness Neutral more
Relaxed relaxed
Good
Emancipated
Easy
Calm
Throat Relaxation Neutral Not relaxed Uncomfort
Normal Normal Cool
Prank-like Easy
Chest Neutral Amused Mild tension Mild delight
Surprised Neutral Easy Reserved
Boredom Normal Uncomfort
Restless Uneasy
Prank-like
Calmness
Shoulders Normal Easy Mild delight
Calmness Uncomfort
Arms Flowing Normal Not relaxed Reserved
Neutral more
relaxed
Amused
Hands Normal Not relaxed ReservedCalmness Interested Calm
Awkwardness Neutral more
relaxed
Amused
Stomach Flowing Amused Interested Amused
Safe Good Mild delight
Uneasy
Sides Amused
Tensed
Pelvis Neutral Tensed
Safe
Thighs Restless Mild tension Tensed
confident Uncomfortable
Knees Restless Waiting Tensed
Uncomfortable
Amused
Shins Normal Normal Tensed
Restless Uncomfortable
Prank-like Amused
Feet Pleasant Prank-like Comfortable Tensed
Normal Mild tension Mild delight
Flowing confident Amused
Observing the bodily sensations and emotional constructs results for the new elevator, it
is interesting to see that the emotional constructs were mostly connected to the head in the
case of female Part Bs, in relation to the new elevator. The constructs were a mixture between
aroused and passive, negative and positive emotions. The emotions were dominated by
positively passive. Likewise, the male Part As and Bs also featured a mixture of constructs,
positive and negative, aroused and passive in relation to sensations in the head. However, the
female Part As only specified positively passive emotions – ‘relaxation’, ‘pleasant’,
‘normal’ and ‘flowing’. Interestingly also, the Part As (both female and male) were
more positive in relation to the elevator when indicating the throat than the Part Bs. All
of the Part A constructs related to positive passivity, besides one ‘prank-like’, while Part Bs
indicated a range of emotional constructs from ‘not relaxed’ and ‘uncomfort’, to ‘easy’ and
‘cool’ (both female).
There was a concentration of identification of the chest area amongst male Part As in
connection to the new elevator. Once again, the emotional constructs attached were mostly
positive and humorous emotions. There was one negatively aroused construct, ‘restless’
stated, the rest were both aroused and passive positive constructs. Among the other
participants there was a mixture of emotions articulated in connection with the chest, yet
surprisingly not as much among females as among males. The male Part Bs in particular
expressed notions of unease.
It was mostly males who identified as feeling sensations in their shoulders, equally for
Part As as for Part Bs. The Part As emphasised notions of calmness, while the Part Bs arousal
both positive and negative. The arms were also interesting in that they were only mentioned
twice by Part As (female and male), and in both cases they were connected with ‘flowing’
and ‘normal’. Arms were mentioned mostly by male Part Bs, where they were connected to a
mixture of emotions, but notably and in relation to the female Part B who indicated arms,
they existed in connection to both negative (not relaxed) and positive (flow) emotions.
The hands were not indicated by female Part As, and were mostly related to negative
arousal in female Part Bs, with the exception of one stating ‘interested’. Male Part Asindicating sensations in the hands gave passively positive constructs, and this was continued
among male Part Bs with the exception of one stating ‘reserved’ and the other stating
‘amused’. Once again, what is interesting to note is the connection between indicating
the stomach among males (Part A and B) and the emotion of amusement. All of the
females indicating the stomach did this in connection with stating positive constructs,
and only one male Part B indicated the construct ‘uneasy’. The sides were only shown by two
male Part Bs who connected them to ‘amused’ and ‘tensed’ (from the same group). Then the
pelvis was indicated twice by female Part As in relation to ‘neutral’ and ‘safe’, while the
male Part B indicating the pelvis reported ‘tensed’.
The thighs were not identified by female Part As, and were connected to restlessness by
male Part Bs. They were interestingly connected to ‘mild tension confident’ by a female Part
B and ‘tensed’ and ‘uncomfortable’ by a male Part B. The knees were connected with
‘uncomfort’ and the negative impacts of time in all cases where they were indicated, apart
from one male Part B stating ‘ amused’ and no female Part As identifying them. Two Part As
(female and male) connected shins with normality, while the rest connected them with either
positive or negative arousal – female Part Bs did not identify the shins.
The feet seemed to be the site of both negative and positive feelings. All of the female
Part As constructs connected to feet were positive, the male Part A was humorous, and two
participants (female and male Part Bs) connected feet to tension. So, once again a pattern can
be observed in which negativity and arousal were concentrated towards the legs and pelvic
region, and excitement related sentiments were shown in the stomach. Positive feelings and
sensations of passivity and flow seemed connected to the head.Semantic differential results
The semantic differential results are described here in terms of averages and observable
relationships, between the elevators, the participants’ roles (i.e. A or B) and gender. The
semantic differential method was an efficient way of obtaining information regarding how
participants experienced the tested elevators in terms of bodily sensations, elevator design
and social emotions. It has also been instrumental in showing the relationship between how
people experience these elements first hand, and how others try to evaluate the elevators from
another person’s point-of-view. It shows where people are more likely to be able to
adequately guess another person’s evaluations, and where they are less likely to. Please note
that the constructs are represented according to their location on the binary scales. That is,
words located to the lower-left of the hyphen were at the ‘1’, words at the right were located
at the ‘7’.
Bodily sensations
Fig. 11: Bodily sensation semantic differential total averages
In light of the semantic differential total averages, it can be seen that the new elevator
was experienced as only slightly roomier (3) than the old elevator (3,4). The old elevator
(3,8) was experienced as colder than the new elevator (4,4). The old elevator (3,3) ride was
bumpier than the new one (5,5), but then there was an equal experience somewhere in
the middle of distancing and intimacy (3,6 old elevator; 3,7 new elevator), which is
connected to how they perceived the sense of space (i.e. roomy-crowded). The new elevator
(5,4) was experienced as providing a firm feeling, while the old elevator (3,5) was in the
middle (not as firm, yet not swaying). The old elevator (4,1) was experienced as more
unstable and the new (2,6) as stable. Also, the new elevator (2,7) was seen as relatively
secure while the old elevator was slightly unsecure (3,8). There was no experience of
physical pressure in either of the elevators, yet the feeling experienced in the new elevator
(4,8) was lighter than in the old elevator (4). In both elevators participants felt relative
neutrality (4,6 old elevator; 4,9 new elevator) rather than the sensation of butterflies
(nervous sensation) in one’s stomach. There was also a relatively stable, or neutral sensation
experienced in both elevators which slightly went towards a tingling (like goose bumps on
the skin = cutis anserina) sensation (3,7 old elevator; 4 new elevator). The new elevator (5,5)
was experienced as steadier than the old elevator (3,9), and the new elevator (3,1) wasadditionally more comfortable than the old (4,3). Participants felt more protected in the new
elevator (4,8) than in the old (3,7).
Fig. 12: Bodily sensation semantic differential Part A averages
Differences can be seen in the responses when analysing them according to the
participant’s role. When looking at the chart in general, it can be seen that Part As responses
towards the old elevator were much more neutral (between the 3-4 mark) than towards the
new elevator. The only stronger responses were regarding instability (unstable), neutrality
(following suit with what is observable), tingling sensation (slightly) and discomfort
(uncomfortable). Responses towards the new elevator were more radical in that based on the
results, it can clearly be seen that Part As experienced the new elevator as roomy, somewhat
warm, smooth, firm, stable, secure, light, neutral, steady, comfortable, and protected.
Fig. 13: Bodily sensations semantic differential Female Part A averagesFig. 14: Bodily sensations semantic differential Male Part A averages
When comparing the female Part A responses to the male Part A responses, it can be
seen that experiences of the new elevator in comparison to the old varied drastically in the
case of the female participants as compared to the male participants. Still, many of the
constructs relating to the old elevator were evaluated in terms of neutrality, the only
constructs to really stand out being, cold, bumpy, unstable, unsecure, tingling, dipping,
and uncomfortable. The new elevator was experienced by female Part As as roomy, warm,
smooth, firm, stable, secure, light, neutral, steady, comfortable and protected. The male
Part As on the other hand took a yet more neutral line when evaluating the bodily sensations
of the old elevator. Here, the only major rise in the chart was at the point of neutrality. The
male results of the new elevator showed however, that males clearly experienced it to be
smooth, firm, stable, secure, light, neutral, strong, steady and protected. Thus, the new
elevator, which was experienced as more positive, received more definite characterisations of
the types of bodily experiences induced by the ride. The old elevator was experienced as
neutral. The differences in male and female participants can be seen particularly in regards to
female evaluations of stability, security and comfort. Males on the other hand concentrated
on smoothness, stability and security, but without much emphasis on comfort.
Fig. 15: Bodily sensations semantic differential Part B averagesPart Bs seemed to take a more cautious, or neutral line when evaluating the bodily
experiences of the elevators on behalf of Part A. Interestingly contrasts can be seen in the
case of the ‘cold-warm’ binary constructs, whereby even the old elevator was experienced as
slightly warm. And along these lines the old elevator was perceived as giving a slightly light
bodily sensation, neutrality and steadiness. The stronger evaluation of constructs once
again related to the new elevator, in which Part Bs thought that Part As experienced the
elevator as smooth, firm, stable, secure, light, neutral, strong, steady and protected. Quite
similarly to the Part As.
Fig. 16: Bodily sensations semantic differential Female Part B averages
Fig. 17: Bodily sensations semantic differential Male Part B averages
The way in which the female and male Part Bs guessed the Part As were experiencing,
was surprisingly quite similar. Factors which stand out as being experienced relating to the
old elevator were the slight warmth, neutrality and steadiness. For the new elevator, also
there were similarities in it being believed to be perceived as warm, smooth, firm, secure,
light, neutral and steady. Yet, similarly to the results of the Part As, the females also noted
the new elevator as being comfortable.Elevator design
Fig. 18: Elevator design semantic differential total averages
The total results of the elevator design semantic differential show that the old elevator
was experienced as ugly (5), dull (2,4), unconvincing (4,2), boring (5,4) and spacious (4,5).
The new elevator was also considered boring (4,3), timeless (4,2), safe (2,4), spacious (5)
and calming (5). Thus, the greatest differences can be seen in terms of ugliness as compared
to neutrality and safety.
Fig. 19: Elevator design semantic differential Part A averages
When looking at the results of Part As, more variations can be seen in terms of the
factors of ugliness (old elevator) and neutrality, dullness, unconvincingness and boringness of
the old elevator. This is in comparison to the expressed experiences of reassuringness (of the
reliability of the elevator), safety, spaciousness and calming elements of the new elevator.Fig. 20: Elevator design semantic differential female Part A averages
Fig. 21: Elevator design semantic differential male Part A averages
There were once again some tendencies among the female attempts to emphasise
stronger contrasts between the elevators. The element of fun was brought more to the fore by
female Part As than male Part As regarding the new elevator. In fact, males expressed the
new elevator as well as being slightly boring. Also, the unconvincingness (unreliability) of
the old elevator was more emphasised by females than males so was the feeling of the lack of
safety, and stress. In fact, females and males varied on this note, in that females experienced
the old elevator as stressful, whereas the males experienced it as slightly calming. But for
the most part, results were quite similar in that the new elevator was experienced by both
genders as being reassuring, timeless, safe, spacious and calming.Fig. 22: Elevator design semantic differential Part B averages
Part B results proved yet again to exist more along the lines of neutrality, and there was
less expressed difference between the elevators. As Part Bs were guessing what Part As were
experiencing it can be seen that they felt Part As thought the old elevator was ugly, dull,
slightly unconvincing, boring, spacious and slightly calming. The new elevator was
evaluated as more neutral yet still attracting the evaluations of being boring, slightly
timeless, safe, spacious and calming.
Fig. 23: Elevator design semantic differential female Part B averagesFig. 24: Elevator design semantic differential male Part B averages
The results of female and male Part B evaluations were starkly similar, and somewhat
similar to the Part A results. Again, the old elevator was evaluated as ugly (stronger response
among males), dull, slightly unconvincing, boring, spacious, and calming. Yet, female Part
Bs also expressed the old elevator as being timeless. Both female and male Part Bs saw the
new elevator being experienced as boring, yet this time the males evaluated the new elevator
as being timeless and once again the female Part Bs emphasised the factor of safety.
Social emotions
Fig. 25: Social emotions semantic differential total averages
This social dimensions component was quite interesting as it was heavily connected to
the people with whom the participants undertook the study. Yet, there were still patterns
which could be observed in relation to the respective elevators. Due to the social nature of
elevator usage, this dimension is important to understand in terms of the impacts induced on
the social dynamics on the basis of physical elevator qualities. The old elevator was
experienced overall as being anti-social (5), yet connected (2,4), outgoing (4,2), self-
conscious (5,4) and indifferent (4,5). The social emotions experienced in the new elevatorwere expressed as slightly self-conscious (4,3) and uneasy (4,2), inviting (2,4), indifferent
(5) and relaxing (5).
Fig. 26: Social emotions semantic differential Part A averages
Fig. 27: Social emotions semantic differential Part A averages
Here, Part As experienced the old elevator as slightly anti-social, isolated, they felt self-
conscious, uneasy, and that it was overall uninviting. Whereas, the Part As also felt slightly
outgoing, indifferent, relaxed, and a sense of pride in the new elevator. Part Bs on the other
hand did not vary as greatly in regards to the social emotions they felt Part As had
experienced in the respective elevators. Actually, guessed experiences of anti-social
emotions were attributed to the new elevator, as was the feeling of isolation (slightly),
uninvitingness, indifference and relaxation. In the old elevator Part Bs guessed that Part As
felt a slight sense of isolation, unease, indifference and to a slightly lesser extent relaxation.Fig. 28: Social emotions semantic differential female Part A averages
Fig. 29: Social emotions semantic differential male Part A averages
Looking at the variations between the female and the male Part As, it can be seen that
females rated the old elevator as anti-social and isolated, while the males were quite neutral.
Males felt slight outgoing in the new elevator, but yet also self-conscious (aware of
themselves and possibly concerned that people were looking at them) in the old elevator.
Females clearly felt self-conscious in the old elevator, as well as uneasy, that it was
uninviting (as did the males), anxious, and irritated. When asked the ‘bonus’ Part A
question as to whether or not they felt proud or embarrassed (a subconscious reflection of
perceiving that one is being watched) both females and males were slightly proud in the new
elevator and quite neutral in the old elevator. As can be seen when comparing the graphs,
female Part As felt the social emotions on a somewhat stronger level than the male Part As.Fig. 30: Social emotions semantic differential Part B averages
The overall averages of the social emotions dimension is quite interesting, as on average, Part
Bs experienced the new elevator as being slightly ant-social, both elevators as slightly
isolating, making them feel self-conscious, they were also shown to be uninviting, in addition
to being experienced as indifferent and relaxing.
Fig. 31: Social emotions semantic differential female Part B averagesFig. 32: Social emotions semantic differential male Part B averages
Male and female Part Bs gave quite similar responses which were more in line with the
male Part Bs than female Part As. Surprisingly, both males and females guessed that the Part
As experienced the new elevator as slightly anti-social. There was also the sensing of slight
isolation in the new elevator, and they felt that Part As felt slightly self-conscious also in the
new elevator. They felt that the new elevator would be perceived as slightly uninviting, yet at
the same time that Part As would feel indifferent and relaxed. The results of the old elevator
were similar to that of the new, in that it too was assumed by female part Bs to be
experienced as anti-social, yet not by male Part Bs. Both males and females thought the old
elevator would be experienced as slightly isolated, uninviting, and again Part Bs predicted
that Part As would feel indifferent and relaxed in the old elevator.
While male Part As, as well as both male and female Part Bs assumed a more neutral
approach to evaluating the experience of social emotions, female Part As, who were supposed
to be evaluating what they themselves felt, had stronger inclinations toward particular
constructs. As seen in the results until now, there does not seem to be too much difference, if
any between women and men in terms of the ability to read other people’s emotions, which
means that there might be other instances or meanings pertaining to the neurological finding
of heightened mirror neuron activity in women as compared to men. But, could this mean
also that the mirror neuron activity does not necessarily mean the ability to read others’
emotions, rather that women simply feel in a stronger way than men? This may explain the
female labelling of emotional.
Levels of difference between Part A and Part B responses
The following section describes how the female and male Part Bs differed in their semantic
differential responses from the Part As. These show the likelihood of accuracy when guessing
what another person is experiencing and evaluating qualities on their behalf. The Part Bs had
been told to try to feel what the Part As were feeling and write their responses according to
this. By looking at the total of average point difference between female and male Part B
responses, it can be seen that on average, both genders were quite close to predicting or
guessing how the Part A was feeling. Despite the visual difference in this graph (please keep
in mind that the Y axis starts at 1,5 and ends at 1,86), the actual numerical difference is small.
Females were only slightly more accurate in guessing Part A experiences by 0,2 points (thescale was out of 7, meaning that there was the possibility to deviate by 6 points). On average,
Part Bs varied from Part As in their responses by 1,7 points.
Average point difference
1,85
1,8
1,75
1,7
Average distance
1,65
1,6
1,55
1,5
Female Male
Fig. 33: Average point difference between Part As and Part Bs by gender
When looking at the difference in responses through the dimensions of bodily
sensations, elevator design and social emotions, the following can be seen (please note that
the order of the binary constructs do not apply in these graphs, they merely describe the
factors under evaluation):
6
5
4
3
2 Male old elevator
1
Female old bodily
0
Male new bodily
Female new bodily
Fig. 34: Levels of difference between Part B and Part A responses regarding bodily experience
While there was not much difference between the genders in their ability to guess what
the Part As were experiencing in terms of bodily sensations, females seemed more consistent
and able to predict Part As’ experiences particularly in relation to the new elevator, and more
than the males in the old elevator. Interestingly, once again the factor of comfort was more
accurately predicted among females than males in both elevators. This held for the sensation
of strength/tingling and the pressure level factors. Male Part Bs were particularly accurate
when guessing the steadiness factor in the new elevator, yet somewhat distanced in the newelevator. The males in particular seemed to vary from the Part As in their responses to the old
elevator, especially on the factors of smoothness, firmness and this steadiness factor.
Females had greater accuracy in the old elevator yet varied somewhat in the sensation of
security, and neutrality. The sensation of pressure in the new elevator was also somewhat
distanced in the female Part B responses. The total average distance in responses towards
bodily sensations was 1,7, females receiving an average of 1,7 and males receiving an
average of also 1,7.
6
5
4
3
Male old elevator
2
Female old elevator
1
Male new elevator
0
Female new elevator
Fig. 35: Levels of difference between Part B and Part A responses regarding elevator design
There was slightly less difference in the responses towards elevator design between
Part As and Part Bs, with a total average of 1,6, but also the difference between male and
female responses was greater in regards to accuracy. Here, females received an average of 1,5
points difference to the Part As, and males receive 1,8 points difference. So, women on the
whole were slightly more accurate in their ability to guess what Part A was thinking about in
terms of the physical elevator qualities. In particular, females were quite accurate in their
evaluation of the factors of dull/fun, reassuring/unconvincing, and safety of the new
elevator. The greatest distance regarding female evaluations related to both the old and new
elevator in terms of dated/timelessness. Here, males were more accurate regarding the new
elevator, but less accurate regarding the old. For the most part, here it can be seen that males
were less able to guess what the Part As were feeling particularly in relation to the old
elevator, regarding perceptions of timelessness and safety. The slightly weaker results of the
men regarding experience of safety also continued in the new elevator.
On the whole, what is interesting to see is that experiences relating to the new elevator
were easier to guess than for the old elevator. This may indicate that with newness,
smoothness of ride, reliability and attention to interior detail (i.e. polished granite flooring,
atmospheric led lighting and carefully finished stainless steel-mirror side panels), the way
that people experience is more likely to be controlled than if the technologies (elevators) are
dated and start working in unpredictable ways.6
5
4
3
Male old social
2
Female old social
1
Male new social
0
Female new social
Fig. 36: Levels of difference between Part B and Part A responses regarding social emotions
In relation to the dimension of social emotions, a total average difference of 1,7 was
achieved. Females and males performed similarly in their ability to guess what Part A what
feeling about the social situation. Yet, once again females (1,5 point distance) slight out-
performed males (1,8 point distance). The male strong point was their ability to guess the
sense of connectedness experienced in the new elevator, and the level of invitingness in the
old elevator. Both in the new and old elevators males were less able to sense the unease of
Part A, in addition to the level of anxiety/indifference, and irritation/relaxation. Female Part
Bs quite steadily guessed Part A’s experiences within 2 points in both the new and old
elevators. They were more aptly able to guess the extent to which Part A experienced
social/anti-socialness, as well as connectedness in both the old and new elevators. Also they
were quite efficient at guessing the level of irritation that Part A experienced.
All in all, while looking at the results and observing that there was no noticeable
difference between the performance of both male and female Part Bs. Rather, a slight
tendency for females to be more accurate. However, in all cases it can be seen that guessing
how another experiences concrete, physical properties – i.e., of the elevators – is easier than
trying to guess what another is feeling, both within their body and in relation to other people.Discussion
During the course of the experiments and as seen in the results, some themes and
findings did emerge regarding the topic. On the basic level, and as seen through the results –
emotional constructs, bodily sensations, and semantic differential – it seems the more stable
and consistent the technology, i.e., that of a working and updated elevator, the more uniform
the experience (e.g. calmness, relaxation, neutrality). Additionally, by combining the
indications of bodily sensations with the emotional constructs it could also be seen that there
was a pattern of mostly positive constructs being concentrated towards the head region.
Excitement and tension were experienced in the stomach2. This corresponds with
Nummenmaa et al.’s (2013) results showing that people reported sensations in the stomach
and chest area when reporting the non-basic emotion of anxiety. Furthermore, it could be
seen in the results of this study that negative feelings were strongly connected to the legs and
shins. This somewhat corresponds with Nummenmaa et al.’s (2013) results whereby the basic
emotion of fear was experienced in the shins and so too was anger (basic), however the
strongest relationship between emotion and bodily sensation in the shins was in the case of
happiness (basic).
When viewing the semantic differential results, it can be seen that female Part As –
those who were answering from their own perspective – gave the most radical/varied
responses, clearly categorising bodily sensations, elevator designs and social emotions in
terms of specific characteristics. They also reported more clear contrasts between the
elevators. The other participants were not as varied in their results, many times tending
towards neutrality, particularly on behalf of the Part Bs. Perhaps Part Bs (both males and
females) were weary of making assumptions on behalf of others.
There were also patterns amongst the responses of females and males. Two males
reported boringness and restlessness, and there was a tendency in the semantic differential
results for the males to rate both the old and the new elevator as boring. Also males rated the
old elevator as dull. Females (both Part As and Bs) referred to the ‘waiting’ aspect of the
experience. In their responses, females (both Part As and Bs) more often rated the elevators
in terms of comfort and safety in the semantic differential, whereas male Part Bs in particular
mentioned the aspect of uncomfort in their qualitative responses. Different social dynamics
could be seen to be induced by the different quality elevators. The old elevator tended to
induce more self-consciousness (awareness of oneself in relation to the outer world) and was
found to be uninviting, while the new elevator showed that people (Part As) reported a slight
sense of pride. In the results, it could be seen that the females (both Part As and Bs slightly
less) rated the old elevator in terms of being anti-social and isolating. Female Part As rated
the old elevator also as stressful.
It can be noticed that the more stable and consistent the elevator experience (new
elevator), the more uniform the answers – across participants, quite often referring to the
experience in the new elevator as neutral, normal, relaxing and calm. The more inconsistent
the experience (the old elevator has a tendency to vary in speed and make random mechanical
noises) the less uniform the responses are.
There was the tendency that Part Bs were more accurate in guessing Part As’
experiences when basing these experiences on the tangible elevator design characteristics.
The ‘in-body’ characteristics of bodily sensations and social emotions were guessed with less
accuracy. Furthermore, Part Bs in general rated the old elevator design in particular as dull,
2 This was an interesting connection in light of Juhani Mattila’s (2014) current book which discusses excitement
and nervousness in light of fear, as he locates the sense of tension to the stomach.and females were yet more accurate than men at guessing Part A’s experience of the old
elevator.
While females only slightly outperformed males in their ability to guess what another
person experiences, there may be a relationship between mirror neuron activity and the extent
to which people (males and females) experience emotions. As noted earlier, the female Part
As had a tendency to be clearer in their expression of differences between the elevators in
terms of how they readily characterised their experiences and the design properties, when
rating these on the semantic differential scale. However, when expressing their experiences
via qualitative emotional constructs (words), female Part As tended to be focused on aspects
of time (i.e. the negative experience of waiting in the case of the old elevator) and the
positive aspects of neutrality, relaxation (calmness) and safety (in the case of the new
elevator).
Male Part As had expressed anxiety both in relation to the old and the new as well as
the negative sensation of time. Overall it is interesting to observe the total emotional
constructs made by the Part As as compared to Part Bs, as here the Part As seemed to be
more focused towards neutrality in their qualitative descriptions only exceeding Part Bs in
terms of their negative expressions of time regarding the old elevator. Part Bs on the other
hand gave more, either positive or negative constructs regarding negative arousal and positive
passivity, in the instance of the old elevator, and positive arousal, negative arousal, negative
temporal and positive passivity in the instance of the new elevator. In other words,
qualitatively the observers made more distinctions and generalisations than those basing the
opinions on their own experiences.
Yet, quantitatively, females in particular made more distinctions and
characterisations based on their own perspectives than those who made observations.
Could this relate to our conceptualisation of what qualitative (subjective-based) and
quantitative (objective-based) material are? Could it mean, that in the case of qualitative
data, where there is open acknowledgement regarding the subjective and (somewhat)
unverifiable nature of qualities in experience, it is easier (or more acceptable) to make
generalisations on others’ behalf than in the case of quantitative data, whereby we feel that
the numbers will always verify some form of truth, which thus means that they should be
reliable?Conclusion
This was an exploratory study, initiated with an interest in discovering the mechanisms of
bodily sensations in relation to emotions during elevator travel. For this reason two elevators
which contrasted in age, design aesthetics and mechanical fluency were selected. The study
sought to implement alternative data collection techniques such as the bodily emotion
colouring indication method developed by Nummenmaa et al. (2013), and to see what claims
such as the heightened female mirror neuron activity discovery in the neurosciences really
meant in terms of elevator experience and the ability to “read minds”.
The results of this study shows that this “mind reading” ability is almost equally as
strong in men as in women, but the accuracy of relying on secondary (observational)
information to examine the subjective experience of others is roughly 50%. What could be
seen however, was the determined nature (less grey areas) of qualitative responses from
females who rated their experiences according to semantic differential, and the more distinct
categories of qualitative information given by those who were asked to describe another’s
emotional experiences.
Based on this small study, it could be seen that the aesthetics in terms of elevator
interior design, age and mechanics can influence the ways in which people experience the
social dynamics of the elevator, and how much they are aware of their own body and
presence inside the elevator. Further, while both genders experienced time negatively,
particularly in the case of the old elevator, factors of stress, comfort and safety arose in the
semantic differential data from the females – both those who evaluated their own experiences
and those who evaluated from the perspectives of others. Male Part Bs mentioned the aspect
of uncomfort in their qualitative emotional constructs.
It would be worthwhile undertaking this study on a larger scale, in a high rise building
(office, commercial, recreational etc.) in which the duration of elevator travel time is longer.
Further, it should be implemented in conjunction with an ethnographical style study looking
at actual use and experiences of everyday elevator travel. By combining these results we may
gain more insight into issues such as why the factors of comfort, stress and safety are
expressed by females in the highly structured study as compared to the men. And develop
deeper insight into mental processes in conjunction with the observable behavioural.References
Berridge, K and Winkielman, P. (2003). What is an unconscious emotion? (The case for conscious
“liking”. Cognition and Emotion, 17 (3), 181-211. Retrieved February 17, 2013, from:
http://www.communicationcache.com/uploads/1/0/8/8/10887248/what_is_an_unconscious_e
motion-_the_case_for_unconscious_liking..pdf.
Brave, S. & Nass, C. (2007). Emotion in human-computer interaction. Handbook of Human-
Computer Interaction: Fundamentals, evolving technologies and emerging applications.
Hillsdale, NJ: Lawrence Erlbaum, 77-92.
Chalmers, D. (1990). Consciousness and cognition [working paper]. Retrieved April 13, 2013, from:
http://consc.net/papers/c-and-c.html.
Chalmers, D. (2004). The representational character of experience. In B. Leiter (Ed.), The Future for
Philosophy. Oxford: Oxford University Press.
Frijda, N. (1988). The laws of emotion. American Psychologist 43(5), 349-358.
Hekkert, P. (2006). Design aesthetics: Principles of pleasure in design. Psychology Science 48(2),
157-172.
Jordan, P. (2000). Designing pleasurable products. An introduction to the new human factors.
London, New York: Taylor & Francis.
Nummenmaa, L., Glerean, E., Hari, R. & Hietanen, J. (2013). Bodily maps of emotions. PNAS Early
Edition – Psychology and cognitive sciences, 1-6.
www.pnas.org/cgi/doi/10.1073/pnas.1321664111
Ortony, A. & Turner, T.J. (1990). What’s basic about basic emotions?. Psychological Review 97(3),
315-331.
Osgood, C.E., Suci, G. & Tannenbaum, P. (1957). The measurement of meaning. Urbana, IL:
University of Illinois Press.
Peirce, C.S. (2009). The writings of Charles S. Peirce, a chronological edition, Vol. 8: 1890-1892.
Bloomington, IN: Indiana University.
Van der Gaag, C., Minderaa, R. & Keysers, C. (2007). Facial expressions: What the mirror neuron
system can and cannot tell us, Social Neuroscience 2 (3-4), 179-222, DOI:
10.1080/17470910701376878
Warell, A. (2004). Towards a theory-based method for evaluation of visual form syntactics. TMCE
2004, tools and methods of competitive engineering. Lausanne: OIS Press.