Exploring the Dynamics between Cobot’s
Production Rhythm, Locus of Control and
Emotional State in a Collaborative Assembly
Scenario
Marta Mondellini1,2, Matteo Lavit Nicora1,3, Pooja Prajod4, Elisabeth Andre´4, Rocco Vertechy3,
Alessandro Antonietti2, Matteo Malosio1
1 CNR, Institute of Intelligent Industrial Technologies and Systems for Advanced Manufacturing, Lecco, Italy.
2 Catholic University of the Sacred Heart, Department of Psychology, Milan, Italy.
3 Industrial Engineering Department, University of Bologna, Bologna, Italy.
4 Human-Centered Artificial Intelligence, University of Augsburg, Augsburg, Germany.
marta.mondellini@stiima.cnr.it
effective [1]–[3]. In this sense, recent studies have focused
Abstract—In industrial scenarios, there is widespread use of on defining design principles of mental-health-friendly work
collaborative robots (cobots), and growing interest is directed
cells for operators working with cobots [4]. This perfectly
at evaluating and measuring the impact of some characteristics
aligns with the current need for moving from the concept of
of the cobot on the human factor. In the present pilot study,
the effect that the production rhythm (C1 - Slow, C2 - Fast, Industry 4.0 towards the so-called Industry 5.0 [5], that is,
C3 - Adapted to the participant’s pace) of a cobot has on the the transition from a technology-driven approach towards a
ExperientialLocusofControl(ELoC)andtheemotionalstateof value-driven era prioritizing the workers’ well-being [6]. In
31participantshasbeenexamined.Theoperators’performance,
this context, a relevant topic is the identification of which
the degree of basic internal Locus of Control, and the attitude
characteristics of a robot influence the emotional state of the
towards the robots were also considered. No difference was
found regarding the emotional state and the ELoC in the three subjectswhointeractwithitandotherpsychologicalvariables,
conditions, but considering the other psychological variables, a for example, the Locus of Control.
morecomplexsituationemerges.Overall,resultsseemtoindicate The ”Locus of Control” is the degree to which people
a need to consider the person’s psychological characteristics to
believe they have control over events in their lives, rather
offer a differentiated and optimal interaction experience.
than being influenced by external forces beyond their influ-
Index Terms—Human Factor, Human-Robot Interaction, Lo-
ence[7].Thus,itisaone-dimensionalconstructcharacterized
cus of Control, Emotional State.
by two poles, internal and external, placed on the extremities
I. INTRODUCTION of a continuum; people’s attitudes are arranged along this
continuum by attributing the cause of what happens to them.
Extensive research has been carried out in recent years,
Individuals with an internal Locus of Control believe events
focusing on the technical aspects of human-robot interaction
are primarily a result of their actions (e.g., Work performance
(HRI) in industrial scenarios, particularly safety and produc-
depends almost entirely on their commitment and abilities).
tivity. However, the experience of a user interacting with
In contrast, those with an external Locus of Control attribute
this kind of machine is not limited to those aspects and
events to external factors (e.g., work performance depends
has relevant relapses on a social and psychological level.
on external factors, including chance). Despite many studies
The need for a careful analysis of how the introduction of
reporting that an internal Locus of Control is more associated
autonomous systems influences humans, for example, what
with good physical health [8]–[11], it would seem that even
effect it has on attention, awareness, and team dynamics,
moreimportantistheflexibilitywithwhichapersoncanadapt
arises. Starting from the analysis of the human factor, a lot
their thinking (external-internal) depending on the need [12].
of work has been done to obtain indications on which robotic
Regardingrobotics,someauthorshavehighlightedthatpeople
characteristics are socially accepted and make the interaction
with an internal Locus of Control have worse usage perfor-
mance, as they struggle to leave control of the situation to an
This project has received funding from the European Union’s Horizon
2020researchandinnovationprogrammeundergrantagreementNo847926 autonomoussystem[13],[14].Personalexperiences,including
MindBot. work experiences, can influence the Locus of Control. In
979-8-3503-1579-0/24/$31.00©2024IEEE particular, a change in the Locus of Control in a specific
©2024IEEE.Personaluseofthismaterialispermitted.PermissionfromIEEEmustbeobtainedforallotheruses,inanycurrentorfuturemedia,including
reprinting/republishingthismaterialforadvertisingorpromotionalpurposes,creatingnewcollectiveworks,forresaleorredistributiontoserversorlists,or
reuseofanycopyrightedcomponentofthisworkinotherworks.DOI:
4202
beF
1
]OR.sc[
1v80800.2042:viXrascenario when interacting/using a product, i.e., a Cobot, is
referred to as the Experiential Locus of Control [15]. This
concept is an extension of the classic Locus of Control
construct and refers to the effect that one experience has on
the Locus of Control relative to that specific experience.
Similarly, for humans and robots to interact effectively,
it is necessary to consider the human emotional state in
response to robot actions and features, especially in industrial
settings, where robots play an important role in automated
production[16].Forexample,humansarehypothesizedtofeel
more anxious and cautious when the robot’s movement speed
isgreater[17].Oneoftheaspectstoconsider,therefore,isthe
impactthatcharacteristicsofthecobot,suchastheproduction
rhythm, have on the emotional state.
Fig.1. Aschematictopviewoftheworkcellwherearesearcher[A]monitors
II. AIMOFTHESTUDY the session and acts as a Wizard of Oz using a laptop [B]. The participants
[D]usethetable[C]toworkontheirpartoftheassembly,whilethecobot
The present study examined the impact of the cobot’s pro- [E]movestothecommonarea[F]forthejointactionstepafterpickingup
duction rhythm on an operator’s psychological and emotional oneofthepreassembledcomponentsavailableontheothertable[G].
state. In particular, how the experiential Locus of Control, the
emotionalstateandperformance,andthesubjectivepreference
B. Study Design
of one experimental condition over another change depending
The study was designed as a within-subjects with three
on the cobot’s production rhythm was observed. Furthermore,
experimentalconditions,derivedfromtheexperienceobtained
it was observed whether positive or negative attitudes toward
in [22]. In the mentioned work, a similar setup and task were
robotsinfluencethesevariablesandwhetherapersonalinternal
analyzed,andinstanceswherethecobotortheuserwouldwait
Locus of Control impacts the experiential Locus of Control.
forthecollaborationtohappen,werenoticed.Sinceweexpect
Further information on these psychological variables and why
these instances to lead to different emotions and experiences,
theyareessentialinhuman-robotinteractionisreportedinthe
we designed the following experimental conditions to explore
next paragraph.
the topic further:
III. MATERIALSANDMETHODS 1) C1-Slowcondition:Thecollaborativerobotundergoes
a scanning movement across its pre-assembled compo-
A. The Experimental Scenario
nents, selecting one and delivering it to the user. From
A collaborative industrial work cell is set up in a lab thecommencementofeachproductioncycle,ittypically
environment. Two distinct areas are defined where the cobot takes approximately 55 seconds for the cobot to reach
and the operator can work on their sub-assemblies, plus a the participant for their collaborative task.
common area for collaborative joining (Figure 1). The re- 2) C2 - Fast condition: The collaborative robot skips
searchermonitoringtheexperimentalactivityusesadedicated the scanning motion and directly proceeds to the next
table on the side. This study uses a Fanuc CRX10ia/L cobot sub-assembly, picking it up and delivering it to the
equipped with a Robotiq Hand-e parallel gripper to perform participant. The cobot takes about 15 seconds from
the required pick and place operations. The product to be the beginning of each production cycle to reach the
assembled collaboratively by the operator and the cobot is participant for their collaborative task.
a 3D-printed planetary gearbox [18], represented on the left 3) C3 - Adaptive condition: The collaborative robot ex-
of Figure 2. Each assembly cycle comprises a sub-assembly ecutes the scanning motion as described earlier until
phase, followed by a joining phase, during which the two prompted by the researcher to deliver a specific sub-
entities work together to mesh the gears and complete the assembly to the participant. There is no predetermined
production cycle. The components depicted in Figure 2 are timing for the cobot, and the cobot is activated through
assembled by the user, while the pieces assigned to the cobot a simple keyboard press whenever the participant is
werealreadypre-assembledonitssideofthetable.Tocontrol nearing completion of the assembly task.
therobotfromacustomprogramrunningoutsidetheprovided Each participant performed the three conditions during a
teachpendant,asoftwaremoduleisusedtointerfacetherobot single experimental session; presentation order of the condi-
controller with ROS Noetic [19] and, therefore, exploit the tions was randomized between subjects to control for order
capabilities of RosControl [20] and MoveIt [21] tools. On effects. Participants were not informed of the cobot’s produc-
top of that, the high-level state machine needed to orchestrate tion rhythm change before the experiment.
the task was realized using Visual SceneMaker [21], again This study had several objectives, reported below in the
interfaced with ROS thanks to dedicated plugins. form of research questions:Fig.2. Inthepicture,[A]showsthecomponentsassembledbytheuser,[B]isthepreassembledpartassignedtothecobot,[C]showsthejointactionstep
schematicallywhilein[D]onvolunteerisdepictedinthemomentofcollaborationwiththecobot.
• Q1: is the experiential Locus of Control different in the explained that the focus of the study was on the experience
three experimental conditions? of human-machine interaction. The assembly activity would
• Q2: is the emotional state different in the three experi- last 15 minutes and be repeated three times. Before the start
mental conditions? of the study, and at the end of each 15-minute block, a
• Q3: is the experimental condition possibly influencing series of questionnaires designed to evaluate some subjective
performance? characteristics and the assembly and interaction experience
• Q4: is the experiential Locus of Control related to the were administered. The questionnaires were created on the
internal Locus of Control? MS form platform and completed online in the same room
• Q5: is performance related to experiential Locus of where the experiment took place.
Control and emotional state?
E. Measures
• Q6: is the attitude towards robots related to experiential
Locus of Control and emotional state? Thenumberofassembliesperformedduringeachcondition
was registered as the participants’ performance.
C. Participants
Concerning subjective measures, the following question-
A total of 33 healthy adult volunteers participated in the naires were proposed:
experiment (25 males, 8 females) ranging from 18 to 48 y.o. • Internal Control Index [23] (ICI), administered before
(mean = 29.48, SD = 7.35). The participants were recruited the interaction with the cobot. It consists of 28 items
among the institution’s employees or students of a nearby to which reply on a 5-point Likert scale, where 1 cor-
University, who were all Italian speakers. The study has been responds to ”rarely” and 5 to ”usually”. A high score
conducted according to the guidelines of the Declaration of (maximum 140) corresponds to a high internal Locus of
Helsinki and approved by the Ethics Committee of I.R.C.C.S. Control level. The score can vary from 28 to 140.
EugenioMedea(protocolcodeN.19/20-CEof20April2020). • Negative Attitudes Towards Robots Scale [24]; this
psychometric scale measures negative attitudes towards
D. Procedure
robots. It consists of 14 questionnaire items divided into
The study was carried out as follows. The participant three subscales: S1 relates to ”negative attitudes toward
enteredtheroomandwasaskedtoreadandsigntheinformed situations of interaction with robots” (six items), S2 per-
consent. Then, the participant was explained that s/he would tains to ”negative attitudes toward the social influence of
have to assemble half the gearbox; s/he was then shown how robots” (five items), and S3 addresses ”negative attitudes
to do it, and s/he could freely try the assembly until s/he un- towardemotionsininteractionwithrobots”(threeitems).
derstoodtheprocedure.Itwasthenexplainedtotheparticipant Each item is rated on a scale from 1 to 5 (1: strongly
thatthecobotwouldoperateautonomously,bringingtheother disagree - 5: strongly agree). The score can vary from 6
half of the component into the space used for collaboration; to 30 in S1, 5 to 25 in S2, and 3 to 25 in S3.
the participant was shown how to operate the joint and finish • Experiental Locus of Control Questionnaire (ELoC),
theproduct.Althoughthetaskwasrelativelysimpleandcould composed of 3 items from the ”Internal Control In-
be completed without the help of the cobot, the subjects were dex” [23], appropriately modified to evaluate the Experi-ential Locus of Control [15]. The score can vary from 3 TABLEI
to 15. MEANS,STANDARDDEVIATIONS,MINIMUMANDMAXIMUM
SCORES,RANGEANDALPHACOEFFICIENTSFOREACH
• Self-Assessment Manikin [25]; a non-verbal pictorial VARIABLEMEASURED
assessment technique that directly measures the Valence,
Arousal,andDominanceassociatedwithaperson’semo- Variable Mean St.Dev. Min. Max. α
PerformanceC1 12.90 1.11 10 15 -
tive reaction to several stimuli. The participant responds
PerfomanceC2 17.84 2.34 13 22 -
on a 9-point Likert scale for each subscale. The Valence PerformanceC3 16.19 1.70 12 20 -
scale ranges from positive emotion (happy) to negative ICI 107.48 6.47 93 124 0.43
emotion (sad). On the Arousal scale, the score varies reduced 91.68 7.00 74 109 0.62
ICI
from high excitement to calmness. Low scores on the
NARSS1 12.03 3.43 6 20 0.57
Dominance scale correspond to low control, and vice NARSS2 13.03 4.10 5 24 0.65
versa. The score can range from 1 to 9. NARSS3 9.45 3.60 3 15 0.87
ELoCC1 9.48 2.28 5 13 0.50
Additionally, the experimental session ended with a written ELoCC2 9.58 2.31 5 14 0.59
question on which of the three conditions was preferred. ELoCC3 9.52 3.01 3 14 0.74
ValenceC1 4.29 1.53 1 8 -
Participants had to justify their choice with a written open
ValenceC2 4.03 1.47 2 8 -
answer. ValenceC3 3.84 1.46 2 8 -
ArousalC1 6.84 1.66 4 9 -
ArousalC2 6.35 1.76 3 9 -
F. Statistical Analysis
ArousalC3 6.77 1.91 3 9 -
DominanceC1 7.19 1.68 3 9 -
All statistical analyses were performed with SPSS v.29.
DominanceC2 7.00 1.71 4 9 -
Skewness and kurtosis have been calculated to evaluate the DominanceC3 7.03 1.70 3 9 -
assumption of normality of the distribution of each variable.
Cronbach’s alphas were obtained to test the reliability of each
subjectivescale.Descriptiveanalyseswereruntoobtainmeans B. Differences Between Experimental Conditions
and standard deviations for each variable. Repeated measures
No difference was observed in the three conditions con-
of ANOVA were performed to compare the scores obtained
cerning Experiential Locus of Control(Q1); no difference
in the Experiential Locus of Control (Q1) and emotional
appeared even when considering emotional Valence, Arousal,
experience (Q2) in the three experimental conditions. The
andDominance(Q2).Regardingtheperformance,asignificant
same test was run to compare the number of assemblies
difference was observed between the three conditions, with
accomplished in the three conditions (Q3). Simple and partial
F(2,60)=61.68andp<0.001.Post-hoctestswithBonferroni
PearsoncorrelationswererunbetweenICIandthesubsequent
adjustmentwererun,anddifferencesbetweenconditions1and
scores gained on the experiential Locus of Control scale in
2 (p < 0.001), between conditions 1 and 3 (p < 0.001), and
the three conditions (Q4), between performance, experiential
between 2 and 3 (p = 0.012) emerged (Q3).
Locus of Control, and emotional state (Q5), and between
attitude toward robots and both emotional experience and
experiential Locus of Control (Q6). C. Correlations Between Variables in Each Condition
ICI and the Experiential Locus of Control did not correlate
IV. RESULTS
in any conditions (Q4).
Regarding Q5, in C1 some simple and partial correlations
A. Descriptive Statistics
emerged, in particular between ELoC and performance (r =
Allthevariablesconsideredhadnormaldistribution,except 0.36, p = 0.045; r = 0.39, p = 0.38), Valence and Dominance
p
the”performanceC3”variable,withkurtosis>3,andthetotal (r=-0.41,p<0.022),DominanceandArousal(r=0.60,p<
scoreofICI(kurtosis>2).Twosubjectsresultedasoutliersin 0.001;r =0.61,p<0.001).InC2andC3,simpleandpartial
p
thesescales,withZscore>|3|;afterremovingthemfromthe correlation emerged only between Dominance and Arousal: r
database,allvariablesobtainednormaldistribution.Therefore, = 0.65(p < 0.001) and r = 0.66 (p < 0.001) in C2, r = 0.47
p
the number of participants whose results were considered was (p = 0.007) and r = 0.43 (p = 0.023) in C3.
p
31 (24 M, 7 F) aged 18 to 48 (mean = 29.61, SD = 7.57). Concerning Q6, a negative correlation between NARS
Descriptive statistics are reported in Table I. The reliability S1 (”negative attitudes toward situations of interaction with
of the ICI was very low (α = 0.43); SPSS was asked whether robots”)andValenceemergedinC1,withr=-0.43,p=0.017,
thereliabilitywouldbehigherbyeliminatingsomeitemsfrom and r = -0.52, p = 0.006. The NARS S3 (”negative attitudes
p
the scale. A new Internal Control Index was calculated and toward emotions in interaction with robots”) correlated neg-
used in the subsequent inferential analyses (”reduced ICI”); atively with Dominance, with r = -0.37, p = 0.039 and r =
p
items 7, 8, 17, and 18 of the original questionnaire were -0.43, p = 0.027. In C2, only a simple negative correlation
deleted. Thus, the lowest score obtainable was 24, and the between dominance and NARS S1 emerged (r = -0.37, p =
maximum was 120. 0.045). No correlations were found in C3.D. The Preferred Condition them. The motivational aspect of the activity was, in fact, not
considered in this study.
FourteenparticipantspreferredCondition2(45.2%),and13
Ontheotherhand,thecobot’sproductionrhythminfluenced
participants chose Condition 3 (41.9%). Only 4 participants
the participant’s performance (Q3), and better performance
(12.9%) claimed that Condition 1 was the best.
was accomplished in the condition with the cobot running
Considering the motivations of these answers, insights
at the fastest rhythm. This result is understandable, as the
emerged. Some participants’ replies are reported in Table II.
slowness of the cobot in C1 forced the participant to wait
Those who chose C1 underlined the calmness experienced
for the joint activity. However, this result also shows that the
during the interaction and the feeling of not being under pres-
subject was pushed to work harder in C2 than s/he would at
sure; this result agrees with what is reported on the Arousal
their own pace, as in C3.
scale, where C1 gained scores corresponding to greater calm.
Contrary to what we expected, experiential LoC scores
Furthermore,someparticipantssaidtheirproductivitywasthe
are not correlated with internal LoC (Q4). This could be
same (even if this was just an impression). C2 was chosen
due to various reasons, but the low validity of the ICI tool
mainly for its faster pace, and some participants had the
that emerged in the statistical analysis suggests the need to
feeling that C2 was faster than C3, while others had the
investigate this aspect more thoroughly and find alternative
opposite impression. In this case, the topic of ”competition
tools.
with her/himself” emerged, and participants reported they
felt more engaged in the activity and they worked better. Regardless of the experimental condition, a strong corre-
ParticipantswhochoseC3saidmainlythatthepacewasmore lation was found between Dominance and Arousal. In short
adequate to their needs, a medium way between C1 and C2; words, a calmer emotional state corresponded to a feeling of
thefeelingofbeingsynchronizedwiththecobotwasreported. greater dominance over the emotion. This result is consistent
with what was reported in [26]. Regarding Q5, a correla-
tion between experiential Locus of Control and performance
TABLEII
REASONSGIVENFORCHOOSINGTHEPREFERREDCONDITION emerged only in C1; this could indicate that when the subject
is not forced to accelerate the pace of production, the Locus
FavoriteCondition Motivation
of Control of the interaction increases with performance, but
”Therobotwasslowerbutproductivity
1 didnotchange” forcing the subject to accelerate causes this relationship to
”Icanadaptmypaceandworkcalmly” disappear. In sum, all correlations between psychological and
”otherconditionsweretooslow”
performance scores are weak. This could be due to the design
2 ”Iamaverycompetitiveperson
andIexperiencedthiscondition of the test; for example, the subjects could only start a new
asacompetition” assembly after finishing the joint with the cobot; therefore,
”Therobotwasfasteranddidn’tslowme
other variables usually linked to performance, such as the
downtoomuch.Eventhoughitrushedme
alittle,itwasbetterthantheothertwotimes” sense of challenge or perceived competence, would not come
”thecobot’spacewaslikemine” into play in this correlation.
3 ”theconditionhadaworkpacethat
Concerning Q6, a negative correlation between the nega-
wassustainableforalimitedtime”
”itwastheconditioninwhichtheroboticarm tive attitude toward situations of interaction with robots and
andIweremoreinsymbiosis,Ididn’thaveto Valence was observed in C1. This did not happen in C2
waitforit,anditdidn’thavetowaitforme”
and C3, which seems to indicate that setting the cobot to a
production rhythm that does not force the subject to speed up
leads those with a negative attitude towards interacting with
V. DISCUSSION
cobotstoexperiencemorepleasantfeelings.Finally,inC1and
The present study examined the influence of the cobot’s C2, a negative correlation between negative attitudes toward
productionrateonparticipants’experientialLocusofControl, emotions in interaction with robots and dominance emerged;
emotion, and performance. this could indicate that in conditions in which the subject’s
The production rhythm did not impact ELoC (Q1). No behavior is forced by the speed of the cobot (too slow or
data on this aspect is available in the literature; this is the too fast), those who tend to have negative emotions while
first result from which to start investigating how and if the interacting with cobots have less control of their emotional
production rate of a cobot impacts the worker’s locus of state.
control. Regarding Q2, the cobot’s production rhythm doesn’t Regarding the favorite condition, C2 and C3 were the most
affect the participant’s emotional state; this result does not chosen. In the case of C2, the participants appreciated the
agreewithotherworks,wherethespeedofthecobotincreases sense of challenge and the better performance obtained, while
anxiety [1], [17]. However, in the cited reference, the speed inC3,participantsperceivedafeelingofsynchronizationwith
was related to the robot’s movement and not only to its the cobot.
production rhythm, which could explain the different results
obtained.Additionally,wemustconsiderthatthesubjectsmay
VI. CONCLUSIONS,LIMITATIONSANDFUTUREWORK
nothaveunderstoodtheaddedvalueofthecobotinthisfairly This initial investigation offers insights into the design
simple assembly task, even though it had been specified to considerations for an industrial setting incorporating a cobotto enhance the operator’s well-being. The cobot’s production [6] E.SchneidersandE.Papachristos,“It’snotallbad-workerperceptions
rhythm does not influence the participant’s emotional state ofindustrialrobots,”in202217thACM/IEEEInternationalConference
onHuman-RobotInteraction(HRI),IEEE. IEEE,2022,pp.1025–1029.
or Experiential Locus of Control. However, the relationship
[7] J. B. Rotter, “Generalized expectancies for internal versus external
becomes more multifaceted when the negative attitude toward control of reinforcement.” Psychological monographs: General and
robots and the personal Locus of Control is considered. In applied,vol.80,no.1,p.1,1966.
[8] C. R. Gale, G. D. Batty, and I. J. Deary, “Locus of control at age 10
conclusion, these variables, and probably other characteristics
years and health outcomes and behaviors at age 30 years: the 1970
suchaspersonalitytraits,mustberegardedascustomizingthe britishcohortstudy,”PsychosomaticMedicine,vol.70,no.4,pp.397–
interaction with the cobot. 403,2008.
[9] J.Arraras,S.Wright,G.Jusue,M.Tejedor,andJ.Calvo,“Copingstyle,
The present work has some limitations. Firstly, it is neces-
locus of control, psychological distress and pain-related behaviours in
sarytoobservethesevariablesinalargersample.Furthermore, cancerandotherdiseases,”Psychology,Health&Medicine,vol.7,no.2,
the ”Internal Control Index” did not achieve good reliability, pp.181–187,2002.
[10] D. A. Cobb-Clark, S. C. Kassenboehmer, and S. Schurer, “Healthy
and further studies are needed to confirm the robustness of
habits: The connection between diet, exercise, and locus of control,”
our findings; for example, the reliability of the scale could be JournalofEconomicBehavior&Organization,vol.98,pp.1–28,2014.
influenced by the sample size or by the Italian language, in [11] D.Kesavayuth,J.Poyago-Theotoky,V.Zikosetal.,“Locusofcontrol,
healthandhealthcareutilization,”EconomicModelling,vol.86,pp.227–
whichtheinstrumenthasnotbeenvalidated;therefore,itmay
238,2020.
be helpful to implement an in-depth investigation and modify [12] C. Cheng, S. F. Cheung, J. H.-m. Chio, and M.-p. S. Chan, “Cultural
the questionnaire to make it more robust. Similarly, whether meaning of perceived control: a meta-analysis of locus of control
andpsychologicalsymptomsacross18culturalregions.”Psychological
this result occurs in samples of different languages should
bulletin,vol.139,no.1,p.152,2013.
be understood. Additionally, the lack of relationship between [13] L. Takayama, E. Marder-Eppstein, H. Harris, and J. M. Beer, “As-
ICI and the Experiential Locus of Control suggests that, at sisteddrivingofamobileremotepresencesystem:Systemdesignand
controlled user evaluation,” in 2011 IEEE international conference on
least in our sample, the two variables are not linked when,
roboticsandautomation. IEEE,2011,pp.1883–1889.
theoretically,theyshouldbe.Furtherobservationswithalarger [14] U.Acharya,S.Kunde,L.Hall,B.A.Duncan,andJ.M.Bradley,“In-
sampleandmoretoolsdedicatedtoLocusofControlwillneed ferenceofuserqualitiesinsharedcontrol,”in2018IEEEInternational
ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2018,pp.588–
to be conducted to strengthen and confirm our preliminary
595.
findings. [15] J. Jang, H. Shin, H. Aum, M. Kim, and J. Kim, “Application of
Furthermore, a possible limitation of our study is a lack of experiential locus of control to understand users’ judgments toward
useful experience,” Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 54, pp. 326–
balance between men and women within the sample. Future
340,2016.
studiesontheseaspectscouldinvestigateapotentialdifference [16] F. Azni Jafar, N. Abdullah, N. Blar, M. N. Muhammad, and A. M.
in emotional state and locus of control due to sex. Kassim,“Analysisofhumanemotionstateincollaborationwithrobot,”
AppliedMechanicsandMaterials,vol.465,pp.682–687,2014.
It would be appropriate to complement these findings with [17] F. A. Jafar, N. Abdullah, M. N. Muhammad, N. A. Zakaria, and
qualitative investigations to explore the conscious motivations M.N.A.Mokhtar,“Investigationofhumanemotionalstateinhuman-
robotcollaboration.”J.Comput.,vol.9,no.3,pp.668–677,2014.
that lead a person to prefer one situation over another. An
[18] D. F. Redaelli, F. A. Storm, and G. Fioretta, “Mindbot planetary
aspect to consider could, for example, be the value the gearbox,” Nov. 2021. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.5281/
participant gives to the help of the cobot and the motivational zenodo.5675810
[19] Stanford Artificial Intelligence Laboratory et al., “Robotic operating
aspect in carrying out the task. Additionally, physiological
system.”[Online].Available:https://www.ros.org
indicatorscouldbeassociatedtogainobjectivedataregarding [20] S. Chitta, E. Marder-Eppstein, W. Meeussen, V. Pradeep,
perceived stress or arousal. A. Rodr´ıguez Tsouroukdissian, J. Bohren, D. Coleman, B. Magyar,
G. Raiola, M. Lu¨dtke, and E. Ferna´ndez Perdomo, “ros control:
A generic and simple control framework for ros,” The
REFERENCES Journal of Open Source Software, 2017. [Online]. Available:
http://www.theoj.org/joss-papers/joss.00456/10.21105.joss.00456.pdf
[1] M. Koppenborg, P. Nickel, B. Naber, A. Lungfiel, and M. Huelke, [21] D.Coleman,I.Sucan,S.Chitta,andN.Correll,“Reducingthebarrierto
“Effectsofmovementspeedandpredictabilityinhuman–robotcollab- entryofcomplexroboticsoftware:amoveit!casestudy,”arXivpreprint
oration,”HumanFactorsandErgonomicsinManufacturing&Service arXiv:1404.3785,2014.
Industries,vol.27,no.4,pp.197–209,2017. [22] M. Mondellini, P. Prajod, M. L. Nicora, M. Chiappini, E. Micheletti,
[2] A.M.Zanchettin,L.Bascetta,andP.Rocco,“Acceptabilityofrobotic F. A. Storm, R. Vertechy, E. Andre´, and M. Malosio, “Behavioral
manipulators in shared working environments through human-like re- patternsinroboticcollaborativeassembly:Comparingneurotypicaland
dundancyresolution,”Appliedergonomics,vol.44,no.6,pp.982–989, autismspectrumdisorderparticipants,”FrontiersinPsychology,vol.14,
2013. p.1245857,2023.
[3] L. Takayama and C. Pantofaru, “Influences on proxemic behaviors in [23] P.C.Duttweiler,“Theinternalcontrolindex:Anewlydevelopedmea-
human-robot interaction,” in 2009 IEEE/RSJ International Conference sureoflocusofcontrol,”Educationalandpsychologicalmeasurement,
onIntelligentRobotsandSystems. IEEE,2009,pp.5495–5502. vol.44,no.2,pp.209–221,1984.
[4] M. L. Nicora, E. Andre´, D. Berkmans, C. Carissoli, T. D’Orazio, [24] T.Nomura,T.Suzuki,T.Kanda,andK.Kato,“Negativeattitudestoward
A. Delle Fave, P. Gebhard, R. Marani, R. M. Mira, L. Negri et al., robotsscale,”InteractionStudies:SocialBehaviourandCommunication
“Ahuman-drivencontrolarchitectureforpromotinggoodmentalhealth inBiologicalandArtificialSystems,2006.
in collaborative robot scenarios,” in 2021 30th IEEE International [25] M.M.BradleyandP.J.Lang,“Measuringemotion:theself-assessment
ConferenceonRobot&HumanInteractiveCommunication(RO-MAN), manikinandthesemanticdifferential,”Journalofbehaviortherapyand
IEEE. IEEE,2021,pp.285–291. experimentalpsychiatry,vol.25,no.1,pp.49–59,1994.
[5] X. Xu, Y. Lu, B. Vogel-Heuser, and L. Wang, “Industry 4.0 [26] A. B. Warriner, V. Kuperman, and M. Brysbaert, “Norms of valence,
and industry 5.0—inception, conception and perception,” Journal of arousal,anddominancefor13,915englishlemmas,”Behaviorresearch
ManufacturingSystems,vol.61,pp.530–535,2021.[Online].Available: methods,vol.45,pp.1191–1207,2013.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0278612521002119