AI for Extreme Event Modeling and
Understanding: Methodologies and
Challenges
Gustau Camps-Valls1*, Miguel-A´ngel Fern´andez-Torres1, Kai-Hendrik
Cohrs1, Adrian H¨ohl2, Andrea Castelletti3, Aytac Pacal16,4, Claire
Robin5, Francesco Martinuzzi13,14,15, Ioannis Papoutsis7,8, Ioannis
Prapas7,8,1, Jorge P´erez-Aracil9, Katja Weigel4,16, Maria
Gonzalez-Calabuig1, Markus Reichstein5, Martin Rabel10, Matteo
Giuliani3, Miguel Mahecha6, Oana-Iuliana Popescu10, Oscar J.
Pellicer-Valero1, Said Ouala11, Sancho Salcedo-Sanz9, Sebastian
Sippel6,SpyrosKondylatos7,8,1,TamaraHapp´e12 andTristanWilliams1
1*ImageProcessingLaboratory,UniversitatdeVal`encia,Spain.
2ChairofDataScienceinEarthObservation,TechnicalUniversityofMunich,Munich,Germany.
3DepartmentofElectronics,Information,andBioengineering,PolitecnicodiMilano,Italy.
4UniversityofBremen,InstituteofEnvironmentalPhysics(IUP),Bremen,Germany.
5MaxPlanckInstituteofBiogeochemistry,Jena,Germany.
6LeipzigUniversity,Leipzig,Germany.
7NationalTechnicalUniversityofAthens,Greece.
8NationalObservatoryofAthens,Athens,Greece.
9DepartmentofSignalProcessingandCommunications,UniversidaddeAlcala´,Madrid,Spain.
10GermanAerospaceCenter(DLR),Jena,Germany.
11IMTAtlantique,Brest,France.
12InstituteforEnvironmentalStudies,VUAmsterdam,TheNetherlands.
13CenterforScalableDataAnalyticsandArtificialIntelligence(ScaDS.AI),Leipzig,Germany.
14InstituteforEarthSystemScience&RemoteSensing,LeipzigUniversity,Leipzig,Germany.
15RemoteSensingCentreforEarthSystemResearch(RSC4Earth),LeipzigUniversity,Leipzig,
Germany.
16DeutschesZentrumfu¨rLuft-undRaumfahrt(DLR),Institutfu¨rPhysikderAtmosph¨are,
Oberpfaffenhofen,Germany.
*Correspondingauthor(s).E-mail(s):gustau.camps@uv.es;
Abstract
In recent years, artificial intelligence (AI) has deeply impacted various
fields,includingEarthsystemsciences.Here,AIimprovedweatherfore-
casting, model emulation, parameter estimation, and the prediction of
extreme events.However,the latter comeswith specificchallenges,such
as developing accurate predictors from noisy, heterogeneous and limited
annotated data. This paper reviews how AI is being used to analyze
1
4202
nuJ
82
]IA.sc[
1v08002.6042:viXra2 CONTENTS
extremeevents(likefloods,droughts,wildfiresandheatwaves),highlight-
ing the importance of creating accurate, transparent, and reliable AI
models. We discuss the hurdles of dealing with limited data, integrating
information in real-time, deploying models, and making them under-
standable, all crucial for gaining the trust of stakeholders and meeting
regulatoryneeds.WeprovideanoverviewofhowAIcanhelpidentifyand
explainextremeeventsmoreeffectively,improvingdisasterresponseand
communication.Weemphasizetheneedforcollaborationacrossdifferent
fieldstocreateAIsolutionsthatarepractical,understandable,andtrust-
worthy for analyzing and predicting extreme events. Such collaborative
efforts aim to enhance disaster readiness and disaster risk reduction.
Keywords:Artificialintelligence,extremeevents,droughts,heatwaves,
floods,detection,forecasting,modeling,understanding,attribution,
explainableAI,causalinference,communicationofrisk
Contents
1 Introduction 3
2 Review of AI methods 4
2.1 Extreme Event Modeling. . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 4
2.1.1 Detection . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 5
2.1.2 Prediction . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.1.3 Impact Assessment . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 6
2.2 Extreme events understanding and trustworthiness . . . . . . . 8
2.2.1 Extreme Event Attribution . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2.2 Explainable AI . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 8
2.2.3 Causal inference . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.2.4 Uncertainty quantification . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.3 The Last Mile: operationalization, communication, ethics and
decision-making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 9
2.3.1 Operationalization . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3.2 Communication of risk and ethical aspects. . . . . . . . 10
2.3.3 Ethics in AI models and data . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 10
2.3.4 Policy and decision-making . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3 Data, model and integration challenges 11
3.1 Data challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 11
3.2 Model challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 12
3.3 Integration challenges . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . 13
4 Case Studies 13
4.1 Droughts: detection, forecasting and explainability . . . . . . . 13
4.2 Heatwaves: prediction, attribution and understanding . . . . . 15CONTENTS 3
4.3 Wildfires: predict, explain and understand . . . . . . . . . . . . 16
4.4 Floods: from detection to communication of risk . . . . . . . . 17
5 Conclusions and Outlook 17
1 Introduction
The frequency, intensity, and duration of weather and climate extremes have
increasedinrecentyears,posingunprecedentedchallengestosocietalstability,
economic security, biodiversity loss, and ecological integrity [1]. These events
–rangingfromseverestormsandfloodstodroughtsandheatwaves–exertpro-
found impacts on human livelihoods and the natural environment, often with
long-lasting and sometimes irreversible consequences. Modeling, characteriz-
ing, and understanding extreme events is key to advancing mitigation and
adaptation strategies.
Inthiscontext,ArtificialIntelligence(AI)hasemergedasatransformative
toolforthedetection[2],forecasting[3,4],analysisofextremeeventsandgen-
eration of worst-case events [5], and promises advances in attribution studies,
explanation,andcommunicationofrisk[6].Thecapabilitiesofmachinelearn-
ing(ML),anddeeplearning(DL)inparticular,incombinationwithcomputer
vision techniques, are advancing the detection and localization of events by
exploiting climate data, such as reanalysis and observations [7]. Modern tech-
niques for quantifying uncertainty [8] are a necessary step to making progress
in climate change risk assessment [9]. Using ensembles in combination with
AI models has progressed the field of attribution of extremes [10], identifica-
tion of patterns, trends [11] and climate analogs [12]. Yet, AI does not only
excelatpredictionbutcanalsoexplainprocesses(e.g.,viaexplainableAI[13]
and causal inference [14]), which is essential for decision-making and effective
mitigation strategies. Recent advances in large language models (LLMs) that
retrieve information from heterogeneous text sources allow for effective inte-
gration of methods for communication tasks and human-machine interaction
in extreme event and situation analysis [15].
Here,wreviewtheroleofAIforextremeeventanalysis,itschallengesand
opportunities for extreme event analysis. The general pipeline of AI-driven
extreme event analysis (cf. Fig. 1) encapsulates the entire workflow from data
collection and preprocessing to the generation of outputs such as predictions,
patterns, trends, climate attributions, and causal relations. The framework
also highlights the iterative nature of AI processes, where outputs serve their
direct purpose and also serve to inform and improve data collection, prepro-
cessing, and hypothesis formulation. Nevertheless, developing AI models that
are accurate, operational, explainable, and trustworthy still remains a signifi-
cantchallenge.Issuessuchasdatascarcity,theneedforhigh-dimensionaldata
processing, and the interpretation and explanation of AI models are critical
challenges that must be addressed. Moreover, communicating risk effectively4 CONTENTS
inform preprocessing
Data collection & analysis AI methodologies
Outputs
Climate data Machine learning Computer vision Predictions Patterns & trends
Reanalysis Explainable AI Causal inference
Attributions Causal relations
Observations Ensembles NLP/LLMs
improvement adaptation
inform redefine hypotheses &
data collection Challenges (model, data) challenges
Data hs igc ha -r dc ii mty, , q nu oa nl -i sty ta, t
Model explaI in nt ae brp ilr ite yt ,a eb vil ait ly u, a tion
Integration opg ee rn ae tir oa nli az la izti ao tn io, n
Fig. 1 A general AI-driven extreme event analysis pipeline.Differentcomponents
inmodelingandunderstandingextremeeventsusingAImethodologiesareinterconnected,
highlighting the flow from data collection and analysis to actionable insights/outputs and
thechallengesencountered.NotethefeedbackloopswhereAIdoesnotonlyproducesome
Preprocess & represent
relevantoutputsandproductsfromdata(predictions,patternsandtrends,climateattribu-
Cleaning
tions,andcausalrelations)butalsomayhelpsuggestareasforimprovementandadaptation
in methodologiesNtoormaolizvaetiorncome identified challenges, redefine the hypotheses and challenges
themselves,aswelAlugamsentaitnionformdatacollectionandpreprocessing.
Feature extraction
and ethically, and integrating AI tools with existing systems to ensure opera-
tional viability and scientific robustness are nontrivial tasks requiring ongoing
research and development.
We provide a comprehensive overview of the AI-driven pipeline for ana-
lyzing extreme events, including modeling, detection, forecasting, and com-
munication (Section 2), and discuss key challenges (Section 3). We present
case studies on AI applications for droughts, heatwaves, wildfires, and floods
(Section 4), and conclude by identifying major challenges and future research
opportunities in AI for extreme events (Section 5).
2 Review of AI methods
Thissectionreviewsthemainmethodsinallaspectsofextremeeventanalysis
(cf. Table 1): data, modeling, understandingand trustworthiness, and thelast
mile on communication and deployment.
2.1 Extreme Event Modeling
AI methodologies for extreme event modeling can be categorized into detec-
tion [16], prediction [17] and impact assessment [18] tasks. Thanks to the
emergence and success of DL, all of these tasks can be tackled by designing
data-driven models that exploit spatio-temporal and multisource Earth data
characteristics, from climate variables to in situ measurements and satellite
remote sensing images (see Figure 2 [top row]).
ssecorperPCONTENTS 5
Table 1 Acomprehensivecategorizationofextremeeventsanalysisinfourmainblocks
(data,modeling,understandingandtrustworthiness,andthelastmileoncommunication
anddeployment)regardingtheirtask,standardandcurrentAImethods.
Aspect Task Standard methods Current AI methods
Data collection, Manual normalization and ML-based methods for denoising,
harmonization, Prepare data for down-stream task detrending. Statistical methods for gap-filling, data fusion
preprocessing denoising, gap-filling or data fusion
Feature selection via feature
importance or causal feature Feature selection Find informative low-dimensional Manual feature selection and feature
selection. Dimensionality reduction
and extraction representations of the data engineering
techniques and causal
representation learning
Simulation of Simulate extremes under varying ML-based and hybrid generative
extremes scenarios with correct frequency and Physical models and simulations models
amplitude
Detect and identify extreme events Threshold- or percentile-based Outlier detection, one-class
Detection geographically and over time methods and extreme value theory classification, reconstruction-based
(EVT) and probabilistic methods
Prediction Make predictions on potential future Numerical weather prediction models Deterministic and probabilistic ML
extreme events and expert judgment and heuristics forecasting models
Impact Estimate the effects of extreme Expert judgment, heuristics and field Deterministic and probabilistic ML-
assessment events on society, the economy and data collection based methods
the natural environment.
Extreme event Quantify influence of anthropogenic Probabilistic/statistical event Weather and climate emulation
attribution forcings on extreme events attribution, storyline approaches, models and ensemble techniques
expert judgment and elicitation
Make the rationale of a black-box ML Transparent and interpretable-by- Distillation methods, feature
Explainability method understandable by humans design models attribution methods, attention
mechanisms and prototypes
Identify and analyze factors directly Statistical and correlation-based Causal inference and counterfactual
Causality leading to the occurrence of extreme analysis, simulation-based and explanations
events experimental studies
Uncertainty Identify and quantify sources of Sensitivity analysis and parametric MC dropout, variational inference,
quantification uncertainty distributions ensembles
Integrate trustworthy predictive Manual integration into decision Automated integration using APIs
Operationalization models and real-time data analysis systems and ML-driven decision support
into early warning systems
Communication Convey information on extreme Ethical and fairness-aware AI
of risk and risks, ensuring ethical transparency, Adherence to ethical guidelines and models and causality for
ethical aspects community preparedness and standards quantification of biases
response
Risk assessment and management,
cost-benefit analysis (CBA), multi-
Policy and Manage and mitigate impacts of criteria decision analysis (MCDA), Time series analysis, ensemble
Decision-Making extreme events, ensuring resilience adaptive management and methods, anomaly detection,
and safety community-based participatory clustering, reinforcement learning
approaches
2.1.1 Detection
Detecting and identifying extreme events geographically over time to distin-
guish them from normal conditions is fundamental for discovering underlying
patterns and correlations between climate variables. This allows for a better
understanding of their generating processes and mechanisms and facilitates
their anticipation.
Classicalstatisticalmethods,suchasthresholdorpercentile-basedindices,
have been widely applied to detect extreme events (see Table 1). However,
these often fail to identify the same events as expert or impact-based detec-
tionmethods[19].AImethodologiescanhelpreconcileexpertknowledgewith
data-driven approaches as they capture regularities and nuanced relations in
large volumes of observational data. Canonical ML treats the detection prob-
lem as a one-class problem or an outlier detection problem. Many methods
are thus applied [20], and available in software packages [2]. Recent advances
dna
gnidnatsrednU
ataD
gniledoM
ssenihtrowtsurt
elim
tsaL6 CONTENTS
includedeeplearningforsegmentationanddetectionoftropicalcyclones(TCs)
andatmosphericrivers(ARs)inhigh-resolutionclimatemodeloutput[21]and
semi-supervised localization of extremes [22]. Alternatively, reconstruction-
basedmodels(e.g.,withautoencoders)areoptimizedtoaccuratelyreconstruct
normaldatainstances,andthusextremesareassociatedwithlargereconstruc-
tion errors [23]. Finally, probabilistic approaches try to identify extremes by
estimating the data probability density function (PDF) or specific quantiles
thereof. Standard Extreme value theory (EVT) approaches, however, strug-
gle with short time-series data, nonlinearities, and nonstationary processes.
Alternative probabilistic (ML) models have relied on surrogate meteorological
and hydrological seasonal re-forecasts [24], Gaussian processes and nonlinear
dependence measures [25] and multivariate Gaussianization [26].
2.1.2 Prediction
Designing predictive systems that accurately model extreme events is essen-
tial to anticipating the effects of future extreme events and providing critical
information for decision-makers to prevent damages. Spatial and temporal
predictions aim to provide a quantitative estimate of the future value of the
Earth’s state (Table 1).
Many ML algorithms have been proposed for deterministic extreme event
prediction, but most are only applied to small regions and specific use cases,
though. Prediction can be performed using climate variables alone [27] or
in combination with satellite imagery [28]. Here, for example, the vegetation
response under extreme drought conditions is modeled as a video predic-
tion task of the satellite imagery while conditioning on the climate variables.
Another common approach is to directly estimate an indicator that defines
the extreme event, e.g. flood risk maps [29] or drought indices [30]. The esti-
matedvariablescancoverdifferentleadtimesdependingonthecharacteristics
of the extreme, spanning from short-term prediction to seasonal prediction
[31].Recently,DL-basedpredictiontechniqueshavegainedpopularityfortheir
abilitytoprocesslargedatavolumes,capturecomplexnonlinearrelationships,
andreducemanualfeatureengineering.Thesebenefitshaveledtothecreation
of global models that generalize across various locations, as seen in flood [32]
and wildfire [33] predictions.
Probabilistic models, unlike deterministic ones, focus on predicting the
probability distribution of future variable states. The importance of proba-
bilistic forecasts for extreme heatwaves has been emphasized [34]. AI-based
techniques,integratedwithinclimatemodels,canenhancepredictions,suchas
in drought prediction [35] and extreme convective precipitations downscaling
[36].
2.1.3 Impact Assessment
Estimating the effects of extreme events on society, the economy, and the
environmentiscrucialforconveyingpotentialfutureconsequencestothepub-
lic, policymakers, and across disciplines [18, 37]. Impact assessment involvesCONTENTS 7
Detection, forecasting, impact assessment
Detection - is this anomalous and extreme? Forecasting - what will happen in the future? Impact assessment - how much foreseen impact?
… … …
time
variables until time to anomaly score at time t=to variables until time t anomaly score in t>to anomaly intensity at t=to impact estimation at t=to
Understanding & Trustworthiness
Explainable AI - what are the main drivers? Attribution and causality - what if and why? Uncertainty estimation - how sure?
Feature IG, CAM, LRP,
“Bat ytr dib eu sti io gn n” LDAP , D GAM WhaC t wo ouu ld n hat ve e hr af pa pec net du ifa ...?l s Why? do-cP aO lc, u lus Propagation
CD ois nt ti rll aa sti to ivn e CL oI uM nE tT e, r r eS faeH ctA uP a, l s AI Wh WCa ht ah a ta cpI u apn ue s snt ase a l i sfr l tI r v um d ce a tuin s rn i ep u c et la xi oo pte lav n t ih nei ss ? tr h H y iso ?w? FR CTC I, , P I CV QP uare nd tii fc icti av te ion EA ple isa teto mric ic enG sP e dms ro, b pB l oeN usN , t s M, C
Communicating
Operationalization - accountable & robust results Risks and ethics- accountable & robust results Policy & decision-making - analysis to action
A inu teto gm raa tit oe nd AI APIs La mn og du ea lsge L nL aM rrs a, tb ivo et ss, P aa pr pti rc oi ap ca hto er sy PRA, focus
Tru rest sw uo ltr sthy Robustness, XAI Situation rooms P va isd us a, lp iza an tie ol ns, Mu al nti a-c lyri ste isria AHP, TOPSIS Human-machine
Acc reo su un lt ta sble XAI, Uncertainty Fair ML models Al fg ao irr nit eh sm sic Co as nt a-b lye sn isefit NPV, BCR, IRR Active learning
uM na cen ra tg ai in ng ty Uncertainty Bias & ethics gu di id vee rli sn ite ys, asseR si ss mk ent Planning, trees Reinforcement
Fig.2 ComponentsinanAIpipelineforextremeevents.AImainlyexploitsspatio-
temporal Earth observation, reanalysis, and climate data to answer “what’-questions (top
row):detectionofevents,prediction,andimpactassessment.AIcanalsobeusedforunder-
standingeventsandthusanswer“whatif,”“why,”and“howsure”questions(middlerow)
and makes use of explainable AI (XAI) to identify relevant drivers of events, causality to
understanding the system, estimate causal effects and impacts, and imagine counterfac-
tual scenarios for attribution and uncertainty estimation to quantify trust and robustness
for decision-making. Communicating extreme events and their impacts can benefit from
statistical/machine learning (bottom row) by improving operationalization, ensuring fair
andequitablenarratives,andintegratinglanguagemodelsinsituationroomsforenhanced
decision-making.
understanding how a system reacts to extreme event forcings. Unlike extreme
event detection and prediction, the focus here is on impact-related outcomes,
such as the number of injuries, households affected, or crop losses.
In recent years, there has been an increasing interest in predicting vegeta-
tion state using ML [4], as a way to estimate the impact of climatic extremes
on the evolution of the vegetation state variable [38, 39]. Recent advances
methods have used echo state networks [40], ConvLSTM-based [28, 41], and
transformers [42] using high-resolution remote sensing and climate data.
Another way to address impact assessment with ML is to analyze changes
in the probability density function over time. This approach allows a quan-
tification of the impact of different events, which can be used to improve our
understanding of the drivers of vulnerability, [43] to such as population dis-
placement [44]. Alternatively, the impact of extreme events can be detected
by analyzing the news coverage based on natural language processing (NLP)
and, more recently, on large language models (LLMs) [45].8 CONTENTS
2.2 Extreme events understanding and trustworthiness
Yet,allpreviousapproachesfocusonthe‘what,’‘when,’and‘where’questions,
not the ‘why,’ ‘what if,’ and ‘how certain’ ones. In environmental sciences,
there’s an increasing emphasis on the need for trustworthy machine learning
[46]. This is especially important in extreme events, where critical high-stakes
decisions need to be made impacting public safety, health, infrastructure, and
resourceallocation.DisciplineslikeexplainableAI(xAI)anduncertaintyquan-
tification (UQ) offer methods to make AI more reliable and trustworthy (see
Figure 2 [middle row]). These approaches not only help us interpret AI model
predictions but also enhance our understanding of extreme events themselves.
Techniques such as causal inference and extreme event attribution further
enhance xAI and UQ by understanding the mechanisms behind these events,
crucial for improving AI models and gaining trust in the decision-making
process.
2.2.1 Extreme Event Attribution
Extreme event attribution (EEA) quantifies the influence of anthropogenic
forcings (such as greenhouse gas emissions) on the likelihood of extreme cli-
mate events by using numerical simulations with General Circulation Models
(GCM) to compare their probabilities under observed conditions (the factual
world) and a hypothetical scenario without human emissions (the counter-
factual world) [47] (cf. Table 1). Two main viewpoints exist: probabilistic
EEAemploysquantitativestatisticalmethodstoestimatethislikelihood(e.g.,
the EE is 600 times more likely due to human emissions), while storyline
approachessimulatetheevolutionoftheEEunderdifferentforcingstogather
a process-based attribution statement (e.g., 50% of the magnitude of an EE
is explained by natural variability) [48]. Ideally, both methods should be
combined to provide a complete understanding.
Ensembles of neural networks have been developed to emulate GCMs, cre-
ating surrogate models that operate significantly faster [49]. These models
successfully predict the year based on the global annual temperature field
under present conditions but struggle to perform accurately in hypothetical
scenarios resembling pre-industrial conditions [50]. Despite the scarce liter-
ature on this topic, the impressive recent advances in weather and climate
emulation with AI [3] suggest that climate emulators will play a significant
role shortly, allowing almost real-time EEA.
2.2.2 Explainable AI
Many models are transparent and interpretable-by-design, like linear models
ordecisiontrees,buttheymaynotperformwelloncomplexproblemsandare
rarely employed in extreme events (cf. Table 1). Explainable AI (xAI) aims to
unveil the decision-making process of AI models. xAI also facilitates debug-
ging,improvingmodels,andgatheringscientificinsightbyrevealingthemodel
functioning, learned relationships, and biases. The most commonly used xAICONTENTS 9
approaches rely on model-agnostic distillation or feature attribution methods
[51, 52], cf. Fig. 2. Distillation methods, such as SHapley Additive exPlana-
tions (SHAP) and Local interpretable model-agnostic explanations (LIME),
create surrogate models and have been widely used in geosciences and cli-
mate sciences [44, 53]. Feature attribution methods, like Partial Dependence
Plot (PDP) or Gradient-based Class Activation Map (Grad-CAM), highlight
important features by perturbing the inputs or using backpropagation [54].
Recent approaches explain DL models using attention in drought prediction
[55] and prototypes for explaining event localization [56]. xAI have been also
used to evaluate climate predictions [13, 57], and thus offering an agnostic,
data-driven approach for model-data intercomparison.
2.2.3 Causal inference
Causal graphs encode intuitive information about robust system properties.
This information is further required for deciding the identifiability of queries
about interventional or counterfactual properties [58, 59]. For extreme events,
most widespread causal inference methods [60, 61] cannot be applied directly,
as traditional assumptions of normality and mild outliers do not hold, and
dependence may manifest only in the extremes (Table 1). This has motivated
recent works that deal with causal discovery for extreme event analysis, pro-
viding different frameworks for understanding the dependencies and causal
structuresinextremevalues[62],withapplicationson,e.g.riversdischarge[63].
Another relevant line of work focuses on answering counterfactual questions
for climate extreme events, which links to EEA [14, 64].
2.2.4 Uncertainty quantification
Evenequippedwithexplanatoryandcausalmethods,itisstillcrucialtoassess
howconfidentareAImodeldecisions,asinaccuratewarningsordecisionscould
impact safety and resources [8, 65]. Understanding the sources of uncertainty
is important to inform and disentangle the inherent (aleatoric) uncertainty of
the weather phenomenon from the lack of knowledge in the model (epistemic)
uncertainty.Onecanreducethelatterwithmoredataandadditionalassump-
tions, but not the former (cf. Table 1). DL approaches with UQ have shown
promise for extreme events recently [34, 66].
2.3 The Last Mile: operationalization, communication,
ethics and decision-making
Thepreviouscomponents(methodsandtechniques)intheAIpipelineneedto
be operationalized, be robust, accountable and fair, so they ultimately serve
the purpose of evidence-based policy making (see Figure 2 [bottom row]).10 CONTENTS
2.3.1 Operationalization
Operationalization strictly needs the previous layer in place (xAI, causality,
UQ) for improved and accountable explanations of the predictions in early
warningsystems(EWSs),andforenhanceddisasterriskmanagement.Calibra-
tion of ML models [67], especially when coupled with uncertainty estimation,
aligns predicted probabilities to reflect the real-world likelihood of extreme
outcomes, enhancing reliability and interpretability essential for informed
decision-making. Poor calibration can lead to misguided decisions, such as
overestimating or underestimating the likelihood of critical events.
2.3.2 Communication of risk and ethical aspects
History shows that even actionable forecasts can fail if not communicated
properly.Forinstance,despitepredictionsoftheMediterraneanstormDaniel’s
landfall four days in advance, the lack of effective communication contributed
to the tragic outcome in Libya, with severe casualties and displacement [68].
Even in the more developed country of Germany, the devastating effects of
floods were related to ineffective warnings [69]. This highlights the critical
need for robust EWSs that predict events and effectively communicate risks
to ensure community preparedness and response (Table 1).
The challenge of false alarms in the context of EWS is a significant
challenge, as they can lead to “warning fatigue”, where the public becomes
desensitized to alerts and may ignore crucial warnings during actual emer-
gencies [70–72]. Addressing this issue requires improving the accuracy and
trust in predictive models, refining communication strategies, and engaging
the community [73].
2.3.3 Ethics in AI models and data
The governance of AI ethics calls for systems to be respectful of human dig-
nity, ensure security, and support democratic values [74]. The deployment of
AI to help manage extremes involves several fundamental principles: ensuring
fairness,maintainingprivacy,andachievingtransparency[75,76].Inthiscon-
text, the rise of Large Language Models (LLMs) heightens ethical risks like
outdated or inaccurate data, bias, errors, and misinformation, often obscured
by their vast training on web data. Additionally, current AI models (like gen-
erativeAIandLLMs)oftendrawonlargedatasets,sothereisariskofstrong
biases if these datasets are unrepresentative [52]. Spatial sampling and anal-
ysis are vital to collecting geographically and environmentally representative,
fair, and unbiased data. Global initiatives like the Common Alerting Protocol
have standardized warning data, but the success of these systems depends on
their inclusivity and ability to adapt to the diverse needs of affected commu-
nities, who should participate in developing EWSs [72, 77]. AI enhances these
systems by enabling the rapid dissemination of personalized alerts tailored to
specific locations and individual risk factors like proximity to flood plains or
wildfire zones, ensuring warnings are understandable and relevant to all.CONTENTS 11
Achieving the inclusion of affected communities, especially in the Global
South, still remains a significant challenge, as centralized, ’one-size-fits-all’
models are often simpler and cheaper to implement but less effective at
addressing local nuances. Designing AI systems, building on large-language
models fine-tuned to local communities with users in the loop, offers excellent
opportunities to overcome “one-size-fits-all” while being efficient.
2.3.4 Policy and decision-making
Even if AI-assisted, human operators are in charge of implementing the final
decision. This implies supporting end-users in making the most out of the
generatedinformation[6].Thisoperationalvalueisoftenproblem-specificand
dependsuponthesystem’sdominantdynamicsandthesocio-economicsectors
considered. Quantifying this value, however, might not be straightforward as
amoreaccuratepredictiondoesnotnecessarilyimplyabetterdecisionbythe
end users [78]. When multiple forecasts from different systems are available,
usersshouldaddressanumberofproblemswhereAIcanbehelpful,including
the selection of the forecast product, the lead time, the variable aggregation,
the bias correction, and how to cope with the forecast uncertainty.
Integrating the pipeline in Fig. 1 with impact models that leverage
Reinforcement Learning algorithms to simulate optimal decision-making can
help quantify how AI-enhanced information about extreme events translates
into better decisions [79]. The co-design of impact models via participatory
processes, including end users in the loop, further strengthens the over-
all model-based investigation by better capturing end users’ requirements,
expectations and concerns. End users should understand both the benefits
of AI-enhanced information for improved decision-making and the risks of
misinformation leading to poor choices.
3 Data, model and integration challenges
Extreme event analysis faces many important challenges related to the data
andmodelcharacteristics,butalsototheintegrationofAIindecisionpipelines
(see Table 2.
3.1 Data challenges
Amajorchallengeisthelackofsufficientdatawithexpertannotations,which
areessentialfortrainingandevaluatingAImodels.Giventheirrarity,extreme
events can be overlooked during the data preprocessing steps to eliminate
noise,gaps,biases,andinconsistencies[80,81].Additionally,AIstruggleswith
integrating and extracting relevant information across various data sources
and scales, which can complicate feature extraction and selection [52]. Future
AI development needs to focus on deriving robust features (or representa-
tions)thateffectivelycapturethedistinctcharacteristicsofextremeevents(cf.
Table 2).12 CONTENTS
Table 2 ChallengesandrisksofusingAIforextremeeventanalysis,andneededadvances
inAItotacklethem.Thesameblocksbeforerelatedtodata,modelandintegration
challengesarestudied.
AI models are increasingly used to enhance parameterizations of subgrid-
scale processes in Earth system models, addressing gaps in traditional meth-
ods.However,akeychallengeistheirnumericalinstabilityoverextendedtime
horizons, which may produce unrealistic scenarios when simulating extremes
due to insufficient training data [82]. The quality of observational data also
challengesAImethodsusedfordataassimilation.Recently,hybridMLmodels
thatcombinedomain-drivenwithdata-drivenmodelsapproachespromisemore
robust and trustworthy AI models [81, 83]. Moreover, AI-based methods have
improved error characterization, enhancing uncertainty quantification [84].
Generativemodelsarealsousedtosampleensemblemembersmoreeffectively,
offering better representations of the system’s state [85] (cf. Table 2).
3.2 Model challenges
Thelackofaclearstatisticaldefinitionofextremeeventsandthemechanisms
responsiblefortheiroccurrencehampermodeldevelopmentandadoption.For
detection, extremes usually constitute not pointwise but complex contextual,
group, or conditional anomalies, whose source (changing process, parents, dis-
tribution) is often unknown [52]. This results in challenges, such as capturing
subtle (new) patterns, setting adaptive thresholds, or integrating data across
distant points in space and time (cf. Table 2). For prediction and impact
assessment, AI models are sensitive to initial conditions and may not capture
long-term dependencies [80]. Moreover, data might not reveal the dynamics
of extremes, there might be changes to unseen dynamics [20], and stationar-
ity may not hold in general. Using hybrid models that combine data, domain
knowledge and models could allow insights into the mechanisms that trigger
extreme events [81, 83, 86].
The complexity of extremes also makes attribution, causal discovery, and
explainability particularly challenging. xAI can only reveal correlations theCONTENTS 13
model learned and has no information about the causal structure. This could
lead xAI to exacerbate model biases or spurious correlations. Indeed, different
xAI methods can produce very different explanations, whose suitability for
differentmodelsshouldbequantitativelyevaluated[13].Causalityisnoterror-
free,asawrongassumptionaboutwheretheextremecomesfromcouldleadto
wrong causal graphs, conclusions and decisions [58]. Finally, challenges in UQ
include differentiating and quantifying aleatoric and epistemic uncertainties,
which is complicated by the models’ overparameterization and their lack of
robust probabilistic foundations (cf. Table 2).
3.3 Integration challenges
MLmodelsaretypicallytrainedonhigh-quality,well-curateddatasets,suchas
CopernicusERA5reanalysisorcloud-freesatelliteimagery,whichoftendonot
reflect the error-prone meteorological forecasts and cloudy conditions encoun-
teredinreal-worldsituations(Table2).Applyingdomainadaptationstrategies
or leveraging invariant features could align model performance from training
phases to operational conditions. Besides, leveraging proprietary and trusted
geospatialdatafromoperationalstakeholders,suchasdetailedforestfuelmaps
andelevationmodels,allowsforfine-tuningthesemodelstoenhancedetection
and forecasting accuracy and enable finer spatial and temporal resolution in
output products.
4 Case Studies
We showcase four case studies on drought, heatwaves, wildfires, and floods,
each of them covering the different aspects of detection, forecasting, impact,
explainability, attribution, and communication of risk (Fig. 3).
4.1 Droughts: detection, forecasting and explainability
Droughtsareamongthecostliestnaturalhazards,havingdestructiveeffectson
the ecological environment, agricultural production, and socioeconomic con-
ditions. They have been traditionally approached with heuristic thresholds
and simple parametric models on related variables (e.g., soil moisture, vege-
tation indices, precipitation, or temperature, etc.). Being drought monitoring
historically purely based on station-based measurements, Earth observation
technology (e.g., Sentinel and Landsat series) and remote sensing allowed for
estimating drought-related variables over larger spatial and temporal scales
[87]. However, drought definitions presented in the literature (meteorolog-
ical, hydrological, agricultural, operational, or socioeconomic) are usually
subjective and limited [88]. These types are not independent but refer to
complementary physical, chemical, and biological processes of the Earth sys-
tem droughts involve. Although empirical multivariate drought indicators
have been proposed to account for these dependencies, the complexity of the14 CONTENTS
time series
datacubes
text
features predictions
time lag
Climate Burned area
Anthropo
Topo
W Vee ga et th ate ior
n
●●●p fainr irrtee ee andd saainfi tfyc geect tri e mo dan p ●●●e sfuea nx al cite ep un rrtecl aa y irn amn tnyak a mpinat gpion
time series
datacubes
text
Fig. 3 Summary of case studies using AI to manage extreme events.
Four use cases (drought, heatwaves, wildfires, and floods) are showcased where AI
enables detection, forecasting, impact assessment, explanation, understanding, and
communication of risk, providing a comprehensive solution for disaster manage-
ment.(a) Droughts.Top:AIleveragesmultimodaldatatopredictEarth’ssurface
dynamics, enhancing forecasts for crop yields, forest health, and drought impacts.
Bottom: XAI techniques, like “neuron integrated gradients,” elucidate the key fac-
tors driving severe drought conditions, highlighting variable interactions over time.
(b) Heatwaves. Top: Variables of interest are extracted from heterogeneous data
sources (images, time series, text) and potentially aggregated over space and/or
time.BottomLeft:Relevantfeaturescanbeextractedfromthedatausinge.g.,clus-
tering techniques. Right: Prediction of heatwaves can be done in combination with
dimensionalityreductiontoolsordirectlyfromtheselectedfeatures.(c) Wildfires.
Top: AI enhances understanding and prediction of wildfire dynamics, particularly
for mega-fires intensified by global warming, by analyzing extensive datasets and
differentiating fire types with XAI. Bottom: AI combined with causal inference
aims to better detect and understand pyrocumulonimbus clouds, intense storm
systems generated by large wildfires that complicate fire behavior prediction. (d)
Floods.AItransformsfloodriskcommunicationbyusingrealistic3Dvisualizations
and animations to depict rising water levels’ impact on communities and infras-
tructure, making the information more relatable (thisclimatedoesnotexist.com).
AI-driven platforms analyze vast amounts of data from weather forecasts, river lev-
els, and historical flood patterns to predict future events accurately, integrating
this information with digital maps and urban models to identify high-risk areas
(climate-viz.github.io.com). This approach enhances flood risk management by
allowingfortargeted,personalizedcommunication,enablingresidentstoreceivespe-
cific alerts and visualize potential impacts on their homes. AI also supports the
generation of detailed flood reports from various sources, enhancing preparedness
and mitigation efforts (floodbrain.com).
combination of drought processes makes their detection, prediction, and char-
acterization (severity, duration, start-end, etc.) a burden to researchers and
policymakers, which can benefit from data-driven AI approaches.
erutaef noitcartxe
retsulc
PCACONTENTS 15
Traditional ML approaches have been successfully applied to drought pre-
diction, from support vector machines, decision trees, and random forests to
more advanced multivariate density estimation approaches [26, 89, 90]. How-
ever, DL algorithms are required for efficiently modeling spatial and temporal
correlations in data. To this end, neural networks have been used for drought
monitoringinasupervisedway,mainlyusingmultilayer,convolutional,and/or
recurrent neural networks [2]. Drought detection is an unsupervised problem
due to its spatiotemporal variability and the shifting definition of drought
under climate change. Thus, unsupervised and semi-supervised methods are
recommended for practical applications [16].
To overcome some of the challenges before, recent works have applied AI
methodstoprocessmultimodaldata(satelliteimageryatdifferentresolutions,
mesoscale climate variables, and static features). Drought detection has been
addressed at the European level employing domain knowledge-driven varia-
tionalautoencoders(VAEs)[90],whichcombinetraditionaldroughtindicators
with climate data. Forecasting the dynamics of the Earth’s surface with AI
may help predict crop yield, forest health, and the effects of drought events
[42] (Fig. 3a, top). Similar DL drought detectors can be explained with xAI,
identifying the most salient regions in time and space and attributing their
main drivers [91] (Fig. 3a, bottom).
4.2 Heatwaves: prediction, attribution and understanding
In the context of climate change, heat extremes are becoming more frequent
and intense [92], but still regional trends are uncertain [93]. For example, a
notablewarminghotspotinwesternEuropewasidentifiedwithheatextremes
increasingfasterthanpredictedbythecurrentstate-of-the-artclimatemodels
[94]. Understanding the physical drivers of heat extremes is crucial for accu-
rate seasonal prediction and projection of these events. Several drivers of heat
extremes remain uncertain though, specifically long-term changes in atmo-
spheric circulation as well as land-atmosphere interactions, that may amplify
or enhance specific events [92].
AI methods can accurately detect and predict heat extremes on differ-
ent spatial and temporal scales, some lead times and aggregations using deep
learning [12, 95, 96], causal-informed ridge regression [27], or hybrid models
[97], among others. These approaches often require dimensionality reduc-
tion tools to select predictors from high-dimensional climate data (Fig. 3c).
Expressivelower-dimensionalfeaturerepresentationshavebeenextractedfrom
high-dimensional data using VAEs, which can be used to improve the predic-
tion of heat extremes [34]. New methods, such as the EarthFormer, explore
transformer networks specifically for the prediction of temperature anomalies,
where encoder/decoder structures are combined with spatial attention layers
[98].Nexttopredictingheatwaves,physicaldriversofheatwavescanbeinferred
fromtheMLmodelsaswell.Forexample,XAItoolscanbeappliedtodiscover
physical drivers of heat extremes, e.g. [97]. Apart from XAI, causal inference16 CONTENTS
methods have been used to understand the drivers of extreme temperatures
[27].
Attribution studies for temperature and precipitation have increasingly
used AI techniques [50]. When it comes to heatwaves the identification of
circulation-inducedvs.thermodynamicalchangesbecomescrucial.Severalsta-
tistical and ML methods are currently in use for this purpose [99]. The next
vitalstepforattributionstudiesistousesuchMLmethodstounderstandthe
contribution of dynamical changes to the observed trends. This will lighten
thediscrepanciesbetweencirculationtrendsinclimatemodelobservationsand
reanalysis [94]. Finally, recent development shows that ML techniques can be
successfully applied for rare event modeling, sampling, and prediction [34].
4.3 Wildfires: predict, explain and understand
Mostwildfiredamagestemsfromafewextremeevents.Predictingtheseevents
is vital for effective fire management and ecosystem conservation. Climate
change is expected to increase the frequency, size, and severity of extreme
wildfires, exacerbating fire weather conditions [100]. Traditional firefighting
approachesareincreasinglyinadequate,withmanyextremefiresburninguntil
naturally extinguished [101]. The complexity of nonlinear interactions among
fire drivers across various scales hinders the predictability of fire behavior.
Therefore, enhancing models to better understand and predict conditions
leading to large, uncontrollable fires is crucial.
DL methods can associate weather predictions, satellite observations, and
burned area datasets to model wildfires achieving better predictability than
conventional methods. DL has been used successfully to forecast wildfire dan-
ger [31] and for susceptibility mapping [102]. In the short term, wildfires are
driven by the daily weather variations but also by the cumulative effects of
vegetation and drought. On sub-seasonal to seasonal scales, where weather
forecasts are less reliable, wildfires are modulated by Earth system large-scale
processes, such as teleconnections. Early work has shown that DL models
can leverage information from teleconnections to improve long-term wildfire
forecasting[103].Apartfrompredictingwildfires,itisveryimportanttounder-
stand the reasons behind the predictions to support decision-making and fire
management. In this context, xAI can aid in identifying what drives wildfires,
supporting, for example, the differentiation and management of various fire
types, such as wind-driven and drought-driven fires [31].
Under global warming [101], in the coming years, we expect an increase
in the frequency of unstable atmospheric conditions that can cause Pyrocu-
mulonimbus (pyroCbs), i.e., storm clouds that generate their weather fronts
and can make wildfire behavior unpredictable [104]. Despite the risk posed
by pyroCbs, the conditions leading to their occurrence and evolution are still
poorly understood, and their causal mechanisms are uncertain. AI, in com-
bination with causal inference, can advance the detection, forecasting, and
understanding of the drivers of pyroCb events [105].CONTENTS 17
4.4 Floods: from detection to communication of risk
Studying floods is crucial as they are the most frequent and costly natural
disasters, affecting millions annually and causing over $40 billion in dam-
ages worldwide each year [106]. Developing novel methods for flood detection
enhancesEWSs,reducingfatalitiesbyupto40%,whileeffectiveriskcommuni-
cationensuresbetterpreparednessandresponse,potentiallysavingthousands
of lives.
In July 2021, intense rainfall in Germany, Belgium, France, and the UK
triggered severe flash floods, particularly devastating the Ahr River region
in Germany, claiming nearly 200 lives [107, 108]. Alerts were issued by the
European Flood Awareness System (EFAS) and disseminated through an
international warning system. However, the floods exposed significant flaws in
these systems (Fig. 3d). Damage to river monitoring infrastructure impeded
dataaccuracy,andalthoughmeteorologicalforecastspredictedtherainfalltwo
daysinadvance,floodpredictionsforsmallerbasinslackedprecisionandfailed
to consider debris flow and morphodynamics, leading to underestimations of
flood severity.
AI offers promising avenues for enhancing flood management systems.
AdvancedglobalmeteorologicalforecastingmodelspoweredbyAIcanrapidly
process large data ensembles, providing more accurate probabilistic estimates
even during extreme weather events. Furthermore, AI techniques such as ML-
accelerated computational fluid dynamics could address the computational
challenges in hydro-morpho-dynamic modeling, allowing for more precise pre-
dictions of stream flow and flood levels, particularly in ungauged basins
[109].
Additionally, AI can aid in calibrating non-contact video gauges, poten-
tially more robust than traditional methods, as they are not directly affected
by the water. AI can also guide forensic analysis to evaluate exposure and
vulnerability, employing multi-modal approaches to refine geospatial models
at a local scale. However, the effectiveness of these AI-driven models depends
on detailed knowledge of the local terrain, including potential bottlenecks like
bridgesandchannels,andaccuratedataaboutsocietalvulnerabilitytofloods.
Yet, AI can also transform how warnings are issued to improve com-
munication and response strategies. For instance, AI-generated maps and
photorealistic visualizations based on digital elevation models can depict
expectedinundationareasanddamages[110].Moreover,AIcangenerateeasily
understandable, language-based warnings, both written and auditory, tai-
lored for diverse populations, including the visually impaired. An LLM-based
chatbot feature could enhance interactivity, providing real-time, personalized
responses to emergency inquiries (see examples in Fig. 3d).
5 Conclusions and Outlook
This review highlighted the significant potential of AI for analyzing and mod-
eling extreme events while also detailing the main difficulties and prospects18 CONTENTS
associated with this emerging field. Integrating AI into extreme event anal-
ysis faces several challenges, including data management issues like handling
dynamic datasets, biases, and high dimensionality that complicate feature
extraction. AI models also struggle with unclear statistical definitions of what
is ‘extreme’. Furthermore, integrating AI with physical models poses substan-
tialchallengesyetofferspromisingopportunitiesforenhancingmodelaccuracy
and reliability. Trustworthiness concerns arise from the complexity and inter-
pretabilityofMLmodels,thedifficultyofgeneralizingacrossdifferentcontexts,
andthequantificationofuncertainty.Operationalchallengesincludethecom-
plexity of AI outputs which hinder interpretation by non-experts, resistance
to AI adoption due to concerns over reliability and fairness, and the need for
frameworks that facilitate transparent and ethical integration of AI insights
into decision-making processes.
The previous challenges compromise reproducibility and comparability of
ML models in analyzing extreme events. These challenges are exacerbated
by data scarcity, lack of transparency in model configurations, and the use
of proprietary tools. Additionally, interdisciplinary differences hinder con-
sistency and comparability. Effective solutions demand robust, transparent
methodologies, inclusive data-sharing practices, and frameworks that support
cross-disciplinary collaboration.
We overviewed and emphasized the importance of developing operational,
explainable,andtrustworthyAIsystems.Addressingthesechallengesrequires
a coordinated effort across disciplines involving AI researchers, environmen-
tal and climate scientists, field experts, and policymakers. This collaborative
approach is crucial for advancing AI applications in extreme event analysis
and ensuring that these technologies are adapted to real-world needs and con-
straints. From an operational perspective, adapting AI solutions to real-time
data integration, model deployment, and resource allocation highlights the
need for systems that can function within the operational frameworks of dis-
astermanagementandriskmitigation.Besides,methodologicalimprovements
are still needed in model evaluation and benchmarking to alleviate issues like
overfitting and enhance AI systems’ generalization capabilities.
Looking forward, there are significant areas for further exploration and
improvement. These include the development of benchmarks specific to
extreme events, enhanced integration of domain knowledge to improve data
fusionandmodeltraining,andthecreationofrobust,scalableAIsystemscapa-
bleofadaptingtothedynamicnatureofextremeevents.RecentLLMsharvest
vast amounts of domain knowledge embedded in the literature, promising
significant advances in communicating risk.
As we advance, the ultimate goal is to harness AI’s potential to substan-
tially benefit society, particularly by enhancing our capacity to manage and
respondtoextremeevents.Throughdedicatedresearchandcollaborativeinno-
vation,AIcanbecomeacornerstoneinourstrategytounderstandandmitigate
the impacts of these challenging and elusive phenomena.CONTENTS 19
References
[1] Seneviratne, S.I., Zhang, X., Adnan, M., Badi, W., Dereczynski, C.,
DiLuca,A.,Ghosh,S.,Iskander,I.,Kossin,J.,Lewis,S.,etal.:Weather
and climate extreme events in a changing climate (chapter 11) (2021)
[2] Gonzalez-Calabuig, M., Cort´es-Andr´es, J., Williams, T., Zhang, M.,
Pellicer-Valero, O.J., Fern´andez-Torres, M.-A´., Camps-Valls, G.: The
AIDE Toolbox: AI for Disentangling Extreme Events. IEEE Geoscience
and Remote Sensing Magazine 12(3), 1–8 (2024). https://doi.org/10.
1109/MGRS.2024.3382544
[3] Lam, R., Sanchez-Gonzalez, A., Willson, M., Wirnsberger, P., Fortu-
nato, M., Alet, F., Ravuri, S., Ewalds, T., Eaton-Rosen, Z., Hu, W.,
Merose, A., Hoyer, S., Holland, G., Vinyals, O., Stott, J., Pritzel,
A., Mohamed, S., Battaglia, P.: Learning skillful medium-range global
weather forecasting. Science 382, 1416–1422 (2023)
[4] Ferchichi,A.,Abbes,A.B.,Barra,V.,Farah,I.R.:Forecastingvegetation
indices from spatio-temporal remotely sensed data using deep learning-
basedapproaches:Asystematicliteraturereview.EcologicalInformatics,
101552 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ecoinf.2022.101552
[5] Ragone, F., Bouchet, F.: Rare event algorithm study of extreme warm
summers and heatwaves over europe. Geophysical Research Letters
48(12), 2020–091197 (2021)
[6] Yokota, F., Thompson, K.M.: Value of information analysis in environ-
mentalhealthriskmanagementdecisions:past,present,andfuture.Risk
analysis 24(3), 635–650 (2004)
[7] Salcedo-Sanz, S., P´erez-Aracil, J., Ascenso, G., Del Ser, J., Casillas-
P´erez, D., Kadow, C., Fister, D., Barriopedro, D., Garc´ıa-Herrera, R.,
Giuliani, M., Castelletti, A.: Analysis, characterization, prediction, and
attribution of extreme atmospheric events with machine learning and
deeplearningtechniques:areview.TheoreticalandAppliedClimatology
155(1), 1–44 (2024). https://doi.org/10.1007/s00704-023-04571-5
[8] Gawlikowski, J., Tassi, C.R.N., Ali, M., Lee, J., Humt, M., Feng, J.,
Kruspe, A., Triebel, R., Jung, P., Roscher, R., Shahzad, M., Yang, W.,
Bamler,R.,Zhu,X.X.:Asurveyofuncertaintyindeepneuralnetworks.
Artificial Intelligence Review 56(Suppl 1), 1513–1589 (2023) https://
arxiv.org/abs/2107.03342.https://doi.org/10.1007/s10462-023-10562-9
[9] Harrington, L.J., Schleussner, C.F., Otto, F.E.L.: Quantifying uncer-
tainty in aggregated climate change risk assessments. Nature Communi-
cations12(1),7140(2021).https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-021-27491-220 CONTENTS
[10] Stott, P.A., Christidis, N., Otto, F.E.L., Sun, Y., Vanderlinden, J.P.,
van Oldenborgh, G.J., Vautard, R., von Storch, H., Walton, P., Yiou,
P., Zwiers, F.W.: Attribution of extreme weather and climate-related
events. Wiley Interdisciplinary Reviews: Climate Change 7(1), 23–41
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1002/wcc.380
[11] Madakumbura, G.D., Thackeray, C.W., Norris, J., Goldenson, N., Hall,
A.: Anthropogenic influence on extreme precipitation over global land
areas seen in multiple observational datasets. Nature Communications
12(1), 3944 (2021)
[12] Chattopadhyay, A., Nabizadeh, E., Hassanzadeh, P.: Analog forecast-
ing of extreme-causing weather patterns using deep learning. Journal
of Advances in Modeling Earth Systems 12(2), 2019–001958. https:
//doi.org/10.1029/2019MS001958
[13] Bommer, P.L., Kretschmer, M., Hedstrom, A., Bareeva, D., Hohne,
M.M.-C.: Finding the right XAI method — A guide for the evalua-
tion and ranking of explainable ai methods in climate science. Artificial
Intelligence for the Earth Systems (2024). https://doi.org/10.1175/
AIES-D-23-0074.1
[14] Hannart, A., Pearl, J., Otto, F.E.L., Naveau, P., Ghil, M.: Causal coun-
terfactual theory for the attribution of weather and climate-related
events. Bulletin of the American Meteorological Society 97, 99–110
(2016)
[15] Vaghefi, S.A., Stammbach, D., Muccione, V., Bingler, J., Ni, J., Kraus,
M., Allen, S., Colesanti-Senni, C., Wekhof, T., Schimanski, T., et al.:
ChatClimate: Grounding conversational AI in climate science. Commu-
nications Earth & Environment 4(1), 480 (2023)
[16] Ruff, L., Kauffmann, J.R., Vandermeulen, R.A., Montavon, G., Samek,
W.,Kloft,M.,Dietterich,T.G.,Muller,K.-R.:Aunifyingreviewofdeep
and shallow anomaly detection. Proceedings of the IEEE 109(5), 756–
795 (2021)
[17] Han, Z., Zhao, J., Leung, H., Ma, K.F., Wang, W.: A review of deep
learning models for time series prediction. IEEE Sensors Journal 21(6),
7833–7848 (2019)
[18] Zennaro, F., Furlan, E., Simeoni, C., Torresan, S., Aslan, S., Critto, A.,
Marcomini, A.: Exploring machine learning potential for climate change
riskassessment.Earth-ScienceReviews220,103752(2021).https://doi.
org/10.1016/j.earscirev.2021.103752
[19] Jones, R.L., Kharb, A., Tubeuf, S.: The untold story of missing data inCONTENTS 21
disasterresearch:asystematicreviewoftheempiricalliteratureutilising
theemergencyeventsdatabase(EM-DAT).EnvironmentalResearchLet-
ters 18(10), 103006 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1088/1748-9326/acfd42
[20] Flach, M., Gans, F., Brenning, A., Denzler, J., Reichstein, M., Rod-
ner, E., Bathiany, S., Bodesheim, P., Guanche, Y., Sippel, S., et al.:
Multivariate anomaly detection for Earth observations: a comparison of
algorithms and feature extraction techniques. Earth System Dynamics
8(3), 677–696 (2017)
[21] Prabhat, Kashinath, K., Mudigonda, M., Kim, S., Kapp-Schwoerer, L.,
Graubner, A., Karaismailoglu, E., von Kleist, L., Kurth, T., Greiner,
A.,et al.:ClimateNet:Anexpert-labelledopendatasetandDeepLearn-
ingarchitectureforenablinghigh-precisionanalysesofextremeweather.
Geoscientific Model Development Discussions 2020, 1–28 (2020)
[22] Racah, E., Beckham, C., Maharaj, T., Ebrahimi Kahou, S., Prabhat,
M., Pal, C.: Extremeweather: A large-scale climate dataset for semi-
superviseddetection,localization,andunderstandingofextremeweather
events. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems (NeurIPS)
30 (2017)
[23] GuancheGarc´ıa,Y.,Shadaydeh,M.,Mahecha,M.,Denzler,J.:Extreme
anomaly event detection in biosphere using linear regression and a spa-
tiotemporal mrf model. Natural Hazards 98(3), 849–867 (2018). https:
//doi.org/10.1007/s11069-018-3415-8
[24] Klehmet, K., Berg, P., Bozhinova, D., Crochemore, L., Du, Y., Pechli-
vanidis, I., Photiadou,C., Yang, W.:Robustness of hydrometeorological
extremes in surrogated seasonal forecasts. International Journal of
Climatology44(5),1725–1738(2024).https://doi.org/10.1002/joc.8407
[25] Johnson, J.E., Laparra, V., P´erez-Suay, A., Mahecha, M., Camps-Valls,
G.: Kernel methods and their derivatives: Concept and perspectives for
the Earth system sciences. PLOS One 15(10), 0235885 (2020)
[26] Johnson,J.E.,Laparra,V.,Piles,M.,Camps-Valls,G.:Gaussianizingthe
Earth: Multidimensional information measures for Earth data analysis.
IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine 9(4), 191–208 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MGRS.2021.3066260
[27] Vijverberg, S., Coumou, D.: The role of the Pacific Decadal Oscil-
lation and ocean-atmosphere interactions in driving US temperature
variability. npj Climate and Atmospheric Science 5(1), 18 (2022). https:
//doi.org/10.1038/s41612-022-00237-7
[28] Kladny, K.-R., Milanta, M., Mraz, O., Hufkens, K., Stocker, B.D.:22 CONTENTS
Enhanced prediction of vegetation responses to extreme drought using
deeplearningandEarthobservationdata.EcologicalInformatics,102474
(2024)
[29] Bentivoglio, R., Isufi, E., Jonkman, S.N., Taormina, R.: Deep learning
methods for flood mapping: a review of existing applications and future
research directions. Hydrology and Earth system sciences 26(16), 4345–
4378 (2022)
[30] Belayneh, A., Adamowski, J., Khalil, B., Ozga-Zielinski, B.: Long-term
SPI drought forecasting in the Awash River Basin in Ethiopia using
wavelet neural network and wavelet support vector regression models.
Journal of Hydrology 508, 418–429 (2014)
[31] Kondylatos, S., Prapas, I., Ronco, M., Papoutsis, I., Camps-Valls,
G., Piles, M., Fern´andez-Torres, M.-A., Carvalhais, N.: Wildfire Dan-
ger Prediction and Understanding With Deep Learning. Geophysical
Research Letters 49(17), 2022–099368 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1029/
2022GL099368
[32] Nearing, G., Cohen, D., Dube, V., Gauch, M., Gilon, O., Harrigan, S.,
Hassidim, A., Klotz, D., Kratzert, F., Metzger, A., et al.: Global pre-
diction of extreme floods in ungauged watersheds. Nature 627(8004),
559–563 (2024)
[33] Zhang, G., Wang, M., Liu, K.: Deep neural networks for global wildfire
susceptibility modelling. Ecological Indicators 127, 107735 (2021)
[34] Miloshevich, G., Cozian, B., Abry, P., Borgnat, P., Bouchet, F.:
Probabilistic forecasts of extreme heatwaves using convolutional neu-
ral networks in a regime of lack of data. Physical Review Fluids
8(4), 40501 (2023) https://arxiv.org/abs/2208.00971. https://doi.org/
10.1103/PhysRevFluids.8.040501
[35] Vo, T.Q., Kim, S.-H., Nguyen, D.H., Bae, D.-H.: LSTM-CM: a hybrid
approach for natural drought prediction based on deep learning and cli-
mate models. Stochastic Environmental Research and Risk Assessment
37(6), 2035–2051 (2023)
[36] Shi, X.: Enabling smart dynamical downscaling of extreme precipita-
tioneventswithmachinelearning.GeophysicalResearchLetters47(19),
2020–090309 (2020)
[37] Callaghan, M., Schleussner, C.-F., Nath, S., et al.: Machine-learning-
based evidence and attribution mapping of 100,000 climate impact
studies.NatureClimateChange11,966–972(2021).https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41558-021-01168-6CONTENTS 23
[38] Sutanto, S.J., van der Weert, M., Wanders, N., et al.: Moving from
drought hazard to impact forecasts. Nature communications 10, 4945
(2019). https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-019-12840-z
[39] Salakpi, E.E., Hurley, P.D., Muthoka, J.M., Barrett, A.B., Bowell, A.,
Oliver,S.,Rowhani,P.:ForecastingvegetationconditionwithaBayesian
auto-regressive distributed lags (BARDL) model. Natural Hazards and
Earth System Sciences 22(8), 2703–2723 (2022)
[40] Martinuzzi,F.,Mahecha,M.D.,Camps-Valls,G.,Montero,D.,Williams,
T., Mora, K.: Learning extreme vegetation response to climate forc-
ing: A comparison of recurrent neural network architectures. Nonlinear
Processes in Geophysics 2024, 1–32 (2024)
[41] Ahmad, R., Yang, B., Ettlin, G., Berger, A., Rodr´ıguez-Bocca, P.: A
machine-learning based ConvLSTM architecture for NDVI forecasting.
International Transactions in Operational Research 30(4), 2025–2048
(2023)
[42] Benson, V., Requena-Mesa, C., Robin, C., Alonso, L., Cort´es, J., Gao,
Z., Linscheid, N., Weynants, M., Reichstein, M.: Forecasting localized
weather impacts on vegetation as seen from space with meteo-guided
video prediction. In: CVPR 2024 (2024)
[43] Zhang, X., Chen, G., Cai, L., Jiao, H., Hua, J., Luo, X., Wei, X.:
Impact assessments of typhoon Lekima on forest damages in Subtropi-
cal China using machine learning methods and Landsat 8 OLI imagery.
Sustainability 13(9), 4893 (2021)
[44] Ronco, M., T´arraga, J.M., Mun˜oz, J., Piles, M., Marco, E.S., Wang,
Q., Espinosa, M.T.M., Ponserre, S., Camps-Valls, G.: Exploring inter-
actions between socioeconomic context and natural hazards on human
population displacement. Nature Communications 14(1), 8004 (2023)
[45] Sodoge, J., Kuhlicke, C., de Brito, M.M.: Automatized spatio-temporal
detection of drought impacts from newspaper articles using natural lan-
guage processing and machine learning. Weather and Climate Extremes
41, 100574 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.wace.2023.100574
[46] Bostrom, A., Demuth, J.L., Wirz, C.D., Cains, M.G., Schumacher, A.,
Madlambayan, D., Bansal, A.S., Bearth, A., Chase, R., Crosman, K.M.,
Ebert-Uphoff, I., Gagne II, D.J., Guikema, S., Hoffman, R., Johnson,
B.B., Kumler-Bonfanti, C., Lee, J.D., Lowe, A., McGovern, A., Przy-
bylo, V., Radford, J.T., Roth, E., Sutter, C., Tissot, P., Roebber, P.,
Stewart, J.Q., White, M., Williams, J.K.: Trust and trustworthy artifi-
cialintelligence:AresearchagendaforAIintheenvironmentalsciences.
Risk Analysis. https://doi.org/10.1111/risa.1424524 CONTENTS
[47] Naveau, P., Hannart, A., Ribes, A.: Statistical methods for extreme
event attribution in climate science. Annual Review of Statis-
tics and Its Application 7, 89–110 (2020). https://doi.org/10.1146/
annurev-statistics-031219-041314
[48] Otto, F.E.: Attribution of extreme events to climate change. Annual
Review of Environment and Resources 48, 813–828 (2023)
[49] Pasini, A., Racca, P., Amendola, S., Cartocci, G., Cassardo, C.: Attri-
bution of recent temperature behaviour reassessed by a neural-network
method. Scientific reports 7(1), 17681 (2017)
[50] Barnes, E.A., Hurrell, J.W., Ebert-Uphoff, I., Anderson, C., Anderson,
D.: Viewing forced climate patterns through an AI lens. Geophysical
Research Letters 46(22), 13389–13398 (2019)
[51] Ghaffarian, S., Taghikhah, F.R., Maier, H.R.: Explainable artificial
intelligence in disaster risk management: Achievements and prospective
futures. International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 98, 104123
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2023.104123
[52] Tuia, D., Schindler, K., Demir, B., Camps-Valls, G., Zhu, X.X.,
Kochupillai, M., Dˇzeroski, S., van Rijn, J.N., Hoos, H.H., Frate, F.D.,
Datcu, M., Quian´e-Ruiz, J.-A., Markl, V., Saux, B.L., Schneider, R.:
ArtificialintelligencetoadvanceEarthobservation:aperspective.IEEE
Geoscience and Remote Sensing Magazine (2024)
[53] Schlund, M., Eyring, V., Camps-Valls, G., Friedlingstein, P., Gentine,
P., Reichstein, M.: Constraining uncertainty in projected gross primary
production with machine learning. Journal of Geophysical Research:
Biogeosciences 125(11), 2019–005619 (2020)
[54] Srinivasan, R., Wang, L., Bulleid, J.: Machine learning-based climate
time series anomaly detection using convolutional neural networks.
Weather and Climate 40(1), 16–31 (2020)
[55] Dikshit,A.,Pradhan,B.,Assiri,M.E.,Almazroui,M.,Park,H.-J.:Solv-
ing transparency in drought forecasting using attention models. Science
ofTheTotalEnvironment837,155856(2022).https://doi.org/10.1016/
j.scitotenv.2022.155856
[56] Barnes, E.A., Barnes, R.J., Martin, Z.K., Rader, J.K.: This Looks Like
ThatThere:InterpretableNeuralNetworksforImageTasksWhenLoca-
tion Matters. Artificial Intelligence for the Earth Systems 1(3), 220001
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1175/AIES-D-22-0001.1
[57] Mamalakis,A.,Barnes,E.A.,Ebert-Uphoff,I.:InvestigatingtheFidelityCONTENTS 25
of Explainable Artificial Intelligence Methods for Applications of
Convolutional Neural Networks in Geoscience. Artificial Intelligence
for the Earth Systems 1(4), 220012 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1175/
AIES-D-22-0012.1
[58] Pearl, J.: Causality: Models, Reasoning, and Inference, 2nd edn. MIT
Press, Cambridge, MA (2017)
[59] Peters, J., Janzing, D., Sch¨olkopf, B.: Elements of Causal Inference
- Foundations and Learning Algorithms. Adaptive Computation and
Machine Learning Series. MIT Press, Cambridge, MA (2017)
[60] Runge, J., Gerhardus, A., Varando, G., Eyring, V., Camps-Valls, G.:
Causalinferencefortimeseries.NatureReviewsEarthandEnvironment
4(7), 487–505 (2023). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43017-023-00431-y
[61] Camps-Valls, G., Gerhardus, A., Ninad, U., Varando, G., Martius, G.,
Balaguer-Ballester, E., Vinuesa, R., Diaz, E., Zanna, L., Runge, J.: Dis-
coveringcausalrelationsandequationsfromdata.PhysicsReports1044,
1–68 (2023)
[62] Gnecco, N., Meinshausen, N., Peters, J., Engelke, S.: Causal discovery
in heavy-tailed models. The Annals of Statistics (2019)
[63] Pasche, O.C., Chavez-Demoulin, V., Davison, A.C.: Causal modelling
of heavy-tailed variables and confounders with application to river flow.
Extremes 26, 573–594 (2021)
[64] Kiriliouk, A., Naveau, P.: Climate extreme event attribution using mul-
tivariatepeaks-over-thresholdsmodelingandcounterfactualtheory.The
Annals of Applied Statistics 14(3), 1342–1358 (2020). https://doi.org/
10.1214/20-AOAS1355
[65] Ghanem, R., Higdon, D., Owhadi, H.: Handbook of Uncertainty Quan-
tification. Springer, Cham, Switzerland (2017)
[66] Xu,L.,Chen,N.,Yang,C.,Yu,H.,Chen,Z.:Quantifyingtheuncertainty
of precipitation forecasting using probabilistic deep learning. Hydrology
and Earth System Sciences 26(11), 2923–2938 (2022). https://doi.org/
10.5194/hess-26-2923-2022
[67] Bella, A., Ferri, C., Herna´ndez-Orallo,J., Ram´ırez-Quintana, M.J.: Cal-
ibration of machine learning models. In: Handbook of Research on
Machine Learning Applications and Trends: Algorithms, Methods, and
Techniques, pp. 128–146. IGI Global, Hershey, PA (2010)
[68] Corps, I.M.: Libya Flooding: Situation Report #9 (2023)26 CONTENTS
[69] DWD: The weather in Germany 2021 (2021). https://www.dwd.de/
EN/press/press release/EN/2021/20210830 the weather in germany
in summer 2021 news.html
[70] Tojcic, I., Denamiel, C., Vilibic, I.: Performance of the Adriatic early
warningsystemduringthemulti-meteotsunamieventof11–19May2020:
anassessmentusingenergybanners.NaturalHazardsandEarthSystem
Sciences (2021). https://doi.org/10.5194/nhess-21-2427-2021
[71] Yore, R., Walker, J.: Early Warning Systems and Evacuation: Rare
and Extreme vs Frequent and Small-Scale Tropical Cyclones in the
Philippines and Dominica. Disasters (2020). https://doi.org/10.1111/
disa.12434
[72] Reichstein, M., Benson, V., Camps-Valls, G., Boran, H., Fearnley, C.,
Kornhuber,K.,Rahaman,N.,Sch¨olkopf,B.,T´arraga,J.M.,Vinuesa,R.,
et al.: Early warning of complex climate risk with integrated artificial
intelligence. Nature Communications (under evaluation) (2024)
[73] Tamamadin, M., Susandi, A., Pratama, A., Faisal, I., Wijaya, A.,
Firdaus, I.M., Kuntoro, W.S.: Automation process to support an infor-
mation system on extreme weather warning. IOP Conference Series:
Materials Science and Engineering (2020). https://doi.org/10.1088/
1757-899X/803/1/012044
[74] AI, H.: Ethics Guidlines for trustworthy AI: High-level expert
group on artificial intelligence. European Commission (2018). https:
//wayback.archive-it.org/12090/20201227221227/https://ec.europa.eu/
digital-single-market/en/news/ethics-guidelines-trustworthy-ai
[75] Jobin, A., Ienca, M., Vayena, E.: The global landscape of AI ethics
guidelines. Nature Machine Intelligence 1, 389–399 (2019)
[76] Kochupillai, M., Kahl, M., Schmitt, M., Taubenb¨ock, H., Zhu, X.X.:
Earth observation and artificial intelligence: Understanding emerging
ethical issues and opportunities. IEEE Geoscience and Remote Sensing
Magazine 10(4), 90–124 (2022)
[77] Macherera,M.,Chimbari,M.J.:Areviewofstudiesoncommunitybased
early warning systems. Journal of Disaster Risk Studies 8 (2016)
[78] Ramos, M.H., van Andel, S.J., Pappenberger, F.: Do probabilistic fore-
casts lead to better decisions? Hydrology and Earth System Sciences
17(6), 2219–2232 (2013). https://doi.org/10.5194/hess-17-2219-2013
[79] Giuliani, M., Pianosi, F., Castelletti, A.: Making the most of data: anCONTENTS 27
information selection and assessment framework to improve water sys-
tems operations. Water Resources Research 51(11), 9073–9093 (2015).
https://doi.org/10.1002/2015WR017044
[80] Camps-Valls, G., Tuia, D., Zhu, X.X., Reichstein, M.: Deep Learning
for the Earth Sciences: A Comprehensive Approach to Remote Sens-
ing,ClimateScienceandGeosciences.JohnWiley&Sons,Hoboken,NJ
(2021)
[81] Reichstein, M., Camps-Valls, G., Stevens, B., Jung, M., Denzler, J.,
Carvalhais, N., Prabhat: Deep learning and process understanding for
data-driven Earth system science. Nature 566, 195–204 (2019)
[82] Iles,C.E.,Vautard,R.,Strachan,J.,Joussaume,S.,Eggen,B.R.,Hewitt,
C.D.: The benefits of increasing resolution in global and regional cli-
mate simulations for european climate extremes. Geoscientific Model
Development 13(11), 5583–5607 (2020)
[83] Cheng, S., Quilodr´an-Casas, C., Ouala, S., Farchi, A., Liu, C., Tandeo,
P., Fablet, R., Lucor, D., Iooss, B., Brajard, J., et al.: Machine learn-
ing with data assimilation and uncertainty quantification for dynamical
systems: a review. IEEE/CAA Journal of Automatica Sinica 10(6),
1361–1387 (2023)
[84] Haynes,K.,Lagerquist,R.,McGraw,M.,Musgrave,K.,Ebert-Uphoff,I.:
Creating and evaluating uncertainty estimates with neural networks for
environmental-science applications. Artificial Intelligence for the Earth
Systems 2(2) (2023). https://doi.org/10.1175/aies-d-22-0061.1
[85] Li, W., Pan, B., Xia, J., Duan, Q.: Convolutional neural network-based
statisticalpost-processingofensembleprecipitationforecasts.Journalof
Hydrology 605, 127301 (2022). https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jhydrol.2021.
127301
[86] Farazmand, M., Sapsis, T.P.: Extreme events: Mechanisms and predic-
tion. Applied Mechanics Reviews 71(5), 050801 (2019)
[87] West, H., Quinn, N., Horswell, M.: Remote sensing for drought mon-
itoring & impact assessment: Progress, past challenges and future
opportunities. Remote Sensing of Environment 232, 111291 (2019)
[88] Zargar,A.,Sadiq,R.,Naser,B.,Khan,F.I.:Areviewofdroughtindices.
Environmental Reviews 19(NA), 333–349 (2011)
[89] Jehanzaib, M., Bilal Idrees, M., Kim, D., Kim, T.-W.: Comprehen-
sive evaluation of machine learning techniques for hydrological drought
forecasting. Journal of Irrigation and Drainage Engineering 147(7),28 CONTENTS
04021022 (2021)
[90] Zhang, M., Fern´andez-Torres, M.A., Camps-Valls, G.: Domain
knowledge-drivenvariationalrecurrentnetworksfordroughtmonitoring.
Remote Sensing of Environment (2024, under review)
[91] Dikshit,A.,Pradhan,B.:InterpretableandexplainableAI(XAI)model
for spatial drought prediction. Science of the Total Environment 801,
149797 (2021)
[92] Barriopedro, D., Garc´ıa-Herrera, R., Ord´on˜ez, C., Miralles, D., Salcedo-
Sanz, S.: Heat waves: Physical understanding and scientific challenges.
Reviews of Geophysics 61(2), 2022–000780
[93] Teng, H., Leung, R., Branstator, G., Lu, J., Ding, Q.: Warming pattern
overthenorthernhemispheremidlatitudesinborealsummer1979–2020.
Journal of Climate 35(11), 3479–3494 (2022)
[94] Vautard, R., Cattiaux, J., Happ´e, T., Singh, J., Bonnet, R., Cassou,
C., Coumou, D., D’Andrea, F., Faranda, D., Fischer, E., Ribes, A., Sip-
pel,S.,Yiou,P.:Heatextremesinwesterneuropeincreasingfasterthan
simulated due to atmospheric circulation trends. Nature Communica-
tions 14(1), 6803. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41467-023-42143-3. Nature
Publishing Group. Accessed 2024-04-30
[95] Jacques-Dumas,V.,Ragone,F.,Borgnat,P.,Abry,P.,Bouchet,F.:Deep
learning-basedextremeheatwaveforecast.FrontiersinClimate4(2022)
[96] Fister, D., P´erez-Aracil, J., Pel´aez-Rodr´ıguez, C., Del Ser, J., Salcedo-
Sanz, S.: Accurate long-term air temperature prediction with machine
learningmodelsanddatareductiontechniques.AppliedSoftComputing
136, 110118. https://doi.org/10.1016/j.asoc.2023.110118. Elsevier
[97] van Straaten, C., Whan, K., Coumou, D., van den Hurk, B., Schmeits,
M.: Correcting subseasonal forecast errors with an explainable ann to
understandmisrepresentedsourcesofpredictabilityofeuropeansummer
temperatures. Artificial Intelligence for the Earth Systems 2(3), 220047
(2023). https://doi.org/10.1175/AIES-D-22-0047.1
[98] Gao, Z., Shi, X., Wang, H., Zhu, Y., Wang, Y.B., Li, M., Yeung, D.-
Y.: Earthformer: Exploring space-time transformers for Earth system
forecasting. Advances in Neural Information Processing Systems 35,
25390–25403 (2022)
[99] Singh,J.,Sippel,S.,Fischer,E.M.:Circulationdampenedheatextremes
intensificationoverthemidwestUSAandamplifiedoverwesterneurope.
Communications Earth & Environment 4(1), 1–9. Nature PublishingCONTENTS 29
Group
[100] Jones, M.W., Abatzoglou, J.T., Veraverbeke, S., Andela, N., Lasslop,
G., Forkel, M., Smith, A.J.P., Burton, C., Betts, R.A., van der Werf,
G.R., Sitch, S., Canadell, J.G., Sant´ın, C., Kolden, C., Doerr, S.H.,
Le Qu´er´e, C.: Global and Regional Trends and Drivers of Fire Under
Climate Change. Reviews of Geophysics 60(3), 2020–000726 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.1029/2020RG000726
[101] El Garroussi, S., Di Giuseppe, F., Barnard, C., Wetterhall, F.: Europe
faces up to tenfold increase in extreme fires in a warming climate. npj
ClimateandAtmosphericScience7(1),1–11(2024).https://doi.org/10.
1038/s41612-024-00575-8. Nature Publishing Group
[102] Zhang, G., Wang, M., Liu, K.: Forest Fire Susceptibility Modeling
Using a Convolutional Neural Network for Yunnan Province of China.
International Journal of Disaster Risk Science 10(3), 386–403 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1007/s13753-019-00233-1
[103] Li, F., Zhu, Q., Riley, W.J., Zhao, L., Xu, L., Yuan, K., Chen, M., Wu,
H., Gui, Z., Gong, J., et al.: Attentionfire v1. 0: interpretable machine
learningfiremodelforburned-areapredictionsovertropics.Geoscientific
Model Development 16(3), 869–884 (2023)
[104] Fromm,M.,Servranckx,R.,Stocks,B.J.,Peterson,D.A.:Understanding
the critical elements of the pyrocumulonimbus storm sparked by high-
intensitywildlandfire.CommunicationsEarth&Environment3(1),1–7
(2022). https://doi.org/10.1038/s43247-022-00566-8. Nature Publishing
Group
[105] Salas-Porras, E.D., Tazi, K., Braude, A., Okoh, D., Lamb, K.D.,
Watson-Parris, D., Harder, P., Meinert, N.: Identifying the causes of
Pyrocumulonimbus (PyroCb). In: 2022 NeurIPS Workshop on Causal
Machine Learning for Real-World Impact (2022). http://arxiv.org/abs/
2211.08883
[106] Jonkman, S.: Global perspectives on loss of human life caused by
floods. Natural Hazards 34, 151–175 (2005). https://doi.org/10.1007/
S11069-004-8891-3
[107] Cornwall, W.: Europe’s deadly floods leave scientists stunned. Science
373(6553), 372–373 (2021). https://doi.org/10.1126/science.373.6553.
372
[108] Mohr, S., Ehret, U., Kunz, M., Ludwig, P., Caldas-Alvarez, A., Daniell,
J.E., Ehmele, F., Feldmann, H., Franca, M.J., Gattke, C., et al.: A
multi-disciplinary analysis of the exceptional flood event of July 202130 CONTENTS
in central Europe–Part 1: Event description and analysis. Natural Haz-
ardsandEarthSystemSciences23,525–551(2023).https://doi.org/10.
5194/nhess-23-525-2023
[109] Kochkov,D.,Smith,J.A.,Alieva,A.,Wang,Q.,Brenner,M.P.,Hoyer,S.:
Machine learning–accelerated computational fluid dynamics. Proceed-
ings of the National Academy of Sciences 118(21), 2101784118 (2021).
https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.2101784118
[110] Lutjens, B., Leshchinskiy, B., Requena-Mesa, C., Chishtie, F., D´ıaz-
Rodr´ıguez, N., Boulais, O., Sankaranarayanan, A., Masson-Forsythe,
M., Pin˜a, A., Gal, Y., Ra¨ıssi, C., Lavin, A., Newman, D.: Physically-
Consistent Generative Adversarial Networks for Coastal Flood Visual-
ization (2023)