Exploring 6G Potential for Industrial
Digital Twinning and Swarm
Intelligence in Obstacle-Rich
Environments
Siyu Yuan, Khurshid Alam, Bin Han, Dennis Krummacker, and Hans D. Schotten
Abstract - With the advent of 6G technology, the demand for hand, swarm intelligence (SI), as a branch of artificial
efficient and intelligent systems in industrial applications has intelligence, SI studies the collective intelligence demonstrated
surged, driving the need for advanced solutions in target by groups of simple agents [7], [8]. It exhibits a notably
localization. Utilizing swarm robots to locate unknown targets advanced ability of sharing local information and experiences
involves navigating increasingly complex environments. Digital among the swarm members, which improves the performance
Twinning (DT) offers a robust solution by creating a virtual along with the swarm size, and therewith grants SI a superior
replica of the physical world, which enhances the swarm's scalability by effectively combining diverse inputs and resources.
navigation capabilities. Our framework leverages DT and However, in wireless scenarios, this advantage may be
integrates Swarm Intelligence to store physical map information compromised by the limited channel capacity, especially when
in the cloud, enabling robots to efficiently locate unknown the deployment is dense. Our previous work [9] demonstrated
targets. The simulation results demonstrate that the DT the benefits of integrating DT with SI in terms of improving
framework, augmented by Swarm Intelligence, significantly communication efficiency. By synchronizing the agents’
improves target location efficiency in obstacle-rich information to their DTs aggregated on a MEC server, and
environments compared to traditional methods. This research virtualizing the information exchange among agents, the
underscores the potential of combining DT and Swarm bottleneck of air interface can be well resolved for SI.
Intelligence to advance the field of robotic navigation and target
However, investigating a multi-unmanned aerial vehicle
localization in complex industrial settings.
(UAV) localization problem, the study of [9] oversimplified the
real-world scenario by neglecting the presence of obstacles, a
common factor in practical industrial scenarios, if not inevitable.
I. Introduction Indeed, it invoked the classical Particle Swarm Optimization
In contemporary industrial scenarios, the imperative for (PSO) [10], which is insufficient for direct use in scenarios with
robust multi-device connectivity and seamless communication is obstacles. While several classical obstacle avoidance algorithms,
increasingly critical. The next phase of industrial advancement such as the A* algorithm [11] and Dijkstra’s algorithm [12],
necessitates more powerful and modern communication have been maturely developed and widely applied, they are
methodologies, with Sixth Generation (6G) [1], [2] poised to predominantly utilized for independent decision making of
play a pivotal role in this evolution. The continuous evolution of individual robots. Developing novel SI-oriented obstacle
network communication technology indicates that 6G has the avoidance solutions, and leveraging the conveniences offered by
potential to integrate with various emerging technologies, such DT therein, becomes thus an interesting topic.
as digital twin (DT) technology [3], [4], machine learning,
To address the limitations, this paper proposes an approach
Multi-Access Edge Computing (MEC), and Distributed Ledger
that combines the strengths of PSO with DT technology. Our
Technology, etc. These integrations, facilitated by 6G, will
research digitizes each swarm agent, creating virtual twins that
create substantial advancements in various industries.
model agent behavior and an obstacle-rich map. This
One of the most promising applications of this integration architecture enables agents to communicate effectively and
is DT [5], [6], which leverages real-time data processing, implement an obstacle avoidance mechanism, facilitating rapid
communication, and synchronization to optimize operations and location of the leak source. Agents navigate the physical map
decision-making in complex environments. With DT technology, using Swarm Intelligence (SI) and exchange global optimal
various features, states, and behaviors of physical objects can be information via a base station, converging towards unknown
accurately simulated and reflected in digital space. On the other target points. By leveraging DT for real-time synchronizationbetween virtual and physical environments, our approach determines its individual optimal position based on its proximity
enhances swarm coordination and navigation in complex, to the target. Through inter-agent communication, the swarm
obstacle-rich settings, thereby improving system performance collectively identifies the most promising position as group best
and reliability. The integration of these methods and techniques position (G-Best). Each agent then calculates with individual
aims to develop a robust system where agents can quickly and best position and G-Best for its next move accordingly. Over
efficiently identify the source of the leakage in challenging multiple iterations, the agents gradually converge towards the
environments. target location. But the challenge of navigating around obstacles
and how agents communicate remains.
The remainder of this paper is organized as follows: Sec II
is a relatively specific problem setup, Sec III proposes method In the event of a chemical leakage, the primary goal is to
with used technology in detail. Sec IV introduces a more specific quickly identify the source of the leakage and then take
simulation, including the description of the process and the immediate corrective action. As shown in Figure 1, the speed
analysis of the results. Sec V includes some supplemental with which the source of the leak can be pinpointed is directly
discussion, and finally, the conclusion and outlooks are related to the ability of the UAVs to mitigate the hazard in a
presented in Sec VI. timely manner and minimize the potential economic
consequences. The faster the source of the leak is identified, the
II. Problem Setup lower the associated risks and economic losses. However, the
structural layout of chemical plants, often containing numerous
The application scenarios in this paper revolve around
fixed walls and other machinery, complicates the task of locating
emergency response, particularly in the case of a chemical
leakage within a production facility. When a chemical leakage the spill source. This environment can be seen as a map filled
occurs at a plant, the dispersion of the contaminant in the with obstacles, making it difficult for single or multiple
surrounding area is altered, resulting in elevated concentrations independent UAVs to solve the location problem quickly.
in the vicinity. Each UAV in swarm equipped with a
concentration sensor can determine the distance between its
III. System Framework: DT-Empowered UAV
location and the target site, but pinpointing the source of the spill
System
is still a challenge. Even with multiple UAVs patrolling indoors,
they may not be able to converge to the source of the leak. The proposed system consists of two main components: the
MEC Server, which integrates the DT module, and the swarm
In scenarios where multiple UAVs must cooperate and
UAVs. The DT module, hosted on the MEC Server, virtualizes
share information to locate the source of a spill, SI algorithms,
the swarm UAVs and the 2D map, providing real-time updates
like PSO, are often employed for their efficiency in distributed
and synchronization. The MEC Server collects and processes the
problem-solving. In the PSO algorithm, agents lack precise
location and distance data uploaded by the UAVs, and calculates
knowledge of the target’s exact location. Instead, they rely on
the G-Best. Upon receiving the G-Best information from the
distributed information that is denser near the target. Each agent
MEC Server, the swarm UAVs locally perform PSO to
determine their next movement step, aiming to quickly converge
towards the target location.
DT facilitates efficient data processing and communication
among UAVs and the cloud. More specifically, for each UAV
as well as for the deployment environment, associated DTs are
created. All DTs are maintained and managed by the same MEC
server, which periodically exchanges information with the
UAVs over the wireless links, as illustrated in Figure 2. Instead
of directly communicating with each other, the UAVs
periodically upload their positions and distance data to the MEC
server, where the information exchange processes are carried out
by their DTs. As a response, the MEC server then replies in
downlink to every UAV that has successfully downloaded
information in the current round. This downlink message
Figure 1 Problem sceneFigure 2 Scene with digital twinning
includes G-Best of the swarm, or a dedicated command that may There is another issue that cannot be ignored. Therefore, the
be appended based on the mode of the agent. Compared to system incorporates a random walk mode. During the UAV’s
individual agents communicating with each other, DT allows all random walk, the VFH algorithm is also integrated to avoid
agents to quickly access the G-Best information, significantly obstacles. Since wireless links are generally subject to packet
enhancing the efficiency and coordination of the swarm. errors, the UAVs may fail to upload data to the MEC server or
receive response therefrom, especially when they move into
After receiving the G-Best from the MEC Server, each
areas with poor channel conditions. When the UAV stays in the
UAV performs local PSO calculations. The PSO computation
same area, it may exhaust its energy without moving at all. In
takes into account the UAV’s own historical best position and
such case, the involved UAVs will switch to an offline mode,
the G-Best. However, this process can lead to a significant issue:
randomly exploring around for a better link quality. In this mode,
the PSO calculated position may result in a collision with
they rely on their onboard distance sensors to avoid collisions
obstacles. To address this, UAVs locally incorporate the Vector
with obstacles, and continue attempting to upload their new
Field Histogram (VFH) algorithm [13], a conventional obstacle
positions and sensor data in every round. Once an offline UAV
avoidance method. The VFH algorithm collects the distribution
successfully receives a downlink response from the MEC, it
of obstacles (occupied) in various directions within the sensor
switches back to the DT mode.
range, centering on the robot in polar coordinates, and
aggregates them into a histogram. From the generated histogram, This system also includes a minor design feature: when the
the optimal direction is chosen to avoid obstacles, effectively UAV holding the current G-Best realizes it is in the optimal
mitigating collision risks. The calculation of the UAV’s new position, it does not wait for other UAVs at the same spot.
position at this time will consider the direction resulting from the Instead, it will perform a small-scale random walk to explore for
fusion of PSO and VFH. However, this still has its shortcomings. an even better position. The UAV will continue this random
walk until it confirms it has reached the target position, at which
As shown in Figure 2, when encountering L-shaped
point it will stop the random walk mode.
obstacles, the UAV may become trapped in a specific area. At
this point, the UAV will send a help request signal to the MEC With the help of DT, the entire system enables the UAV
Server. Once the signal is received, the MEC Server will swarm to quickly converge to the target position, even in a
generate a path to the current round’s G-Best for the UAV complex obstacle-laden map.
based on the 2D virtual map. To ensure consistency in downlink
data format, once the complete path is calculated, it is
decomposed into waypoints with step lengths equivalent to the
maximum speed reachable by the agent. Only the waypoint
closest to the agent’s current position is then transmitted.IV. Simulation pairwise exchanges among all agents. Conversely, in digital
twinning mode, each agent only needs to perform one upload
A. Simulation Setup and one download operation. For instance, in the P2P mode, if a
The process illustrated in Figure 3 depicts the gradual swarm contains n agents and each agent aims to obtain the
convergence of multiple agents. They move from random initial swarm’s G-Best, it would require 𝑛(𝑛−1) transmissions in
positions towards an unknown target location. This process the uplink/downlink. In contrast, in DT mode, only n
unfolds within a map occupied by obstacles, progressing from transmissions in the uplink/downlink are needed.
left to right across the three maps.
DT mode 1 represents a standard DT deployment simulated
The map is sized at 600m×600m and acts as the area in a base station environment, while DT mode 2 serves as a
where agents move towards their goal. The red cross, slightly comparison with the P2P mode. The difference between DT
offset from the map’s center, denotes the target location. mode 1 and DT mode 2 lies in their transmission methods. In DT
mode 1, if an agent loses network connectivity somewhere, it
The packet error rate (PER) for the map is calculated in ns- will randomly move to a random next position and continue
3 by positioning the base station at the center and employing the attempting to upload or download data. Conversely, in DT mode
3GPP propagation loss model. In the PER Map, lighter shades 2, if an agent loses network connection somewhere, it will
denote regions with better signal quality, while darker shades remain in the same place and attempt to retransmit the specified
indicate relatively poorer signal quality. number of times, until successful or until the attempts are
exhausted. Then, it will randomly move to another location. The
The initial positions of the agents are randomly distributed.
number of retransmissions in DT mode 2 is consistent with the
Agents in the map follow specific rules, such as a maximum
number of times an agent needs to upload or download data in
speed limit of 5 meters per second, and how to respond to data
one round in P2P mode.
transmission failures. Each agent is equipped with two sensors,
one of which is used to estimate the distance to the unknown The system is tested with different agent numbers ranging
target location, and the other is used to detect the surrounding from 10 to 100, with 300 runs of Monte Carlo simulation for
environment to avoid obstacles. Additionally, the sensor used each setup in Figures 4 and 5, respectively. The measured
for distance measurement is enhanced with Gaussian noise to distribution of simulation rounds, agent moves, and data traffics
simulate real-world conditions more accurately. till convergence are illustrated in Figures 4 and 5, respectively.
All the Figures illustrate that the numbers in P2P mode are
B. Numerical Results noticeably higher than in DT mode.
The simulation results include both DT and P2P modes.
Figures 4b, 5 show that traffic volume in both uplink and
Specifically, two sub-modes are designed for DT-based
downlink increases as the number of agents rises at a gradually
communication.
slowing rate. A clear comparison among the three modes shows
The difference lies in the communication methods: in peer-
to-peer (P2P) mode, each agent needs to interact with every
other agent in the swarm to obtain the G-Best, resulting in
Figure 3 Simulation convergence phasesa) Rounds till 90% convergence in different number of agents
b) Total moves till 90% convergence in different number of agents
Figure 4 Convergence performance in different modes
that the consumption of communication resources in both DT reaches the target position, it still needs to continuously upload
mode 1 and DT mode 2 is significantly lower than that in the its location information so that other agents that have not reached
P2P mode. In DT mode, the transmissions in the downlink are it can obtain the current G-Best of the swarm.
less than in the uplink, which is closely related to the simulation
It is worth noting in Figure 5 that the disparity between
mechanism. In this mode, if an agent fails to upload, it means
transmissions in the uplink and downlink in DT mode 2 is
the server does not know the current position of the agent and
notably larger than that in DT mode 1. This is due to the data
will not send data to the agent. In this case, only the
retransmission mechanism in DT mode 2. In an area with good
transmissions in the uplink accumulate. Another reason is that in
signal quality, the difference between upload and download
DT mode, any agent reaching the target can cease uploading its
counts is closer to the expected value for that region. However,
location information. However, in P2P mode, even if an agent
in areas with poor signal quality, the difference between uploadFigure 5 Total traffic in uplink and downlink till 90% convergence
and download counts increases. It is also not difficult to In the physical map, agents make moving decisions locally
understand why the uplink traffic in DT mode 2 is higher than using historical data and environmental information, eliminating
that in DT mode 1, while its downlink traffic is lower than that the need to transmit raw data over the network. This approach
of DT mode 1. In areas with better channel conditions, the means individual information and raw data of agents do not need
downlink retransmission count often doesn’t need to be to be frequently transmitted to the MEC server. By making
exhausted to receive data from the MEC server. This data is decisions locally, agents can maintain user data confidentiality
highly likely to be superior to randomly obtained data through while only transmitting necessary shared information to other
wandering. Therefore, agents in DT mode 2 are more likely to agents. This reduces the spread of sensitive personal information
locate the target position compared to agents in DT over the network, enhancing privacy protection. Additionally,
mode1(Figure 5). localized decision-making reduces the need for communication
and computational resources compared to the P2P mode.
V. Discussions
When the MEC server receives a help request signal from
The proposed method enables multiple agents to safely
any agent, the path planning algorithm can fully utilize the
converge to unknown leakage points in obstacle- laden
known 2D map, which corresponds to the digital twin, for path
environments while saving considerable channel resources
planning. The computational load for path planning is smaller
compared to the P2P mode. This efficiency is primarily achieved
compared to traditional path planning algorithms. Moreover, the
by leveraging the advantages of DT. For instance, in the DT
path planning computation only begins upon receiving a signal
mode, once an agent reaches the target point, it no longer needs
from an agent, further reducing computational power
to upload or download information. Additionally, if at least one
consumption.
agent has passed through the target area, even if it later leaves
the area, the position of the target can be shared with other agents However, the current model primarily addresses static
when another agent reaches a region with decent signal strength. obstacles, suggesting the need for further research to handle
Furthermore, this method is device-agnostic, allowing agents to dynamic scenarios, such as moving obstacles and internal agent
be UAVs, Automated Guided Vehicle (AGV)s, or other Internet collisions. These enhancements would provide a more
of Things (IoT) devices. comprehensive understanding of practical applications. Future
research should also explore optimizing signal propagation incomplex environments. This includes forming realistic radio Workshop on Distributed and Intelligent Systems (DistInSys 2022),
2022, pp. 1–4.
source distributions based on obstacle layouts to better reflect
practical conditions. Additionally, optimizing the placement of [10] J. Kennedy and R. Eberhart, “Particle swarm optimization,” in
wireless access points, predicting signal strength and quality, Proceedings of ICNN’95 - International Conference on Neural
and modeling how wireless signals propagate in complex Networks, vol. 4, 1995, pp. 1942–1948.
environments will enhance our understanding of practical
[11] R. Dechter and J. Pearl, “Generalized best-first search strategies
applications. This is particularly relevant in critical scenarios
and the optimality of A*,” Journal of the ACM, vol. 32, no. 3, pp.
like emergency response and autonomous navigation. 505 – 536, jul 1985. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1145/3828.3830
VI. Conclusion
[12] E. W. Dijkstra, “A note on two problems in connexion with
This study demonstrates the effectiveness of utilizing DT graphs.” Numerische Mathematik, vol. 1, pp. 269–271, 1959.
for enabling multiple agents to converge on unknown leakage
point in obstacle-laden environments. The proposed method [13] J. Borenstein, Y. Koren et al., “The vector field histogram-fast
obstacle avoidance for mobile robots,” IEEE Transactions on
conserves both communication and energy resources by
Robotics and Automation, vol. 7, no. 3, pp. 278–288, 1991.
reducing the number of necessary transmissions. Additionally,
local decision-making based on historical and environmental
Acknowledgements
data enhances privacy protection by minimizing the
This work is supported by the German Federal Ministry of
transmission of raw data. The flexibility of this method allows it
Education and Research (BMBF) through the projects
to be applied to various types of agents, such as UAVs, AGVs, Open6GHub (Grant No. 16KISK003K, 16KISK004) and 6G-
and other IoT devices, making it versatile for different practical Terafactory (Grant No. 16KISK186). The corresponding author
applications. for this work is B. Han (bin.han@rptu.de).
References
[1] W. Jiang, B. Han, M. A. Habibi, and H. D. Schotten, “The road
towards 6G: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Open Journal of
the Communications Society, vol. 2, pp. 334–366, 2021. Siyu Yuan received her M.Sc. degree in
Automation and Robotics from the
[2] M. Z. Chowdhury, M. Shahjalal, S. Ahmed, and Y. M. Jang, “6G
University of Dortmund in 2019,
wireless communication systems: Applications, requirements,
technologies, challenges, and research directions,” IEEE Open Germany. Since then, she has been a
Journal of the Communications Society, vol. 1, pp. 957–975, researcher with Wireless Communication
2020. and Navigation group (WiCON) in
University of Kaiserslautern (RPTU).
[3] L. U. Khan, W. Saad, D. Niyato, Z. Han, and C. S. Hong,
“Digital-twin-enabled 6G: Vision, architectural trends, and future Her main research interests are in drone
directions,” IEEE Communications Magazine, vol. 60, no. 1, pp. communication, swarm intelligence with digital twinning,
74–80, 2022. distributed simultaneous localization and mapping, machine
learning in robotics.
[4] B. Han, M. A. Habibi, B. Richerzhagen, K. Schindhelm, F. Zeiger,
F. Lamberti, F. G. Pratticò, K. Upadhya, C. Korovesis, I.-P.
Belikaidis, et al., “Digital twins for industry 4.0 in the 6G era,”
IEEE Open Journal of Vehicular Technology, 2023.
[5] N. P. Kuruvatti, M. A. Habibi, S. Partani, B. Han, A. Fellan, and
H. D. Schotten, “Empowering 6G communication systems with Khurshid Alam received his M. Sc. degree
digital twin technology: A comprehensive survey,” IEEE Access, in Applied Computer Science from the
vol. 10, pp. 112 158–112 186, 2022. University of Kaiserslautern (RPTU),
Germany in 2018. Since then, he has been
[6] D. Krummacker, M. Reichardt, C. Fischer, and H. D. Schotten,
“Digital Twin Development: Mathematical Modeling,” in ICPS a researcher with the Intelligent
2023 – 6th IEEE International Conference on Industrial Cyber- Networks research group at the German
Physical Systems. IEEE, 5 2023, p. 8. Research Center for Artificial
[7] E. Bonabeau, M. Dorigo, and G. Theraulaz, Swarm intelligence: Intelligence (DFKI) GmbH, Germany.
From natural to artificial systems. Oxford university press, 1999. His main research interests include industrial wireless
communication, software defined networking, radio access
[8] D. Martens, B. Baesens, and T. Fawcett, “Editorial survey:
network architecture, radio resource management, artificial
Swarm intelligence for data mining,” Machine Learning, vol. 82,
pp. 1–42, 2011. intelligence, network function virtualization, and network
slicing.
[9] S. Yuan, B. Han, D. Krummacker, and H. D. Schotten, “Massive
twinning to enhance emergent intelligence,” in 2nd InternationalBin Han (Senior Member, IEEE) received
his B.E. degree in 2009 from Shanghai
Jiao Tong University, M.Sc. in 2012 from
the Technical University of Darmstadt,
and a Ph.D. degree in 2016 from
Karlsruhe Institute of Technology. He has
been with University of Kaiserslautern
(RPTU) since 2016, and was granted his
Habilitation (Venia Legendi) in 2023. His research interests are
in the broad area of wireless communications and networking,
with the current focus on B5G/6G and MEC. He is the author of
two books, six book chapters, and over 70 research papers. He
has participated in multiple EU 5G/B5G/6G research projects.
Dennis Krummacker received the M.Sc.
degree in Electrical and Computer
Engineering from the University of
Kaiserslautern (RPTU) in 2016. Since
2016, he has been a Researcher at the
German Research Center for Artificial
Intelligence GmbH (DFKI) in the
Department of Intelligent Networks,
where he is coordinating the research areas regarding
Industrial Communication and Intelligent Infrastructures. His
main research interests include Network Management and
Orchestration, Softwarization, Virtualization, Software-defined
Networking (SDN), and Network Function Virtualization (NFV).
Hans D. Schotten (Member, IEEE)
received the Ph.D. degree from the
RWTH Aachen University of Technology,
Germany, in 1997. From 1999 to 2003, he
worked for Ericsson. From 2003 to 2007,
he worked for Qualcomm. He became
manager of a R&D group, Research
Coordinator for Qualcomm Europe, and
Director for Technical Standards. In 2007, he accepted the offer
to become a full professor at the University of Kaiserslautern. In
2012, he - in addition - became the scientific director of the
German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI) and
head of the Department for Intelligent Networks. Professor
Schotten served as dean of the Department of Electrical
Engineering of the University of Kaiserslautern from 2013 until
2017. Since 2018, he is chairman of the German Society for
Information Technology and a member of the Supervisory Board
of the VDE. He is the author of more than 200 papers and
participated in 30+ European and national collaborative
research projects.