Design of a UE5-based digital twin platform
LYU Shaoqiu1.3, Wang Muzhi1, Zhang Sunrui2, Wang Shengzhi3
（1,University of New South Wales(UNSW) ENG Sydney, Australia;
2, Royal Melbourne Institute of Technology(RMIT) SOD Melbourne, Australia;
3, Talent Science And Technology Co.,Ltd, Shuike Shangyu Energy Technology Research Institute
Co., Ltd. China Nanjing 21000）
Abstracts: Aiming at the current mainstream 3D scene engine learning and building cost is
too high, this thesis proposes a digital twin platform design program based on Unreal Engine 5
(UE5). It aims to provide a universal platform construction design process to effectively reduce
the learning cost of large-scale scene construction. Taking an actual project of a unit as an
example, the overall cycle work of platform building is explained, and the digital twin and data
visualization technologies and applications based on UE5 are analyzed. By summarizing the
project implementation into a process approach, the standardization and operability of the
process pathway is improved.
Keywords: ue5; visualization; digital twin; engineering design
With the development of the informationization in China, smart phones, computers,
advertising screens and other visual interactive media are becoming more and more popular, and the
public and enterprises have higher and higher requirements for digital informatization’s applications.
At the same time, with the rapid development of digital twin technology, the traditional modeling
software in building large-scale scenes faces the challenge of cost and efficiency. The gaming
engines have also entered the public’s view with the popularity of video games, and their highly
customizable/multi-platform compatible/3D visualization features make them a feasible solution
for digital twin platforms. Among the gaming engines, Unity and Unreal Engine are the two most
well-known ones, and Unreal has been updated to UE5 (Unreal Engine 5), which brings richer
light/scene support. The paper will focus on discussing the engineering process in UE5-based
digital twin platform, including scene construction, data processing and user interaction, and show
its potential in improving the efficiency of digital twin realization and application.
As a game engine that focuses on building 3D-related scenes, UE5 has an advantage in
supporting and rendering grand 3D scenes that is difficult to achieve on other platforms. Compared
to Unity3D, UE5 has more complete 3D plug-in support and simulation rendering performance
advantages, richer graphic terrain/material editing functions, and at the same time, it can use the
built-in movie tools to provide better delivery of the display effect[1]; compared to Blender, UE5 can
provide more interactive scenes and settings while being compatible with 3D models; and compared
to the traditional html-based display, UE5 has the advantage of being easy to use (visual
programming and real-time previewing) and more efficient. With UE5, developers can significantly
improve the efficiency and cost-effectiveness of modeling while maintaining visual effects.Before considering UE5 as a platform for digital twins, it is important to understand the
shortcomings of UE5: as a game engine, the accuracy of its physics/fluid simulation is not
comparable to that of professional simulation software; at the same time, it has certain performance
requirements for development and display equipment.
1. Overall project planning and platform preparation
1.1 Project Planning Process
In general, the digital twin project can be divided into 3 major parts.
The first part, project preparation. Before starting to build the project, developers need to
complete such as requirements analysis, risk assessment and management, node planning, project
task segmentation and other preliminary work.
The second part, project construction. We mainly divide the project of building UE5-based
digital twin platform into 4 major stages and 4 major sections. (See section 2.1, 2.2 for details).
After completing the project construction, validation and delivery, the project will enter the
process of post operation and maintenance which is the third phase.
In this paper, we will focus on the construction process and method of building digital twin
platform in a project based on UE5 and build a general procedure for engineering construction.
1.2 Data collection before project construction
UE5-based digital twin platform can visualize the effect of the project, which also means
that compared with other traditional models, this platform needs to do more job in the
information collection and planning work in advance.
The direction of the data collection in early stage is divided into the following five major
parts, see Figure 1. the final presentation of the data collection previously is the visualization
models of the project objects, spatial terrain model, database and data interface,
human-computer interaction model and other management data, for example, in the
construction of a water hub platform in a city in the Yangtze River Delta, through the drone patrol
flights, satellite maps, manual measurements and other ways to obtain the model of the river
channel and the sluice station. Of course, there will be more detailed adjustments according to
different project requirements. Generally speaking, higher precision models are obtained through
design drawings, while the rest correspond to lower precision models.Figure 1. 5 main parts of data collection before construct the project
2. Design flow of platform building
2.1 Architectural Components of the UE5 Digital Twin Platform
According to the information visualization business requirements and UE5 platform features,
in general the digital twin platform is basically divided into the following four main functions. The
platform demonstrates the dynamic or static working state of the target through display roaming and
scene triggering functions. Demonstrate part of the details through the simulation function or show
special scenarios such as emergency fire treatment in order to visualize the scene and the treatment
plan. Demonstrate the state of the project under different time, climate and light through the spatial
terrain environment adjustment. Through the interactive interface UI design and trigger feedback
and information guidance to reduce the difficulty of operations and enhance the user experience, the
functional framework is shown in Figure 2. A water conservancy hub information broadcasting
system project in the Yangtze River Delta region, has a multi-view model roaming, information
monitoring, weather selection and other functions, (see section 4.3).Figure 2. Components of the UE5 digital twin platform
2.2 Overall platform building process
The digital twin platform intuitively displays the project’s visual and other sensory effects. Its
building process includes basic data collected before building, scene building in ue5 engine,
functional realization of UE5-based workflow and featured functions, project testing and final
project display and delivery. The specific workflow is shown in Figure 3.
1)The basic data processing part has been described in detail in the previous section, so no repeat
here.
2) Scene construction based on UE5's powerful terrain rendering and large model processing
capabilities, such as through the conversion of dataSmith and other plug-ins, you can easily
integrate large and complex model materials and clusters. At the same time, relying on epic's huge
commercial and other open-source resource model library, you can quickly build a static scene
yourself.
3) Testing and final project delivery.UE5 can be deployed remotely through, for example, pixel
streaming, and also supports a wide range of platforms, including PCs, game consoles, mobile
devices, and VR/AR devices. This makes it more flexible to deploy and use digital twin applications
on different devices and platforms.Figure 3. Technical phases of the platform's construction
3. Platform presentation and other project requirements and detailed
technical implementations
UE5 engine has powerful features, offering many unique advantages in project usage. Below
are selected unique detailed functionalities of UE5 widely used in projects.
3.1 Visualization and interaction
Building a digital twin desktop system through UE5's powerful built-in systems can improve
user awareness and understanding of the digital twin system, thereby supporting effective
management and optimization. By visualizing information and using human-computer interaction,
users can intuitively understand the status, changes, and relationships of physical entities or
processes in the form of graphics, charts, animations, etc., thereby better monitoring, analyzing, and
understanding the operation of the system.
3.1.1 User interface design
In the early stage of creating a digital twin desktop system, end-users should be investigated to
ensure that the interactivity of the digital twin system can meet their needs and level of
understanding [2]. When completing the digital twin project through UE5, it is necessary to create the
design of the system interface according to the end user habits and visual design principles [3].
The user interface design is directly affected by the quality of user experience and the ease of use of
the digital twin system. In the process of designing the system interface, it is not only necessary to
create the corresponding button or text through UE5's blueprint system, but also to consider the
layout, structure and navigation mode of the user interface to ensure that users can clearlyunderstand the hierarchy and organizational structure of information and quickly find the required
function [4]. The overall visual interface design is equally crucial, as it should align with the style of
the digital twin project, encompassing elements such as graphics, colors, and typography [5].
Furthermore, adherence to principles of visual design is essential, ensuring clarity and
understanding of the interface, maintaining uniformity with subtle differences, and avoiding the
occurrence of distracting elements [6]. Well-designed and visually comfortable user interface design
can enhance the user's experience.
3.1.2 User interaction design
To enhance user interaction in using the digital twin desktop system, the powerful Blueprint
system of UE5 can be leveraged to augment interactivity in digital twin projects. Designers can
visually create various interactive logics, enabling users to interact with the system intuitively
through actions such as clicking and dragging. For different digital twin projects, designers can set
up various colliders and triggers in the scenes, and the animation system can be used to add vivid
effects to the interaction and improve the user's sense of operation feedback.
For example, when designers are using UE5 to create a digital twin project for ship passage
through a lock, they can add a lock start button in the digital twin desktop system. When the end user
presses the lock start button, real-time status information of the lock gates will be displayed on the
screen, and with the help of the animation system, real-time water level status and the ship's
operational dynamics can be showcased, assisting end users in monitoring the ship's passage
process in real-time.
3.2 Data update and display
Network protocols are crucial in digital twin engineering, where information display plays a
vital role. Compared to traditional static information modes embedded within projects, UE5 offers
data transmission capabilities based on network protocols, greatly expanding the project's
presentation capabilities.
1) UE5 supports the HTTP protocol. Through user requests to the server, the server responds
with data. The advantage of the HTTP protocol is its ability to simplify server design and
implementation, making it suitable for large-scale distributed environments.
2) UE5 Blueprints support the WebSocket protocol. It establishes a persistent connection
through a handshake with the server. The advantage of the WebSocket protocol is real-time
bidirectional communication and lower communication latency. It can update data in the server in
real-time, achieving a WYSIWYG (What You See Is What You Get) effect [7].
Overall, different methods can be chosen separately according to customer needs, or multiple
methods can be mixed to meet project requirements while saving server resources. However, as of
now, UE5 does not officially support WebSocket plugins, requiring third-party plugin support.Figure 4. Technical diagram and structure of different network protocols used in UE5
3.3 Simulation and runtime simulation
The built-in Niagara fluid plugin in UE5 can be triggered through blueprints or key presses.
This feature allows for real-time fluid physics calculations and animated displays. With the standard
templates provided by the fluid plugin, various fluid models can be quickly deployed, visually
showcasing scenarios involving fluids, such as dam engineering or corridor smoke systems.
For example, the water flow simulation in irrigation channels includes the display of water
flow dynamics when turning the door on and off, the simulation of water flow in the pipeline, and
the emergency disposal in the case of accidents. Trigger the scene demonstration through the screen
button and use the fluid plug-in instead of the original discrete time axis animation effect. Compared
with the conditional animation trigger, the fluid plug-in can give real-time feedback according to the
behavior of the controller, and the fluid simulation greatly simplifies the cost of animation.
4. Partial project process demonstration
The related processes of the research results of this paper have been applied to the irrigation
projects in northern Jiangsu, the Yangtze River Delta Basin, and the farmland in the middle of
Jiangsu. Provide information visualization services for engineering design, plan rehearsal, facility
planning, and other businesses. Through the technical improvement brought by the new engine, the
technical and time costs of construction communication, software planning and development,
operation and maintenance are significantly reduced, and the quality of information visualization
service itself is improved.
4.1 Design verification of diversion channel in the project (Irrigation district
project)
The UE5 platform engine supports fluid demonstration, and the Niagara fluid plug-in supports
fluid precision programming, which can be customized to meet the needs of the project. The waterdiversion dynamic effect of the diversion tank can be intuitively displayed in the design phase.
Figure 5. Diversion channel verification using UE5 Niagara plug-in
4.2 Character and vision design
The unique character asset editor of the digital twin platform based on UE5 greatly simplifies
the construction process of characters and first-person perspectives. The ability to freely trigger and
switch between multiple perspectives significantly enhances the freedom of controlling characters
and immerses users in the operation.
Figure 6. Edit using the UE5 Character Editor
4.3 Scene interaction and project presentation
The interaction triggering functionality of the UE5 engine can be based on UE5's blueprint
programming feature. The characteristics of low code and the engine can greatly reduce the
threshold of work. By triggering animations, engineering interactivity and user immersion can be
greatly enhanced.
Overall, the project has achieved the consolidation of multiple platform perspectives into the
same interface, as seen in Figure 7. Meanwhile, for detailed project content, such as pump stations,
as shown in Figure 8, the platform has implemented functionalities including operation monitoring,
sluice station monitoring, water level feedback, water quality testing, and more. This has enhanced
the perception capabilities of staff towards engineering projects while simultaneously reducing the
patrol costs for maintenance personnel.
In addition, apart from directly editing frontend page visuals in UE5 to stream the project, thescene interaction page can also serve as a purely display frontend page, where model perspectives
can be streamed over the network using UE5's pixel streaming.
Figure 7. Display interface of a water conservancy hub in the project
Figure 8. Pumping station display interface in the project
5.Conclusions
This paper discusses the feasibility of a new digital twin platform based on the UE5 engine,
and analyzes and demonstrates the relevant application scenarios and presentation forms, etc. The
UE5 platform can greatly shorten the development process and development difficulty whilemeeting the presentation effect as much as possible and deliver the finished products in a more
efficient and convenient presentation form, so it can be used as the main develop platform for
enterprises to carry out digital display and simulation in the future.
This paper proposes a development process for UE5 engine for digital twin projects, which
needs to carry out the application development after the complete preparation of the data collection
and modeling, but the use of UE5 blueprint function can quickly complete the scene interaction/data
feedback/visual presentation, and at the same time use a variety of plug-ins can simplify some of the
complex functions.
UE5 supports the customization of a variety of functions and has a wide range of community
open-source software and plug-in support. In the future, customization and development of features
can be achieved based on open-source plugins according to specific needs, facilitating a transition
from application to creation. Using the characteristics of UE5 engine for multi-terminal support, in
the future a variety of different platforms (PC/VR/mobile/web) applications development can be
achieved at the same time, saving the development budget and shorten the delivery time, improve
the operational efficiency of enterprises.
Reference
[1] ŠMÍD A. Comparison of unity and unreal engine[J/OL]. Czech Technical University in
Prague, 2017: 41-61.
[2] 杜鹤民, 蒋俊杰. 认知思维与视觉思维下的信息可视化设计[J/OL]. 包装工程, 2022,
43(8): 217-224. https://doi.org/10.19554/j.cnki.1001-3563.2022.08.028.
[3] 黄晟. 基于用户体验的APP设计研究[D/OL]. 陕西科技大学, 2013[2024-02-02].
https://kns.cnki.net/kcms2/article/abstract?v=phUvsea1i7Zmm7GyWO202cTeo-dXiY3KDZ9JNH7f
WWITnpTpOJZo4BPnlqXP8JPyrXbrVeGGU0f7Dp4Mh9S1dTdatOWIP2kJeXPT-3oMGnSwNP4HCGkE
4wwKBDwNqsxlvEJW2yUris0PcgVm343sU2bp61tzjO3iRutYk9jg8_I=&uniplatform=NZKPT&langua
ge=CHS.
[4] 顾文佳. UI设计中用户交互体验的视觉思维[D/OL]. 中国美术学院, 2013[2024-02-02].
https://kns.cnki.net/kcms2/article/abstract?v=phUvsea1i7YixUImcXipgLDnFDbrv8eGELoYmHyCG
g2vOpLigV8OvWnYQdellD4oK9FLhNnyJRZj6egSc7T1iCDru47_xpj2Yk4mUQXD_mxvEzxqZzJEtqdZQ
wWv5CCkoWVk8Kz_xsAfBK4g0vulOQ==&uniplatform=NZKPT&language=CHS.
[5] 周黎铃. 基于用户体验的扁平化互联网产品界面设计研究[D/OL]. 浙江工商大学,
2015[2024-02-02].
https://kns.cnki.net/kcms2/article/abstract?v=phUvsea1i7aHBysglB1f0wSF_LiwAnA4INCUTg2U9
wKceBwLUcbpjFKFPd6qmdcOHqI7_fP3QwkyLuDlvX_0KMuMuEIDZp_8PeEsGl8otJdZZCFQ6VjGIGt
Hybyt-p2aSQZ-4LNRG2OU_55csrBfLbdIhzf-fovOd4LtkvqE9cw=&uniplatform=NZKPT&language=C
HS.
[6] 许世虎, 宋方. 基于视觉思维的信息可视化设计[J/OL]. 包装工程, 2011, 32(16):
11-14+34. https://doi.org/10.19554/j.cnki.1001-3563.2011.16.005.
[7] ŁASOCHA W, BADUROWICZ M. Comparison of WebSocket and HTTP protocolperformance[J/OL]. Journal of Computer Sciences Institute, 2021, 19: 67-74.
https://ph.pollub.pl/index.php/jcsi/article/view/2452. DOI:10.35784/jcsi.2452.