Draft version July 3, 2024
TypesetusingLATEXdefaultstyleinAASTeX63
Distributed Instruments for Planetary Surface Science:
Scientific Opportunities and Technology Feasibility
Federico Rossi,1 Robert C. Anderson,1 Saptarshi Bandyopadhyay,1 Erik Brandon,1 Ashish Goel,1
Joshua Vander Hook,1 Michael Mischna,1 Michaela Villarreal,1 and Mark Wronkiewicz1
1Jet Propulsion Laboratory - California Institute of Technology
4800 Oak Grove Dr.
Pasadena (CA) 91109, USA
ABSTRACT
In this paper, we assess the scientific promise and technology feasibility of distributed instruments
for planetary science. A distributed instrument is an instrument designed to collect spatially and
temporally correlated data from multiple networked, geographically distributed point sensors. Dis-
tributed instruments are ubiquitous in Earth science, where they are routinely employed for weather
and climate science, seismic studies and resource prospecting, and detection of industrial emissions.
However, to date, their adoption in planetary surface science has been minimal. It is natural to ask
whetherthislackofadoptionisdrivenbylowpotentialtoaddresshigh-priorityquestionsinplanetary
science; immature technology; or both. To address this question, we survey high-priority planetary
science questions that are uniquely well-suited to distributed instruments. We identify four areas of
research where distributed instruments hold promise to unlock answers that are largely inaccessible
to monolithic sensors, namely, weather and climate studies of Mars; localization of seismic events on
rockyandicybodies;localizationoftracegasemissions,primarilyonMars;andmagnetometrystudies
of internal composition. Next, we survey enabling technologies for distributed sensors and assess their
maturity. We identify sensor placement (including descent and landing on planetary surfaces), power,
and instrument autonomy as three key areas requiring further investment to enable future distributed
instruments. Overall, this work shows that distributed instruments hold great promise for planetary
science, and paves the way for follow-on studies of future distributed instruments for Solar System
in-situ science.
Keywords: distributed instruments — networked science — swarms — surveys
1. INTRODUCTION
The goal of this paper is to survey the breakthrough scientific opportunities offered by distributed instruments for
planetary surface science, and assess their technology feasibility.
A distributed instrument is an instrument designed to collect spatially and temporally correlated data from many
networked, geographically distributed point sensors (Figure 1).
Adistributedinstrumentismorethanthesumofitssensors; bystrategicallyschedulingmeasurementsacrossaregion
to capture data with spatial context, it can provide insight into spatially and temporally correlated phenomena that
is impossible to obtain using monolithic rovers or orbiters.
Distributedinstrumentsholdpromisetounlockanswerstokeyquestionsinplanetarysciencethatcannotbeaddressed
bypointmeasurementsororbitersalone,includinghowsolartidesinfluencetheatmospheresofbodieslikeMars,Venus,
Correspondingauthor: FedericoRossi
federico.rossi@jpl.nasa.gov
4202
luJ
1
]PE.hp-ortsa[
1v75710.7042:viXraFigure1. Artist’srepresentationofanotionaldistributedinstrumenttostudytheMartianglobalclimate. Anetworkofsixteen
sensing units is distributed across the Martian surface to provide coverage of the entire planet. Each sensing unit contains a
weather station, a dust instrument, a camera to observe atmospheric opacity and cloud formation, and a spectrometer. Sensor
readings are relayed to Earth by an existing orbiter. The distributed instrument allows scientists to study the spatial and
temporal correlation of weather and climate patterns (in particular the water, dust, and CO cycles) on the planet.
2
and Titan (Haberle et al. 2014), how pressure waves propagate across a planet, the surface locations from where trace
gas emissions originate (Mischna et al. 2020), and what the interior composition of icy bodies is (Lange et al. 2011;
Vance et al. 2018). The consensus within many scientific disciplines is that, for some fundamental science questions,
the output received from a distributed instrument of modest capability would be significantly more valuable than the
output from a single sensor with exceptional capabilities (Beaty et al. 2012; Banfield et al. 2020; Barba et al. 2019a).
However, the design and development of distributed instruments requires technology advances not only in the design
of individual detectors, but also in distributed filtering (to manage the large amount of data produced by distributed
instruments), localizationandsynchronization(toprovidespatialandtemporalcontextforthemeasurements), delay-
tolerant and mesh networking (to reliably transmit data to Earth), and entry, descent, and landing (EDL) and swarm
guidance (to achieve the desired distribution of the individual sensors).
Today, many individual technologies for distributed instruments are arguably mature or at a tipping point, thanks
to recent advances in miniaturization of sensor technology (e.g., Buehler et al. (2007)), distributed sensing (Tokekar
et al. 2016), delay-tolerant networking (Burleigh et al. 2003), orbit-based localization (Cheung et al. 2019), and EDL
and swarm guidance (Short & Van Buren 2012; Kang et al. 2019; Staehle et al. 2015).
Inaddition,distributedinstrumentsareroutinelyusedforEarthscience,e.g.,forearthquakedetection(USGeological
Survey 2017) and warning (Given et al. 2018), to inform weather forecasts and climate studies (National Weather
Service 2023), and for detection of industrial methane leaks (Project Canary 2023; Chen et al. 2023).
Despitethis, comparatively fewdistributed instrumentdesigns haveemergedwithinthe planetarysciencecommunity.
Inthispaper,wetakeafirststepatexploringthesciencepromiseandtechnologyfeasibilityofsuchdistributedinstru-
mentsby(i)surveyinghigh-priorityscientificquestionsthatcanbeuniquelyaddressedbydistributedinstrumentswith
2existing or tipping-point technologies; and (ii) identifying and ranking technologies that should be further developed
to ensure the technology feasibility and to maximize the scientific returns of promising distributed instruments.
1.1. What is a distributed instrument?
We define a distributed instrument as
“a collection of geographically distributed sensors designed to strategically collect spatially and temporally
correlated readings at known locations.”
Thethreekeycharacteristicsofadistributedinstrumentsaregeographicaldistribution,strategicsampling,andspatial
and temporal correlation.
GeographicallyDistributed: Adistributedinstrumentcollectsobservationsfrommultipledistinctlocationsthrough
multiple sensing units. Depending on the nature of the instrument and on scientific requirements, the sensing units
canbedeployedatalocalscale(wheresensorsareseparatedbytenstohundredsofmeters,andcoveranareaofafew
square kilometers), regional scale (where sensors are separated by kilometers to tens of kilometers, and cover areas of
thousandsto hundredsof thousandsofsquare kilometers), or globalscale(wheresensorcoverageextendsto theentire
surface of a planetary body).
Strategic sampling: Thesensingunitsactasasingleinstrument,andtheirobservationsareprocessedtocollectively
address a science question. This key characteristic of distributed instruments is discussed further in Section 1.1.1.
Spatially and Temporally Correlated: The locations and times of individual sensor readings are well-known, and
the sensors themselves are calibrated against each other, allowing scientists to fuse the individual units’ readings to
characterize the spatial and temporal evolution of the phenomenon under observation.
1.1.1. Distributed Instruments and Sensor Networks
Distributed instruments are a subset of sensor networks: that is, all distributed instruments are sensor networks, but
not all sensor networks are distributed instruments. A sensor network is a collection of geographically distributed
sensors (e.g., a set of weather stations). A distributed instrument builds on this concept by capturing, by design, the
spatialandtemporalcorrelationofthereadings,actingasaunifiedsetofcomponentscollectivelyaddressingaspecific
science question. For a concrete example, a network of weather stations, each independently monitoring atmospheric
pressure,isasensornetworkbutnotnecessarilyadistributedinstrument;incontrast,anetworkofweatherstationsset
incarefullychosenlocationsandsamplingatmosphericpressureatagreed-upontimestocollectivelydetectatmospheric
tides is a distributed instrument.
1.1.2. Distributed Instruments and Swarms
Not all distributed instruments are swarms. “Swarms” are loosely defined as a large number of autonomous agents
that act based on local information in a way leading to a desired emerging behavior (Rahmani et al. 2018). Typically,
individual agents are low-cost and not individually endowed with sophisticated capabilities.
In contrast, a distributed instrument can have as few as two sensing units; each sensing unit can act based on
information from all other units, if necessary; and individual units are not necessarily low cost nor unsophisticated.
Concretely, two networked seismometers collecting data to localize Mars temblors are a distributed instrument; in
contrast,ahundredlow-costweatherstationsindividuallyrelayingindependentmeasurementstoEarthwithnocross-
calibration or synchronization are not a distributed instrument, as they are not designed to accurately capture spatial
and temporal correlations.
1.2. Contribution and Organization
The rest of this paper lays out the science case for distributed instruments, and surveys key technologies required to
bring their potential to fruition.
Specifically, in Section 2, we provide a historical perspective of proposed distributed instruments for planetary ex-
ploration, with a focus on NASA mission studies. In Section 3, we survey high-priority scientific questions that are
uniquelywell-suitedfordistributedinstruments,i.e.,cannotbeaddressedwithsingle-pointmeasurementsprovidedby
orbiters, landers, or rovers. We further examine, in detail, four promising distributed instrument concepts for atmo-
3sphericscience,seismology,magnetometry,andtracegasdetectionandlocalization. Section4providesabroadsurvey
of the state-of-the art in enabling technologies for distributed instruments, including (i) EDL and sensor placement,
(ii)localizationandsynchronization,(iii)communications,(iv)on-boardcomputingandautonomy,(v)power,and(vi)
thermalcontrol. Basedonthesurvey, wethenhighlightwhichtechnologiesrequireadditionaldevelopmenttobringto
reality the instrument concepts in Section 3. Finally, in Section 5 we draw conclusions and lay out recommendations
for future research and development.
2. STATE OF THE ART AND HISTORICAL PERSPECTIVE
Todate,nodistributedinstrumenthasflowntoaplanetarysurface. However,theconceptofsensornetworksforspace
exploration (of which distributed instruments are a subset) has been explored through several mission concepts and
projects over the last several decades. In this section, we review some of these efforts; we focus on identifying how
recent technological advances have removed significant roadblocks that hindered adoption of such architectures in the
past, in particular in the context of planetary surface missions.
2.1. MESUR
Figure 2. Illustration of the MESUR project’s geophysical observation stations (© NASA).
Concepts for deploying a network of landers on the Martian surface were being investigated as far back as the early
1990s. The Mars Environmental Survey (MESUR) concept (Figure 2) was initiated at NASA Ames Research Center,
whilethedetaileddesignwascarriedoutatNASAJPL(Squyres1995;Hubbardetal.1991). ThegoaloftheMESUR
concept was to deploy sixteen landers spread across the surface of Mars, spanning all latitudes and longitudes.
Concernsregardingalackofunderstandingofglobalcirculationpatternsintheatmosphere,crustalthickness,stateand
structureofthemantle,CO andH Odepositsinthepolarregions,presenceofvolatiles,organiccompounds,soilwater
2 2
inventory,andthermalstructureoftheupperatmosphereweresomeofthebroadsciencequestionsthatwereidentified
as being addressable only with the help of multiple networked instruments (Squyres 1995). In order to meet these
objectives,aninstrumentpackagewasidentifiedcomprising: aseismometer;ameteorologypackagecomprisingpressure
sensor, wind sensor, temperature sensor, sky radiometer and humidity sensor; an Alpha/proton/X-ray spectrometer
with a mini rover for transporting the instrument to the desired target; a thermal analyzer (calorimeter); a gas
chromatograph; and a descent/surface imager.
The mission concept also included an orbiter for atmospheric sounding and for relaying data from individual landers.
The data volume was calculated to be on the order of 100 Mbit/node/day, driven largely by the data requirements of
theseismometer. However,itwasacknowledgedthattheserequirementscouldbereduceddownto10Mbit/node/day,
4once the seismic environment has been understood well enough to employ event detection and data compression
algorithms.
It was estimated that this network could be established over 5 launches and 3 launch windows. However, given the
complexity of each lander module targeting a plethora of science objectives, funding constraints led to the approval
of a single lander, initially known as Surface Lander Investigation of Mars (SLIM). The focus of the project shifted
to the micro-rover Mars Pathfinder, which was designed to carry and deploy instruments on the Martian surface, and
the seismometer was removed from the mission.
2.2. SensorWeb
(a)FunctionalSensorWebpod(Delin&Jackson2000). (b)Proposedplanetarysurfacedeploymentschemesfor
thesensorweb(Delin&Jackson2000).
Figure 3. NASA JPL’s SensorWeb distributed instrument concept
Inthelate1990s,theNASAJPL-developedSensorWebconceptentailedminiaturized,networkedsensormodulesfora
variety of planetary and Earth science applications (Delin & Jackson 2000). The effort resulted in a commercial spin-
off that led to successful deployment of sensor networks for studying, among others, algal blooms in Baja California,
biological flourishes in the cryogenic environment of Antarctica, and soil temperature in Huntington Gardens in
Pasadena, CA.
The SensorWeb project demonstrated a number of advances in the miniaturization of sensor pods (Figure 3(a) ),
and in the implementation of multi-hop communication networks. The sensor nodes operated in a dense network,
whereeachsensorrelayeditsdatatoallneighborswithincommunicationrange, untildatareached“prime” nodesthat
would relay all the collected data through a satellite link. The architecture resulted in inherent robustness (since no
reconfiguration was necessary in the event of node failure or replacement, as long as there was a sufficient density of
nodes), and low power usage for communications, since free-space path losses grow with the square of the distance
between nodes. The proposed SensorWeb architecture envisioned heterogeneous sensor nodes with continuously scan-
ning, low-power, high dynamic range sensors for event detection that triggered higher fidelity, power-intensive sensors
for precise measurements. Event localization could also be achieved by synthesizing spatio-temporal information from
multiple sensors.
A variety of solutions were considered for dispersal of these sensor pods on planetary surfaces, such as dispersal from
an aerial vehicle, projectile deployment from a lander, and placement by a rover while moving across the planetary
surface. Figure 3(b) illustrates some of these concepts.
2.3. Volcano SensorWeb
Inthemid-2000s,NASAJPLdevelopedandimplementedanautonomous,Earth-observingsensorwebwheremultiple
instrumentsacrossremotesensingandin-situplatformsactedinacoordinatedmannertoprovidehigh-resolutiondata
within hours of critical events such as volcanic eruptions (Chien et al. 2005). Data from satellites like Terra (Stevens
5Figure 4. VolcanoSensorWebarchitectureillustratinghowretaskinghappensupontriggeringbasedoneventdetection(Chien
et al. 2005).
et al. 2004) and Aqua (Parkinson 2003) with wide-swath, low-resolution scanning capabilities were analyzed to look
for events such as hot-spots created by volcanic activity. Based on other contextual information and pre-defined,
site-specific thresholds, such detections triggered observation requests for a satellite with higher resolution imaging
capabilities, like NASA’s Earth Observing One (EO-1) (Ungar et al. 2003). The sensor web also assigned a priority
to each observation request. An automated mission planning system processed the requests, and carried out the
observation if a) it could be fit within the schedule without disrupting higher priority observations and b) it did not
violate any mission constraints. This sequence of operations is illustrated in Figure 4.
Thesensorwebarchitecturewasdesignedtoingestdatafrommultiplesources,includingground-basedsensornetworks,
terrestrial observatories and Earth-observing satellites. The concept was also adapted for the development of a flood
sensor web (Chien et al. 2019), a wildfire sensor web (Chien et al. 2011), and a cryosphere sensor web (Doubleday
et al. 2011) for detecting events related to the break up of large polar ice sheets.
2.4. NASA Mars and Venus Autonomy Design Reference Missions
In 2018, a NASA autonomy workshop drafted a set of reference design missions for Mars and Venus exploration to
meet 2013-2022 Decadal Survey science objectives (National Research Council 2011) and to identify key enabling
technologies (Beauchamp et al. 2018; Lyness et al. 2019).
The reference mission for Venus used a combination of landers, aerial platforms (e.g., balloons), orbiters, and atmo-
spheric probes (Figure 5, left). Multi-agent coordination, with one platform building upon the observations of the
other in an autonomous manner, was identified as a key technology enabler for this mission concept.
Similarly, the reference mission architecture for Mars involved multiple assets including a fleet of small rovers (for
sample acquisition and delivery to a lander); helicopters for atmospheric measurements and aerial imagery; one or
6Figure 5. Proposed design reference missions for exploration of Venus (left) and Mars (right) (Beauchamp et al. 2018; Lyness
et al. 2019).
more landers for detailed sample analysis with powerful computing and communication infrastructure, and one or
more orbiters for Earth communications and global imagery.
Rovers would traverse outward from the landing site in a cooperative search pattern, collecting samples at intervals,
helping scientists on Earth build a better picture of subsurface geohydrology. Collaborative, autonomous multi-agent
task planning, response to scientific observations, and response to failures and anomalous scenarios were listed as key
technology areas for future research. Efficient use of multi-agent resources would allow the system to function as a
true distributed instrument.
2.5. Lunar Geophysical Network
The2013-2022and2023-2032PlanetaryScienceDecadalSurveys(NationalResearchCouncil2011;NationalAcademies
of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2022) both identified as a high priority a Lunar Geophysical Network (LGN)
mission to study the interior composition and structure of the Moon with a network of landers equipped with seis-
mometers, magnetometers, heat flow sensors, and retroreflectors, operating through an entire lunar tidal cycle of six
Earth years. A LGN mission concept was developed for the 2020 NASA Planetary Mission Concept Study Report, in
preparation for the 2023-2032 Decadal Survey (Neal et al. 2020).
ThescientificgoalsofthemissionconceptincludeunderstandingtheinternalcompositionoftheMoon,determiningthe
distribution and origin of lunar seismic activity, and studying the thermal evolution, bulk composition, and magnetic
field of our natural satellite. All enabling technologies required for the LGN mission concept are at TRL 6 or above
(Neal et al. 2020, Appendix B). Due to the proximity to Earth, data compression is a comparatively minor concern.
Figure 6 shows a high-level overview of the LGN mission concept and the science instruments carried by each LGN
lander.
2.6. Timeliness of Distributed Instruments
NASA and the planetary science community have demonstrated a keen interest in distributed instruments, sensor
networks, and multi-agent systems over the last thirty years, and this interest continues unabated, as shown by the
recent NASA autonomy design reference mission (DRM) concepts for Mars and Venus exploration (Beauchamp et al.
2018; Lyness et al. 2019) and the Lunar Geophysical Network concept (Neal et al. 2020).
Why is it that no distributed instrument has flown on a planetary exploration missions to date, then? And why could
this time be different?
The rest of this paper aims at answering this question. Specifically, in Section 3, we justify the “science pull” for
distributed instruments by showing that such instruments are uniquely well-positioned to address crucial and timely
questionsinplanetaryscience,inlinewiththefindingsofthe2018NASAAutonomyDRMconcepts(Beauchampetal.
2018; Lyness et al. 2019) and with Decadal priorities. We also show that many high-priority science questions require
73. TECHNICAL OVERVIEW
RetroL ra es fle er ctor Pa Cn ao mra em raic S-Band HGA MagL nM eS toS m Fl eu tx eg r a St ee nsor
(1m Boom)
LMSS Searchcoil
Magnetometer (1-m boom)
SI Audio MEMS
Seismometer
(0.7m Deploy)
Laser Retroreflector Heat Flow Probe
VBB 3m Deploy (2x)
Seismometer
LG050
: LMSS Electrode (x4)
Relay Satellite LMSS Fluxgate Magnetometer Sensor
30 AL ua gu un stc 2h 030 Direct Transfer: Cruise to Moon DOI: Re 5l e Sa es pe te L ma bn ed re 2r 0s 3 D 0escend and DL eM pS loS y S me ea nrc th A C so seil mbly LMSS Electrode Deployer
5 Days
SL taG cN k LOI: Lunar Orbit 250 km Circular Polar Orbit LMSS Ion Electrostatic Analyzer
4 September 2030
4 Landers and SP Seismometer
1 Carrier/Orbiter
Silicon Audio / MEMS Seismometer
Heat Flow Probe
All Landers on the surface:
29 October 2030
Figure 7: An overview of the LGN mission con-ops including launch, cruise, descent, and landing. LG019 Figure 3: LGN Lander deployed. LG056
(a)Missionoverview(Nealetal.2020,Figure7). (b)Accommodationsforscienceinstruments(Nealetal.
had a launch window of three days every two weeks. The LGN Orbiter provides navigation, power,
communication and attitude control during the lunar transfer period. 3.1 Instruments Payload Descriptions2020,Figure3).
The LGN instruments are shown in Figure 3, the mass, power and mission data volume are given in
3.3.2 Lunar Orbit Operations Table 4. The instrument details are shown in Table 5 and discussed in the following paragraphs.
cirU cup lao rn pa orr laiv ra ol ra bt it th ae r oM uo no dn t, ht eh e M O or oFb nit .ie Thr g w uei l Ll r p Oee Ir f mo 6r am .n et uhL ve e uL r O cn oIa s m tsr a an bGe ou uve te ro 8 t 6po 5 ph mlay /c ses iLi ncG taN erl m in sNt o o fea Dt2w5 el0 to a k -Vmr ,k mis msi eVo ne tnr y is B o br aov sa eed drb oav nni d te h Sw ee Iis nm Sa io gnm hd te Ste Esr I c( SVi B VeB Bn) B (cd see ev isei mlno ops metd er tb euy r Cm (LN oEe gS nn a ont nds n I éP eG t P a i ln ., F 2r 0a 1n 9c )e ,) : w Th ithe sp or mop eo as ded ap in tas tt ir ou n-
while the circularization burn is approximately 40 m/s, bringing the total transfer cost to 905 m/s. Once the Moon. VBB will contain 4 sensors in an oblique configuration that measures ground accelera-
in the 250 km circular polar orbit, the Orbiter will be commanded by the flight ops team to release tion in the 1mHz /25 Hz bandwidth. This seismometer requires a thermal regime between -55˚C
ree Ega ac ich oh L nLa an and dle er r s owo i rlt lh ba get i dlt e ol pa bln od yas e dla t s ei nt qs u es ei nt te tw iasy lln oyc (rh sr pko an scei ,z de d ow uw t i i~th t3 0hth ee a rs dtt ha ir dt s ao tyf as )t h nae n cdlu etn ha ser y d eoa ay cfl hig h wht i luc l y lnac nle dd ( d srha eow rdn tl) y. s to tt eo nh s+ uo1 r2 eu 5 th˚sC ea r mann ad ld sw ts ai bll i o lb itef y .d Wekp ili to hly oe Indm So igne h t tth hee e s rru itsr af ga ecb ,e iu te n it sd w ce ur ret rh ee ne tnL lya n Tsd Ree Lr,n ~co 7sm fo op rrl e ts hte; e w Mitt ohh o nai .st h Therp em sa ea ilr s s mht oeia math el tlt eoy r
exa inpft se tlr ra ulu min nea nr st d s a swuw cn ch e( s9 ys: f0 u0 llta ym hd el epoc loa Syl et deim , nte h) se a ont et rh xWte Lg aiv nee dn be rl a wn pid lli r n bog e s jsi et ene. ct O tton ,tc he ew l sa un hrd fai in cceg .h h Thas d eb ce euen rvr ev ene tr l i obfi ae psd e lea inn ded wth itle le chnow sinlilo gl lb eg e a i cleo tuws ae tr ofe rdo , sor inn gtl lo eo t sh pce oa olu ll ,n aas nr de s un twrfs oa co ce a r bb ly en sa ( e s“ ict mrwa in laeo r” t r od ke tv h,e el o Mdpe Sid Ld b Dy enH sco eo nnt te y Bsb re aee k e eR Doab eo pdt loico ys m,p w et nhi ti co ih nn sh pa osi ona l
flih Sgca hhve ict t kh .ae r dL Nsa in ted e e oxr ns ttd h,e ep l nio eny ae rd si Sdin e e, t Kh ce ot rf oo ill oelo vnw sii tn e4g o o ,nr d thwer e: feP arK sisT du e( ,P ra- n6 vd0 e Cy yo riu sn iurg m eb a qsis ta uel t o ifi nre tl ed h) de s nit ee ta ro esn idc et hh (e Fn in guoea rer l s 2oi )d .ge, ies fow dr ii tn iodd nin aig l s) t. ht Th er rmieb aV l uB prBt o e ti end cs tt ir ou nimn fe rns ot mt wr ti hull e b m le u npe ao rns i htti eo asn t .e bd y aR tt a kthe inec g c e ae dnn vte atr n o tatf g te eh c oe fhL ta hnn ed o Le arl, n ow dg eh ri yc sh h aw dai il ndl gpv .r Thoavin ed e Vc a Bed B-s
ha3v.3e.3 Lfianldlinegd Opemrataionnsy of the gaps thaDe-tOrbith Inseirntiond (DOeI) Mraneeudver adoptions of distrsiybstuemt ies ldoweirneds utsirnug smtainelensst-ssteeil ncabltesh (1e/8-pinachs dtia.meItner, 2p4 ainrchteis)c oun laa brrid,lec, woitmh twpoa carbeleds
Each Lander, will perform a De-Orbit Insertion connected to the bridle to stabilize rotational motion as it is lowered. The cables are retracted after
to( sD ist .O h AI e) B m ra1a kn9 ineu g9 v M0er s at no e M ulo vw erEe r ( BSth MUe )L fRa on lld oe war ero dr cb bhi yt Tipt ee rre ria acp in-t ure, advances in sensor miniatuc tha rb ei l Ve z Bs ae Bp t a oir na ot i tno hn e, f sr pco am oce mt ch rae f mV t, B wuB it hnis pc io ucm llaep ytl se it ooe n, na on pd ph t oh sae it red e dsp idl wo esy m aofe r n teht e ,m ce yac lih nna dn dei rs .m pC i as ob m lweo du een prt le od ys md oi er le nuc tt l hty e ia roib to angve es
mRaeklateives Nmaviagaltlioenr (TlRaNn) dwiell rbsringp tohes sspaicbeclreaf,t greatly reducing the complexitc yom aes nfro dm cM oSL s tSky oC fran pe, l M anars e2 t02 a0 r S yky -C sr can ae, l eand s J eW nS sT o su rn- nshi eel td w de opl roy km se .nt.
down to an attitude of 100 m above the landing site
with a velocity magnitude of 8.2 m/s. This scenario is
d ine p Ai pc pte ed n din ix F Bi ,g u Sr ee c t8 i. o nT R 2.N 1.5 i .s Ad ti sc thu is ss e sd ta i gn e ,m tho 3ere . sd pe at cTa ei -l HE SCIENCE CASE FOR DISTRIBUTED INSTRUMENTS 8
craft is expected to perform its final descent (Figure 9)
Ditos tlarndi bwuitht ae tdermiinnals vtelroucitmy ofe lnesst tshanh oor elqdualu nique promise for scientific questions that require the investigation of spatio-temporal
to 0.5 m/s at 1 m above the surface. Once landed, the
coLrarndeelra wtilil ovennts anay tremraeinginigo pnroapelllaantn thdrougghlo bal scale.
the ACS thrusters to prevent freezing of the propel-
lant. The entire landing operation, from the start of Breaking Maneuver (BM)
the DOI to touchdown, takes a little over one hour. Figure 8: Each Lander performs a BM and DOI to land LoG0n02
ToAdadistisoneasl dsettaihls aere pprrovoidmed iins Aeppoenfdixd Bi.stributhte esudrfacei onf tshet Mrouon.mentsforavarietyofscientificdisciplines,weconsideredarangeofplanetary
sciencequestions,drawnfromthescientificliteratureandthelatestPlanetaryScienceandAstrobiologyDecadalSurvey,
16
and applied an objective set of criteria to evaluate which could most benefit from a feasible distributed instrument
formulation.
3.1. Methodology
The following criteria were used in the search.
• Compelling to a broad scientific community: We chose to focus on high-impact science questions with
proven interest from the scientific community; specifically, we turned our attention to scientific topics explicitly
identified in the two most recent Planetary Science Decadal Surveys (National Research Council 2011; National
Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine 2022).
• In-situ Planetary Science: We chose to focus our attention on in-situ planetary science, excluding remote
sensing solutions such as spacecraft swarms, orbiting distributed apertures, and space-based interferometers.
This choice was motivated by a desire to bound the problem space, allowing for a more focused evaluation; we
refertheinterestedreadertoRahmanietal.(2018)foranassessmentofthepotentialofswarmsofspacevehicles
for remote sensing and astrophysics.
• Uniquely Beneficial: A focus was placed on science questions that can be uniquely addressed by distributed
instruments; that is, science questions that can only be satisfactorily answered through the collection of multi-
ple geographically distributed, spatially and temporally correlated measurements. In the selection of scientific
questions of interest, oft-touted benefits of distributed systems such as lower cost, higher resiliency, and faster
8data collection were not considered, unless such benefits had a direct impact on the ability of the proposed
architecture to address the science question of interest.
• Feasible: When identifying scientific questions of interest, we performed a deliberately loose feasibility check,
adoptinganoptimisticoutlookonfuturetechnologydevelopmentsandintegrationcosts,toavoidoverconstraining
thesearch. Oncesciencequestionsofinterestwereidentified,amoredetailedfeasibilityassessmentwasperformed
for the top contenders: this assessment is presented in Section 4.8.
• Failure is an option The goal of the search was explicitly not to directly find applications for distributed
systems. Specifically, it was accepted that there might not exist any compelling planetary science questions that
could be uniquely addressed by feasible distributed instruments (e.g., because such questions can be addressed
satisfactorily by monolithic instruments). By adopting this perspective, it was ensured that the outcome of
the search, if any, would be highly compelling from a scientific perspective, and would justify the additional
complexity introduced by distributed instruments.
Based on these criteria, we identified four broad areas of scientific inquiry that satisfied the aforementioned criteria:
global climate and weather, localization of seismic events, magnetometry for internal composition, and trace gas
detection and localization. Each of these areas is discussed in detail next.
3.2. Global Climate and Weather
Understanding atmospheric circulation is a key scientific priority for rocky bodies with an atmosphere, e.g., Venus,
Mars, and Titan. The investigation of Martian atmospheric phenomena is particularly compelling due to its relevance
not only to fundamental questions of planetary formation and evolution, but also to EDL and, eventually, to human
exploration.
Mars climatology scientific priorities align along three themes, corresponding to MEPAG Objective II.A, to “...charac-
terize the state and controlling processes of the present-day climate of Mars under the current orbital configuration”
(Banfield et al. 2020):
• Surface-atmosphere interface, including exchange of material (e.g., moisture and methane), and transport phe-
nomena on the surface (e.g., dust);
• Global atmospheric circulation;
• Transient events in atmospheric circulation, e.g., atmospheric tidal behaviors and the evolution of dust storms.
The key challenge is that past investigations provide global records from remote sensing, with extremely low temporal
resolution, and hyperlocal measurements from rovers and landers.
To fill this gap, one can either deploy a fleet of orbiters with phased overflight times, or a number of “embarassingly
parallel” landerstoprovidehighlycorrelatedmeasurements. Whilemacroscopicandplanet-levelphenomenahaveseen
significant investigation, a number of key scientific questions (e.g., the seasonal transition of the Hadley circulation
and its influence on, and response to, atmospheric dust, the tidal behavior of the Martian atmosphere at the diurnal
and semi-diurnal scale, and the growth of dust storms) are not satisfactorily addressed, and local phenomena at
the microscopic scale (which are strongly influenced by topography, surface composition, etc.) are largely unknown.
Distributed instruments hold promise to fill this gap.
3.2.1. Science and strength of distributed instrument
Several decades of spacecraft study of the Martian atmosphere have revealed a complex global climate system that is,
in many ways, more complex than Earth’s own. Despite the absence of liquid water or biosphere, the Martian surface
environment is a complex interplay of several interrelated climate cycles. Even with ample prior effort invested in
quantifying atmospheric circulation, composition and interaction with the surface, much remains poorly understood
about the Martian atmosphere, reflecting several cost constraints and technological weaknesses in these prior efforts.
In addition to the value of understanding the Martian atmosphere from a scientific perspective (Mars, for example,
providesacomparativeendmemberamongterrestrialplanetaryclimatesinourSolarSystem),propercharacterization
of the global environment is essential for reducing risk to future spacecraft missions to the Red Planet. Entry, descent
and landing on the Martian surface relies on knowledge of atmospheric density and wind profiles near the proposed
9landingsite. Futureeffortstoenableevenhigher-precisionlandingwillrequireacorrespondinglybetterunderstanding
ofatmosphericbehavior. Directspacecraftobservations(fromorbitortheground)provideonlylimitedcoverage,both
temporal and spatial, of the Martian atmosphere. Filling in these gaps requires the use of numerical models that can
simulate atmospheric behavior at all locations and times of day, but which are constrained by the limited availability
of direct observations with which to validate the models. Specifically, these general circulation models rely on two
orthogonal types of data sets to ensure they are able to simulate the Martian atmosphere in a reasonable fashion.
Landed spacecraft generally provide high temporal resolution of atmospheric behavior, but only at a single site, so
theyhave,inherently,verypoorspatialcoverage. Conversely,orbitingspacecraftcanprovidenear-globalcoverage,but
with limited temporal resolution (a typical polar-orbiting satellite in a Sun-synchronous orbit has only two overflights
per day, each 12 hours apart). Together, these data sets provide a piecemeal overview of Martian planetary climate.
SomekeyoutstandingquestionsabouttheMartianatmospherearebestaddressedbymoresophisticatedobservational
approaches, such as joint surface-orbit measurements, or simultaneous observations at multiple locations across the
planet. As an example of this growing need, characterization of the dynamical and thermal state of the lower atmo-
sphere is identified as a higher priority investigation in the MEPAG Goals document (Banfield et al. 2020, Goal II,
Investigation A1.1). The higher priority nature of this investigation is meant to indicate that existing measurements
are insufficient to address the investigation, and are necessary to achieve the overarching MEPAG objective (“Charac-
terize the...present-day climate of Mars”). Underthisinvestigationismentioned,specifically,theneedtocharacterize
larger-scalecirculationssuchasthethermaltides. ThebehavioroftheMartianthermaltides—global-scaleoscillations
inatmosphericproperties—makesitsstudyideallysuitedformeasurementbyaninstrumentwithwideglobalcoverage.
The strong atmospheric tides in the Martian atmosphere (Figure 7) can yield daily changes of surface pressure of as
much as 10% at a single location (Haberle et al. 2014). These tides, which vary on diurnal and sub-diurnal timescales,
are strongly impacted by topography (Withers et al. 2003) and atmospheric dustiness (Wu et al. 2020), yet we have
only a limited grasp of how they function on Mars, based largely on poor spatial and temporal coverage. Orbiting
spacecraft capture the same long-period phases of the tide (the diurnal and semi-diurnal components), but provide
littleinformationaboutvariabilityofthecycleoverthecourseofasingleday. Landedspacecraftcancaptureelements
of the higher frequency tidal modes, but, absent multiple sensors on a global scale, they are not able to interpret the
full range of motion that makes up the tidal oscillations.
A suite of integrated sensors across a wide range of surface locations would enable a proper visualization of the
global motions of the atmosphere, as the atmosphere is not a series of independent, isolated locations but, rather, a
globallyintegratedunit. Becauseoftheglobalnatureofthesedesiredinvestigations,theyrequireinstrumentsthatare
global in scale—for this reason, we envision a distribution of multiple sensors as necessary to address these questions.
Rather than a suite of independent measurements, this distributed instrument should be seen as a single, global scale
measurementobtainedbymultiplesensorsoperatingsimultaneously. Thisperspectiveiswhatdistinguishesthepresent
approach from prior efforts for obtaining global coverage. Similarly, the global condensation flow, a consequence of
the annual CO condensation/sublimation cycle on Mars, may be best observed through a suite of integrated sensors
2
spanningtheplanet. Figure8illustratestheseasonalcycleofpressureasmeasuredattheVikingLander1and2sites.
As 95%oftheMartianatmosphereisCO ,surfacepressureisagoodproxyfortotalatmosphericCO abundance. The
2 2
large seasonal variation of about 30% is a consequence of CO condensation in the cold wintertime hemisphere, which
2
pulls mass out of the atmosphere and onto the polar surface, followed by sublimation of these polar ice deposits back
into the atmosphere during spring and summer. A careful look at Figure 8 reveals asynchronous timing between the
localmaxima/minimabetweenthetwocurves. ThisisbecausethesublimatedmassofCO releasedfromthepolarcap
2
does not instantaneously ‘flood’ the atmosphere but is, rather, distributed more slowly and in a non-uniform manner,
affecting the two landing sites differently, and at different times (high frequency “spikes” are due to weather patterns,
and are distinct from the seasonal behavior of the condensation cycle). As the spring/summer season progresses, the
location of these sublimating deposits changes (Piqueux et al. 2015), as does the nature of this “condensation flow”.
By capturing the evolution of the pressure cycle at multiple locations simultaneously using a distributed instrument,
wecanbetterunderstandthetimingofcondensation/sublimationactivityandthepolarcapcompositionasafunction
of season. This, too, is identified as a higher priority measurement in Mars science (Banfield et al. 2020, Goal II,
Investigation A2.2). As noted in Banfield et al. (2020), “Due to poor local time coverage in existing observations (a
10Figure 7. IllustrationofMars’thermaltide,responsibleforlarge,dailyvariationsinpressureattheMartiansurface. Heating
by the Sun drives global circulation of air towards the night side of the planet, resulting in a diurnal cycle of surface pressure
as the planet rotates beneath the Sun. The timing and structure of the thermal tide is dependent upon such elements as
atmospheric dust and topography. Image credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech/Ashima Research/SwRI.
resultofsun-synchronousspacecraftorbits),existingobservationshavenotbeenabletomeasurethis[CO sublimation]
2
variability.” A globally distributed instrument could directly address this need.
3.2.2. Distributed Instrument Configuration and Strength
There are three cycles that drive climate on Mars—the aforementioned carbon dioxide cycle, the water cycle (both
as vapor and ice), and the dust cycle. Atop the main CO cycle are seasonal variations in water vapor and water
2
ice abundances in the atmosphere, both of which peak, generally, during the northern spring and summer seasons. A
widespread belt of clouds, for example, forms in the tropical latitudes during late spring/early summer [Clancy et al.
(1996); Figure 9]. During southern spring and summer, however, the Martian atmosphere is generally dustier than at
othertimesoftheyear(Figure10),thoughdustisubiquitousintheMartianatmosphere. Thereisastrongrelationship
between atmospheric dust and water ice, as the former serves as condensation nuclei for the latter; hence, one cannot
observeonecyclewithoutconsideringtheother. Becauseofboththetemporalandspatialdistinctionbetweenthe“key”
areas of the different cycles, observations need to be made across a wide spatial extent, and across multiple seasons, if
not years. Global coverage of Mars with identical sensor packages as part of a distributed instrument would therefore
be a valuable approach to providing this global coverage and achieving good temporal resolution. A strawman design
foradistributedinstrumentmighthaveontheorderof10distinctsensorpackagesroughlycoveringalllongitudesand
latitudes (4 latitudes by 4 longitudes would provide quadrant-scale coverage and result in 16 sensors).
A threshold sensor package that would positively advance Mars atmospheric science would contain pressure and
air temperature sensors, as well as sensors to measure wind, and column-integrated dust and water ice abundance.
Augmentations to this basic package might also include a filtered imager or spectrometer to measure clouds and
atmospheric opacity, as well as water vapor abundance. Sensors probing the surface could enable additional useful
measurements of surface-atmosphere fluxes of water and temperature, and an understanding of soil composition. The
11Surface Pressure
10.5
10
9.5
9
8.5
8
7.5
7 Viking Lander 1
6.5 Viking Lander 2
6
90 180 270 0 90
Areocentric Longitude [L]
s
Figure 8. TheannualpressurecycleasmeasuredbyVikingLanders1and2showsa 30%variationbetweenpeakandtrough.
Offset of the two curves is due to different elevation of each lander.
Figure 9. A global image of Mars showing the presence of water ice clouds in the lower latitudes and near large topographic
features. This collection of clouds is referred to as the ‘aphelion cloud belt’ and occurs primarily during the late northern
spring/early summer, when Mars is furthest from the Sun. Image credit: NASA/JPL-Caltech-MSSS
basicpackageislargelycomprisedofhigh-TRL,low-costinstruments(pressure,temperatureandwindsensorshaveall
successfully flown to Mars, e.g., Gómez-Elvira et al. (2012); Spiga et al. (2018)), which is an enabling factor, in terms
12
]aP[
erusserPFigure 10. Six years of atmospheric opacity data illustrating the seasonality of atmospheric ‘dustiness’ on Mars. Opacity
is noticeably higher in the second half of the year, which corresponds to southern spring and summer, when Mars is closest
to the Sun. Data obtained by the Mars Exploration Rover ‘Opportunity’, from the PDS Planetary Atmospheres Node at
https://atmos.nmsu.edu/data_and_services/atmospheres_data/MARS/MER/spirit/atm_opacity.html
ofcostandrisk, fordeployingmultiplesensorsacrosstheplanet. Addingadditionalcomponentstothesensorpackage
increasesitsoverallscientificvalue,butatthepriceofgreaterexpenseorincreasesinSWaPandwithlowertechnological
readiness. Examples of such sensors are a Doppler lidar (for cloud/aerosol detection and wind; e.g., (Whiteway et al.
2008)) or sonic anemometer (for high-frequency wind measurements; e.g., Banfield et al. (2016)). While this study
recognizes the potential value of such measurements, they may be of secondary value towards addressing global-scale
atmospheric processes (versus local atmospheric behavior), for which a distributed instrument is ideally suited.
3.2.3. Technical Challenges
The proposed sensor package has a high TRL, greatly reducing the technical hurdles for development of a distributed
instrument for global Martian climate and weather. Two key technical challenges of such an instrument, however,
are cost-effective delivery to the planetary surface from orbit, and long-term survivability – i.e., the need to deploy
multiple sensors across a planetary surface with lower per-sensor costs compared to current monolithic missions, and
the requirement to ensure the sensors are able to collect data for months to years across a variety of landing sites,
including especially inhospitable polar regions. These challenges are broadly common to all instrument concepts
discussed in this section. For this reason, we defer their detailed discussion to Section 3.6.
3.3. Seismic Techniques: localization of seismic events
Localizationofseismiceventsiscriticaltoilluminateactivegeologicalprocessesonrockyandicybodies,givinginsight
into planetary evolution. While localization can be performed with a single instrument by carefully measuring arrival
times and polarization, the process is highly challenging and requires extremely high-quality data: for instance, data
fromInSight’sSEISinstrument(whichisequippedwithavery-broad-bandseismometerco-locatedwithashort-period
seismometer) has been used to detect 2769 potential seismic events, but only 42 of these events have been reliably
localized (InSight Marsquake Service 2023). In contrast, having multiple geographically separated seismometers holds
13promise to make localization of seismic events many orders of magnitude easier, drastically increasing the number of
events that can be detected by sensor packages in a given class, and reliably providing insight into active geological
phenomena.
3.3.1. Science Benefits of Distributed Seismology
PlanetarysurfaceseismologyisoneofthecriticaltechniquesforinvestigatingtheinteriorofvariousobjectsintheSolar
System, and distributed seismology stands out as one of the prime examples of science that is enabled by distributed
instruments. The field of seismology lends itself naturally to distributed measurements, since such measurements
readily allow for the localization of the source of seismic activity, which is critical to answering questions about the
interior structure of the body. The 2023-2032 Decadal Survey (National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and
Medicine 2022) explicitly calls for geophysical networks capturing seismic and magnetometer measurements on the
MoonandMars(Q3.3,Q5.1),andforseismicinvestigations(althoughnotexplicitlyseismicnetworks)ofVenus(Q3.4)
andofrockyandicyworlds(Q5.6),withparticularfocusonJupiterandSaturnsatellitesincludingEuropa,Enceladus,
and Titan (Q8.2).
Seismic waves can be generated from tectonic and fluid flow processes, and their observations can not only tell us
about the internal structure of the celestial body, but also shed light on internal dynamic processes. Ocean worlds
with significant tidal deformations and bodies with ongoing seismic activity (e.g., plumes), such as Enceladus and
Titan, are prime candidates for seismic exploration. Seismology can answer key questions about the thickness of
Europa’sicycrust,localizethegeothermalactivityresponsiblefortheplumesemanatingfromtheventsonEnceladus,
and study the intensity of active volcanoes on Venus. Some of the specific planetary science questions that can be
explored with the help of distributed seismic instruments are:
• 3D seismic structure of any solid-body object in the Solar System;
• Localization of seismic activity associated with plume processes on ocean worlds;
• Measurement of the distribution of magma on Io;
• Detection of ice subduction on Europa or other ocean worlds;
• Measurement of surface tilt caused by tidal flexing;
• Floodingofaregionofinterestwithalargenumberofseismometers(afewhundred)toobtainaverydensemap
for active surveying, akin to how targeted regions are explored in the oil industry.
3.3.2. Configuration of the Distributed Instrument
Atleast3seismometers(4preferable)areneededtoenabletriangulation-basedlocalizationofseismicevents. Interms
of spatial distribution, if there is poor a priori knowledge of active regions, then distribution on a global scale would
be the preferred option with the aim of discovery and exploration. A global distribution covering a wide range of
longitudes and latitudes is also favorable for increasing localization accuracy. On the other hand, if there is good
knowledge of active seismic locations from orbiter missions or other sources, then a tighter configuration might be
more favorable. The efficacy of a regional network with moderate separation between individual sensors is yet to be
analyzed in detail. Mocquet (1999) studied a global Mars network comprising four hubs, each of which contained a
mini-network of four distributed seismometers. Global coverage using a single launch is hard to achieve for objects
like Mars due to guidance and EDL challenges. However, a global seismic network becomes more feasible on smaller
bodies like Enceladus, where each sensor node has to be imparted with relatively small amounts of ∆V, and survive
lower impact speeds.
The performance specifications for each individual sensor, such as sensitivity, noise figure, bandwidth, etc. have to be
tuned for each target body. Recent advances have led to the development of miniaturized short-period seismometers
suchastheSEISinstrumentflownontheMarsInSightmission(Banerdtetal.2020). Othersuchinstrumentsarealso
currently in development for the Lunar Geophysical Network (Shearer 2011; Neal et al. 2019).
3.3.3. Unique Technical Challenges
3.3.3.1. Data handling and data transfer—A major technical challenge posed by distributed seismology is satisfying
their demanding data handling and data transfer requirements. Seismometers are looking for sporadic events and,
14hence, require near-continuous operation to increase the likelihood of detection. This typically translates to data
rate requirements on the order of a few kHz. On-board computation and analysis of the waveforms and automated
detection of scientifically relevant events can reduce the amount of data that needs to be relayed back to the Earth. A
dedicated effort is needed to develop algorithms for on-board data processing to reduce the volume of data that needs
to be downlinked. These algorithms would have to be parameterized in a way so that they can be easily tuned upon
deployment and adjusted based on the signals encountered during the mission. In the past, it has been challenging to
automate this process, since poor priors are available on the expected structure and frequency of signals. Lightweight
algorithms that can be deployed on low-power embedded computing systems can help overcome the critical challenge
of data reduction.
3.3.3.2. Calibration, localization, and synchronization—The use of tri-axial seismometers reduces the sensitivity of the
instrument to the orientation of the sensor on the surface; however, the sensors have to be localized with a reasonable
accuracy, and the clocks on the sensors have to be tightly synchronized, to enable the localization of seismic events.
Other challenges involve the need for calibration against noise sources such as wind and thermal fluctuations, and
the potential need for anchoring to the planetary surface. For this reason, it worthwhile to explore the possibility of
adding a meteorological package alongside the seismometer to eliminate the effects of temperature, wind, etc., on the
seismic measurements.
3.4. Magnetometry for Internal Composition
Magnetometry is a powerful tool that can be used to probe the internal structure of planetary bodies and gain insight
into the evolution of a past (or current) dynamo. Geophysical magnetometer investigations can be applied in three
ways: electromagnetic sounding, sensing an active dynamo, and sensing remanent crustal magnetization. Active
dynamos and their associated magnetospheres can be sampled satisfactorily by one or more orbiters (such as the
MMS mission (Burch et al. 2016)), and do not require distributed networks on the surface. However, the application
of distributed instruments would be highly useful to sound the interiors of solid bodies and for future planetary
exploration of remanent crustal magnetization.
Electromagnetic sounding can be used to understand the present-day internal layering within a planetary body. Elec-
tromagnetic sounding is a technique which uses magnetometry to sense the conductive layers within the body, such as
anironcoreorasaltyocean. Aconductorinthepresenceofatime-varyingmagneticfieldwillproduceeddycurrents,
which create an induced magnetic field that opposes the time variation of the primary field. This secondary field can
be detected by identifying perturbations to the primary field. In planetary environments, a time-varying magnetic
field may be supplied by the interplanetary magnetic field that originates from the sun or by the relative motion of
a planet’s magnetic field to its moon (Russell et al. 1981; Khurana et al. 1998) . As an example, for an icy moon
like Europa, Jupiter’s rotating magnetic field acts as the primary time-varying field, and the measurement of interest
would be the perturbations to this field caused by magnetic induction via Europa’s ocean. The depth to which the
interior can be sounded depends on the frequency of the inducing magnetic field and the electrical conductivity of the
various layers within the body.
In addition, the presence of a past dynamo can be inferred by detecting remanent magnetization in the surface crust.
This occurs if its superficial composition contains ferromagnetic grains that align with the magnetic field direction
as the crust cools. Hence, crust formed during different time periods can contain snapshots of its contemporaneous
magneticfield. Thismagnetizationcanbeerasedviaimpactheatingorchemicalalteration,whichmayleavethesurface
with a “patchy” distribution of surficial magnetization (as has been seen on the Moon and Mars). Measurements of
crustalmagneticfieldsallowconstraintstobeplacedonthestrengthanddirectionofthefieldatthetimeofformation.
Further, if the age of the magnetized crust can be dated, the lifetime of the planetary dynamo and the evolution of its
internal conditions may be deduced. Understanding the history of a body’s dynamo evolution is important not only
for determining conditions early in its interior, but also for assessing its past habitability (Brain et al. 2020). Intrinsic
magnetic fields may affect atmospheric evolution through their effects on atmospheric ion loss rates due to solar wind
interaction, which are believed to vary with the body’s magnetic field strength (Egan et al. 2019; Sakata et al. 2020).
Remanent crustal magnetization has previously been detected at the Moon and Mars from orbit using instrument
packages that combined magnetometers and electron reflectometers to detect electrons magnetically reflecting from
crustal magnetic fields to infer the surface magnitude (Lin 1979; Acuna et al. 1999). However, the spatial resolution
15of this technique is limited by the gyroradius of the electrons in the planetary environment; in the lunar case, the
resolutionlimitis 10km(Lin1979). Thus,toobtainhighresolutioncrustalmapsofaplanetarysurfacewouldrequire
surface measurements with a magnetometer.
3.4.1. Science Benefits of a Distributed Magnetometry Instrument
Magnetic induction of global electrically conductive layers results in a dipole field whose signal falls off as 1/R3.
Therefore, it is ideal to be as close to the surface of the body as possible to measure the time-varying induced field,
especially since some responses may have low amplitude. In addition, surface magnetometers provide continuous
coverage, while orbiters may only be able to provide informative data when the spacecraft is within a certain altitude
range (i.e., near periapsis). Since inversion methods require enough magnetic data to properly sample the body’s
responsetothevariationoftheinducingfield,continuouscoveragefromthesurfacecanleadtoamorerobustsolution
for determination of interior layers. A network of strategically placed magnetometers carrying out simultaneous
measurements would be needed to build a global view of the body’s time-varying induced magnetic field.
It may also be possible for surface magnetometers to detect asymmetry in ice shells of ocean worlds. Recent literature
has examined the differences in the induction response between a spherical ice shell and an asymmetrical ice shell
(Styczinski & Harnett 2021). Figure 11 shows variability in response for the case of Europa with a spherical (black
line) and asymmetric (green line) ice shell for a surface location at the subjovian point. It can be seen that these
differences are quite small and would require good sensitivity even at the surface location. Since the signal falls as
1/R3, it is doubtful that these differences would be measurable from orbit. A distributed network could possibly
measure this by placing three surface magnetometers along each axis of a chosen coordinate system relative to the
body’s center. Another prime target for such an investigation would be Enceladus, which has plumes located only
at its southern pole. The current line of thought for this plume asymmetry is that the ice shell may be thinner near
the south pole and thicker near the north pole. However, more analysis is required to understand how feasible an
asymmetrical detection would be, and which planetary bodies may present an asymmetrical ice shell that could be
detected through magnetometry.
Figure 11. Differences in the B component of the induced magnetic field of Europa in the EPhiO coordinate system for a
y
spherically symmetric ice shell (black) and an asymmetric ice shell (green). The difference in response only differs by a few nT
as seen from the subjovian point on the surface. Figure from Styczinski & Harnett (2021).
A distributed magnetometry instrument would also provide additional scientific measurements. In addition to the
induced magnetic field, the surface magnetometers would accurately sample both the spatial distribution and magni-
tude of crustal fields. While temporally coordinated measurements are not needed for mapping these time-invariant
16crustal fields, the multi-point measurements from geographically distributed sensors allows quick development of a
more complete picture of the distribution of the remanent magnetic field on the planetary surface.
3.4.2. Distributed Instrument Configuration
Magnetometers require modest power (∼ 0.8 W) and data rates (∼ 30 bps) (Villarreal et al. 2020), making them an
instrument suitable for a distributed network. The optimum configuration of a distributed network on the surface
will vary with the target’s environmental conditions and the type of magnetometry investigation. Crustal magnetism
couldbesensedbystationary,strategicallyplacedmagnetometers(similartoInSight’s)tocomparedifferentmagnetized
locations on the surface; this would allow for monitoring of how crustal fields interact with the solar wind and the
ionosphere over time. However, networks of mobile platforms would likely be most ideal to sample and map a larger
spatial range of crustal fields. A generic case for electromagnetic sounding could possibly consist of one spacecraft in
orbit to directly measure the inducing field, and a small number (3 minimum) of magnetometers on the surface for
greater spatial resolution at higher precision. Placement of the magnetometers on the surface may require a global
distribution (such as near the poles and equator) to capture the induction response. However, detailed analysis is
needed to identify preferable placements for networks on specific bodies.
3.4.3. Unique Technical Challenges
3.4.3.1. Advance knowledge and potential precursor missions—In both applications discussed, prior knowledge of the
magnetic environment would be required before a distributed network can be deployed. This is because the necessary
sensitivityandtherangeoffieldstrengthsthatthemagnetometerwillencounterneedtobeknown. Thus,thisrequires
thatapreliminaryexplorationofthebodybeperformedbyanorbiter. Forthecaseofmagneticinduction,acompanion
orbiting spacecraft would also be needed in addition to a surface network to record the primary field. An orbiting
spacecraft would also be useful (though not necessarily required) for the study of crustal fields, to place any temporal
variation into context.
3.4.3.2. Calibration—Technical issues of such a network need to also be considered. For example, magnetometer
measurementswillbeaffectedbytheambienttemperature. Consequently,landinglocationsthatmayexperiencelarge
diurnaltemperaturefluctuations(particularlyatairlessbodies)mayneedamechanismforregulatingthetemperature
of the instrument. Magnetometers are also typically placed on booms to avoid contamination from magnetic fields
originating from the payload itself. Additionally, intercalibration of the magnetometers will be needed to allow for
direct comparison of data at different locations.
3.5. Trace Gas Detection
TransientplumesoftracegasessuchasmethaneneartheMartiansurfacearehighlytantalizing,astheypotentiallyhint
at the presence of biological phenomena on other worlds. Identifying and localizing sources of gas detection, assessing
emissionfluxes,andmeasuringthemethane/ethaneratiocanshedlightintothesourceoftheseplumesanddetermine
whether they are caused by biological phenomena or by abiotic processes (e.g., serpentinization). Orbiting assets can
detect large gas releases, but they do not provide sufficient resolution to localize them, or to identify smaller plumes;
individual surface assets, in turn, can serendipitously detect smaller gas releases, but they cannot easily identify or
localizetheirorigin. Incontrast,anetworkofgassensorscangreatlyimprovelocalizationanddetectionoftracegases,
providingsimultaneous,spatiallyseparatedmeasurementswithveryhighresolution; adistributedinstrumentcanalso
measure gas fluxes, shedding further light on the nature of the phenomena and proving or disproving its biological
nature.
3.5.1. Science Benefit of a Distributed Instrument
A high-priority scientific goal identified in the Mars Exploration Program Analysis Group Goals document (Banfield
etal.2020)isto“determineifMarseversupported,orstillsupports,life” throughsurfaceandsubsurfacesmartsensor
systems that can define, for example, the origin and point sources of methane and help determine whether Mars is
still active (e.g., heat energy generated by magma and tectonism) and contains groundwater reservoirs, all important
factors for life as we know it.
Life, hydrothermal activity (releases related to the mixing of magma and water), and serpentinization of rocks all
result in methane release on Earth (e.g., Formisano et al. (2004)). Also, methane clathrates release methane into the
atmosphere once unlocked from the melting of ice sheets, lenses, and frozen ground (Prieto-Ballesteros et al. 2006). A
17key question to be addressed is which one of these phenomena (or perhaps all) contributed to the production of the
detected methane on Mars?
On Earth, arrays of methane detectors have been in usage for decades. Recent advances include quantum optimal
detectors for monitoring industrial gas leaks. Earth-based methane investigations include long-range, high-sensitivity,
and high-speed quantitative imaging of the shape and concentration of particulates in gas plumes.
For planetary landers on Mars, methane detectors have been developed and deployed for both orbiting and roving
spacecraft. Low concentrations (up to 10s ppb) of methane have been controversially detected in the modern Martian
atmosphere through Earth-based telescopes (Mumma et al. 2004; Krasnopolsky et al. 2004), and by the Mars Express
spacecraft (Formisano et al. 2004). Viking Landers 1 and 2 detected chloromethane at 15 ppb and .04-40 ppb,
respectively [e.g., Klein et al. (1992)] by using chemical-reaction experiments. The Curiosity rover in Gale crater has
recentlyidentifiedvariablemethaneconcentrationsupto21ppb,usingtheSampleAnalysisatMars(SAM)instrument
(Websteretal.2015),albeitinwhatappearstobetransientreleases. Smartquantummethanesensorsystemsprovide
the next step in the exploration and detection of methane sources.
Individual sensors only provide a point source detection, which makes it extremely challenging to pinpoint the spatial
source of methane gas emissions; in contrast, deploying a sensor array would provide uniquely valuable data to
understand the methane cycle on Mars.
3.5.2. Distributed Instrument Configuration and Strength
Regional and global-scale methane plumes can be detected with orbiters and telescopic observations; once a region
where emissions potentially originate from is identified, a small number of detectors, as part of a distributed network,
canbedeployedtopinpointtheoriginofemission. Ifanorbiterisusedtodetectlargeplumes,aparticularlyattractive
conceptofoperationwouldentailtheorbiterperformingremoteobservationsandcarryinganumberofsurfacesensing
units; onceaplumeisdetectedinagivenregion,theorbitercoulddeploythesensingunitstothesurfaceintheregion
ofinteresttoobtainanaccuratelocalization. Regionsofinterestincludefissuresandpossibleserpentinizationsites. For
instance, four methane detectors comparable to Curiosity’s SAM Tunable Laser Spectrometer (TLS) (Mahaffy et al.
2012), positioned around the edge of Gale crater over a distance of tens to hundreds of kilometers, could potentially
lead to location of a plume source originating from within the crater, such as the one observed by Curiosity in 2015
(Webster et al. 2015).
Localizing the source of a gas plume requires accurate knowledge of atmospheric circulation [Mischna et al. (2020)
and Figure 12]. High-quality mesoscale models of planetary atmospheric circulation are available (Richardson et al.
2007); however, as discussed in Section 3.2, knowledge of ground-truth information is critical to the accuracy of these
models. To this end, augmenting a trace gas detection distributed instrument with a large number of low-cost, high-
TRL weather stations modeled after those flown on Curiosity, InSight, and Perseverance (Gómez-Elvira et al. 2012;
Banfield et al. 2019; Rodriguez-Manfredi et al. 2021) distributed in the region of interest could greatly increase the
accuracy of the distributed instrument, in addition to achieving many of the goals discussed in Section 3.2.
3.5.3. Unique Technical Challenges
3.5.3.1. Advance knowledge and potential precursor missions.—Observations from the ExoMars Trace Gas Orbiter have
not revealed the presence of global-scale gas plumes, and recent publications (Fonti et al. 2015) have called into
question the accuracy of past detections, suggesting that Martian methane emissions are likely to be local in scale.
Recent work (Webster et al. 2021), suggests confinement of the methane signal largely to within Gale crater from
diurnal growth and collapse of the planetary boundary layer. A distributed instrument for gas detection is inherently
a regional (as opposed to global) instrument, and its added value lies in the detection and localization of the source
of local plumes; therefore, advance knowledge of areas where gas emissions are likely is critical to target instrument
deployment. Curiosity’s observations of gas plumes and movements of air are local to Gale crater; precursor detection
of trace gases will be required to motivate deployment at other regions of interest.
3.5.3.2. Reliance on atmospheric circulation models.—Localization of the source of plumes requires precise estimation
of atmospheric transport, which is influenced by local wind. To reduce the uncertainty of transport models, adding
a wind gauge to individual landed sensors would be highly beneficial; an even more beneficial addition would be to
18Figure 12. Identification of the source of methane emission sites relies on accurate knowledge modeling of atmospheric
circulation. Inthefigure,theMarsWRFgeneralcirculationmodel(Richardsonetal.2007)isusedtoresolvethelocalatmospheric
circulationatGalecraterwith4kmresolution,andtheStochasticTime-InvertedLagrangianTransport(STILT)model,adapted
toMars,isusedtotrace,backwardsintime,upstreamlocationsfromwheresurfaceemissionscanexertinfluenceonthedetected
methane concentration. From Mischna et al. (2020).
include a large number of lightweight, low-cost weather stations to be deployed in the area of interest, as discussed
above.
3.6. Common challenges
We conclude this section by discussing two challenges that broadly affect all outlined concepts: cost-effective delivery
of the sensors to the planetary surface, and long-term survivability.
3.6.1. Cost-Effective Delivery
For many distributed instruments, basic sensor costs do not present a significant hurdle, nor do they offer technology
developmentchallenges;rather,thereremainunresolvedchallengesconcerningmethodsofdeployment—howthesensor
payloadsaretobecarriedanddeployedacrosstheplanet—andthecarriersystembywhichthesensorsaredelivered.
Despite the small nature of each individual sensor, costs associated with a “mothership” or payload carrier may
increase mission costs for a dedicated mission. These concerns are especially relevant for instruments that require
globaldistribution,e.g.,thosetargetedtoclimateandmagnetometryinvestigations. Therequirementtodeployacross
a range of latitudes and longitudes presents non-trivial questions about how the sensors are to be released—whether
during approach to the body of interest, or by an orbiting carrier. This uncertainty requires additional analysis, and
the best solution may present additional costs to a notional stand-alone mission design. An alternative approach,
deployment as a series of secondary, “ride-along” SmallSat payloads, also requires further study.
3.6.2. Long-Term Survivability
Individualelements,withlowsize,weight,andpower(SWaP),mustalsomanagepotentiallychallengingenvironmental
conditions;itisalsonecessarytoensureasufficientlylonglifetimeforeachsensorpackage. Forallthescienceconcepts
of interest, multi-year investigations are highly desirable to maximize the likelihood of detecting events of interest and
to capture seasonal or interannual variability. For instance, a strawman threshold mission investigating the Martian
climatewouldlastaminimumofoneMarsyear, soastofullycoverthethreeprimaryMartianclimatecycles. Ideally,
though,amissionlifetimeofseveralMarsyearsismoredesirablesoastocaptureasmuchoftheinterannualvariability
in the climate cycles as possible: while CO and water cycles are mostly consistent year over year, the dust cycle is
2
highly variable and unpredictable; e.g., Zurek & Martin (1993). Likewise, a mission to investigate seismic activity
should perform monitoring over a long time horizon; for reference, InSight’s reference mission was baselined to last
one Martian year (corresponding to approximately two Earth years), and was subsequently extended by an additional
Martian year. Similarly, a distributed instrument designed to observe and localize trace gas plumes should last
19monthstoyears,soastoincreasethelikelihoodofobservingand,critically,localizingameaningfulnumberofplumes.
Survivability concerns are especially critical for instruments requiring global coverage, e.g., climate investigations.
High latitude (polar) elements of the distributed instrument may experience extended periods of low temperature and
darkness throughout the polar winter. This can, in part, be mitigated by deployment of sensors only to mid- or low
latitudes, but to enable true global coverage, it is necessary to deploy elements to polar latitudes, and therefore to
keep elements of these higher latitude payloads and their electronics warm and energized. This will impact payload
design and SWaP of the payload.
An attractive concept of operations to overcome these limitations is for the sensors to take measurements at slow ca-
denceandanalyzethedatathroughsimpleon-boarddetectors(e.g.,pressurewavedetectorsforclimateinvestigations,
plumedetectorsfortracegasinstruments,andseismicactivitydetectorsforseismology);whenasensordetectsanevent
of interest (e.g., a methane spike), all sensors in the distributed instrument switch to a high-rate mode to characterize
its spatial and temporal evolution. Such a concept of operations requires development of both on-board autonomy
technology to detect event of interest, and sensor-to-sensor communication protocols where an orbiter autonomously
relays data between nodes.
4. ENABLING TECHNOLOGIES
Realizing the benefits of distributed instruments poses novel technology challenges that are not typically faced by
monolithic instruments and missions. In this section, we survey the state-of-the-art in ancillary technologies uniquely
relevant to distributed instruments, namely:
• Localization and synchronization, i.e., how to determine the spatial and temporal correlation of sensor measure-
ments;
• Communications, i.e., how to relay data from the sensors to scientists, and how sensors can trigger each other;
• Adaptive sampling and science autonomy, i.e., how to intelligently trigger the sensors and compress data so as
to fit within tight power and bandwidth constraints; and
• Coordinated sensor placement, i.e., how to efficiently achieve the desired spatial distribution of the sensors on
the planetary surface.
Inaddition,individualsensorsofadistributedinstrumentarelikely(althoughnotnecessarilyrequired)tofitinasmall
SWaPenvelope,toallowforefficientdeploymentoftheinstrument. Accordingly,thedesignofdistributedinstruments
is likely to be constrained by technical challenges that affect small instruments, namely:
• On-board computation and storage, i.e., what hardware is available to process and store data on board;
• Power, i.e., how to ensure the sensors can operate for the entirety of the required mission; and
• Thermal control, i.e., how to satisfy the thermal constraints of the sensors and ancillary technologies.
At the end of this section, we also compare the technology readiness level of state-of-the-art technologies with the
scientific requirements discussed in Section 3, and identify areas where additional technology development is required
to bring distributed instruments to a level of technology readiness compatible with spaceflight.
4.1. Localization and Synchronization
Spatial localization and time synchronization of individual sensors is required to provide scientific context for the
sensor readings; it also enables synchronization of readings, which is critical for applications such as seismology, and
can enable significant power savings by allowing individual nodes to only attempt to communicate with an orbiter
when it is overhead.
The problems of localization and synchronization are closely intertwined, and also closely tied to the selected commu-
nications architecture.
4.1.1. Time Synchronization
A number of high-TRL, space-qualified solutions for on-board timekeeping are available, including chip-scale atomic
clocks that provide extremely low drift over long periods of time; if the clocks of individual sensors must be kept
20Table 1. Comparison of time synchronization solutions
Solution family
XO ∼10−10 5 ppm/yr No 13x10x3 mm 3 g 0.03 W Yes 9
TXCO ∼10−10 1 ppm/yr No 20x20x3 mm 10 g 0.05 W Yes 9
OXCO 8·10−12 0.4 ppm/yr No 35x20x10 mm 14 g 2 W Yes 9
CSAC 3·10−10 0.1 ppm/yr No 40x35x11 mm 35 g 0.12 W Yes 7
COTS RF synchronization 0.1 ns 0 Yes 175x77x34 mm 400 g 5 W No -
Ad hoc RF synchronization 100 ns 0 Yes - - - Yes 9
References—Vectron (2019b,c,d); Microsemi (2019); ENSCO (2019); Klipstein et al. (2013)
synchronized to nanosecond-level accuracy, RF-based synchronization techniques can be used to synchronize the indi-
vidual sensors’ oscillators, countering relative drift. Table 1 reports key performance parameters, SWaP, and TRL for
a variety of representative timing and time synchronization solutions applicable to distributed instruments.
4.1.1.1. On-boardclocks—Alargevarietyofhigh-TRL,space-ratedoscillatorsareavailable(Vectron2019a,b)thatoffer
low power consumption and comparatively low frequency drift in the range of 5 parts per million per year (equivalent
to 2.5 minutes/year). Temperature-controlled crystal oscillators (TXCO) (Vectron 2019c) and oven-controlled crystal
oscillators(OXCO)(Vectron2019d)offerhigherprecision(withfivetotentimeslessdriftforagiventemperature)and,
crucially, much lower sensitivity to temperature, at the price of increased size, weight, and power. For very low drift
applications, chip-scale atomic clocks (Microsemi 2019) can provide an additional order-of-magnitude improvement in
drift performance in a package with size comparable to OXCOs; space-qualified models are available.
4.1.1.2. RF-based synchronization—Even the most accurate local oscillators exhibit some drift with respect to one
another over sufficiently long timescales. RF-based synchronization techniques can be used to re-synchronize multiple
oscillators to a common source, e.g., an orbiter’s on-board oscillator. Commercial, military-grade synchronization
solutions are available (ENSCO 2019) that provide real-time sub-ns synchronization over radio links; in the space
domain,anadhocTimeTransferSystem(TTS)hasbeendemonstratedaspartoftheGRAILmission(Klipsteinetal.
2013).
4.1.2. Localization
If the sensor is statically positioned by a larger vehicle whose location is well-known (e.g., it is placed by a rover’s
robotic arm) its location can be accurately computed based on the location of the carrier vehicle. Conversely, if
the sensors perform EDL independently or are delivered dynamically (e.g., they are ejected from a larger vehicle),
two-way RF ranging can provide extremely accurate localization with respect to other sensors and to orbiters; and
one-wayDoppler-basedrangingcanprovidelessaccurateestimationsfromasingleorbiterwithouttheneedforaradio
transponder. Visual odometry-based techniques and terrain-relative navigation are routinely used for localization
of large assets, but they generally require comparatively high-SWaP sensors, which makes them less attractive for
distributed instruments.
Table 2 reports key performance parameters, SWaP, and TRL for representative localization solutions, discussed in
more detail next.
4.1.2.1. RF-basedrangingandtriangulation—RF-basedrangingcanproviderelativerangingwithextremelyhighaccuracy
relyingoneitherawell-characterizedradiotransponder,orawell-synchronizedtimingsource. Intwo-way ranging,the
21
/
ycarucca
mret-trohS
noitaived
nallA
s
1
tfird
mret-gnoL
noitazinorhcnys
evitaleR
eziS
thgieW
rewoP
defiilauq-ecapS
LRTtransmittersendsasignal, andthereceiver’stransponderretransmitsthesignalback; bycomputingthetimebetween
transmission and reception, and given the known performance characteristics of the transponder, the transmitter
computes the relative range with accuracy limited only by the temporal resolution of the measuring equipment. In
one-way ranging, the transmitter broadcasts a signal at an agreed-upon time. The transmitter and the receiver’s
clocks are assumed to be synchronized (as discussed in Section 4.1.1). The receiver compares the reception time with
the agreed-upon transmission time, and computes the range from the transmitter based on the time-of-flight.
In both one-way and two-way ranging, by computing multiple ranges between each sensor and an orbiter, the location
of a sensor can be triangulated to an accuracy comparable to the knowledge of the orbiter’s location in orbit.
AvarietyofsolutionsforRF-basedlocalizationhavebeendemonstratedforEarthapplications,rangingfrominexpen-
sive COTS solutions for localization in small volumes (Jiménez Ruiz & Seco Granja 2017) to military solutions that
providesub-cmaccuracyoverrangesoftensofkilometers(ENSCO2019). However, tothebestoftheauthors’knowl-
edge, existing solutions are not rated for space environments; existing communication equipment for space proximity
links generally does not provide proximity ranging functions (Cheung et al. 2019), although ad hoc solutions have
been developed for the GRACE (Davis et al. 1999) and GRAIL (Klipstein et al. 2013; Weaver et al. 2010) gravimetry
missions.
4.1.2.2. Doppler-based localization from an orbiter—Doppler-based localization observes the Doppler shift of received
signals and uses the known ephemerides of either the transmitter or the receiver to estimate the relative location
of the two. Doppler-based ranging has been widely used for localization on Earth, including for search-and-rescue
applications (ARGOS 2016) where a satellite can compute the location of a surface transmitter with accuracy of tens
of meters during a single overpass (Ellis et al. 2020). Surface receivers equipped with an accurate on-board oscillator
can also compute their own location relative to an uncooperative orbiter (Cheung et al. 2019); availability of surface
reference stations with known location (e.g., a lander) can increase accuracy to a few meters.
4.1.2.3. Image-based localization at deployment—Terrain-relative navigation (TRN) has been proposed for landing on
rocky bodies including Mars (Johnson & Golombek 2012; Johnson et al. 2017), the Moon (Johnson & Montgomery
2008), and Titan (Matthies et al. 2020), and was used for precision landing on the Perseverance rover (Johnson et al.
2017; Jet Propulsion Laboratory 2019). TRN can provide accurate, real-time localization with respect to a known
terrain map during descent and landing; however, it requires dedicated downward-facing cameras and powerful on-
board processing. The key benefit of TRN is the ability to provide real-time localization during the dynamic descent
and landing phase, enabling precision landing - a capability that may not be needed by all distributed instruments.
4.1.2.4. Attitude determination—If it is required to characterize the attitude and orientation of the sensor package,
a number of techniques are available. Sun sensors can be used to compute the full attitude of the sensor unit to a
precision of a few degrees, if a time reference is available (Lambert et al. 2012). For bodies with a magnetic field,
a magnetic sensor can be used to constrain the attitude of the sensor. An IMU can provide information about roll
and pitch, although a Sun sensor or magnetic sensor is typically required to determine yaw. Finally, if a camera
sensor is available, image-based localization can be used to constrain the sensor’s attitude with respect to local visible
landmarks.
4.2. Communications
Thecommunicationsubsystemisacriticalpartofadistributedinstrument. Notonlyisitrequiredtocollectdatafrom
individual sensor units, but it can also allow sensors to communicate with each other in response to sensed events,
enabling reactive and agile sensing and potentially reducing power requirements. In addition, the communication
subsystem is essential to localization and time synchronization, as discussed in Section 4.1.
Inthissection,wesurveyexistingcommunicationequipmentsuitablefordistributedinstruments,rangingfromNASA-
developed transponders and radios, to commercial radios for SmallSats, to COTS radios for Earth applications.
4.2.1. A typical communications architecture from planetary surfaces to Earth
Figure 13 shows a typical communication architecture for communications from a surface asset to Earth, mediated
by an orbiter. The surface asset is equipped with a UHF L-band radio and an omnidirectional antenna; an orbiter
communicateswiththesurfaceassetthroughadirectionalantenna,andrelaysdatatoandfromEarthwithahigh-gain
X-bandorK-bandtransceiver. L-bandistypicallyusedforsurface-to-orbitcommunicationsbecauseitoffersfavorable
22Table 2. Comparison of localization solutions
Solution family
COTS RF-based ranging 5 m - 3 ms 175x77x34 mm 400 g 5 W No -
Ad hoc RF-based ranging ∼ 1 nm - - - - - Yes 9
Doppler-based localization 50 m 50 m 3 s - - - Yes 9
Image-based localization - 40 m 10 s 6U chassis ∼ 10 kg ∼ 100 W Yes 8
References—ENSCO (2019); Klipstein et al. (2013); Cheung et al. (2019); ARGOS (2016); Johnson &
Golombek (2012); Johnson et al. (2017)
Figure 13. A typical relay communication architecture. Ground-based assets communicate with an orbiter over UHF links.
The orbiter, in turn, communicates to Earth over X-Band. From Horne et al. (1997).
propagation characteristics through planetary atmospheres. The typical distance between the surface asset and the
orbiter is in the order of hundreds of kilometers; however, standoffs of up to sixteen thousand kilometers have been
demonstrated by Galileo’s entry probe on Jupiter, and the Cassini-Huygens probe on Titan.
4.2.2. NASA-developed Transponders
The NASA Jet Propulsion Laboratory has developed a number of high-performance, low-SWaP transponders for deep
space applications,including the Iris X-band transponder flown on the MarCO CubeSats to Mars, the Universal Space
Transponder (UST) family (Pugh et al. 2017), and the UST-Lite transponder (Kobayashi et al. 2023), which offers
multi-band capabilities, high uplink and downlink rates, and very high sensitivity in a 3 kg, 2700 cm3 package.
Table 3 reports a comparison of key performance parameters of NASA-developed deep-space transponders. We refer
the reader to Kobayashi (2018) for a detailed review of NASA-developed transponder technologies for SmallSats.
The SWaP of these radios is optimized for larger surface and orbital assets, and is amenable to further reductions;
however, this has not proved necessary for current and planned NASA missions, where the radio system SWaP has
not been a major bottleneck.
23
ycarucca
evitaleR
ycarucca
etulosbA
ezilacol
ot
emiT
eziS
thgieW
rewoP
defiilauq-ecapS
LRTTable 3. Comparison of JPL Deep-Space Transponders. From Kobayashi (2018).
Radio Specification Units Iris UST-DS UST-Lite
Frequency Bands - X up, X down S/X up, S/X down X/Ka up, X/Ka down
simultaneous dual band simultaneous dual band
Mass kg 1.0 5.4 3.0
Volume cm3 600 7500 2700
Bus Input Voltage Vdc 9 – 28 22 – 36 22 – 36
DC Power W 16 45 30
Processors Xilinx V6 + LEON-3FT Xilinx V5 + SPARC V8 Xilinx V5 + LEON-3FT
Receiver Noise Figure dB 3.5 2.1 2.1
Receiver Sensitivity dBm -151 @ 20 Hz LBW -160 @ 20 Hz LBW -160 @ 20 Hz LBW
Uplink Rate sps 62.5– 8k 7.8125 – 37.5M 7.8125 – 37.5M
Downlink Rate sps 62.5– 6.125M 10 – 300M 10 – 300M
Telemetry Encoding Conv, RS, Turbo Conv, RS, Turbo, LDPC Conv, RS, Turbo, LDPC
Radiation Tolerance (TID) krads 23 50 300
S/C Interface 1 MHz SPI 1553, SpaceWire, RS-422 1553, SpaceWire, RS-422
4.2.3. Commercial SmallSat Radios
A number of low-power radios for SmallSats are available from commercial vendors. As a representative example,
Vulcan Wireless (Vulcan Wireless Inc. 2020) and Rincon Research (Rincon Research 2020) both provide software-
defined radios with a mass of hundreds of grams and a volume of hundreds of cubic centimeters, designed to fit in the
demanding SWaP envelope of CubeSats, with flight heritage in the low-Earth orbit environment. Vulcan Wireless’s
radios have also been selected by NASA for development in support of the Artemis lunar exploration program (NASA
2019).
4.2.4. COTS radios
Commercial off-the-shelf (COTS) radios for automotive-grade applications are attractive for highly miniaturized pur-
poses, offering low power consumption in highly compact packages; however, COTS technologies in this class are
generally optimized for low-range, high-bandwidth applications, requiring significant adaptations to perform well over
the long standoff distances required in spaceflight.
AstandoutsolutioninthisspaceisrepresentedbytheICARUSsystemdevelopedbyMaxPlanckInstituteforanimal
tracking(MaxPlanckInstitute2015). ICARUS(showninFigure14)consistsofa5-gramunitequippedwitharadio,a
GPSpayload, andapowersystem. ThousandsofICARUSunitscommunicatewithanorbiter, whichcanalsoaddress
commandstoindividualradiounits. Todate,aroundfivethousandICARUSunitshavebeendemonstratedinthefield,
supportedbyanorbitingreceiverhostedontheInternationalSpaceStation(MaxPlanckInstitute2024). Deployment
of a SWaP-optimized, 1U receiver as part of a larger 16U CubeSat is planned for 2024 (Max Planck Institute 2023).
Each radio unit on the ground knows its location and the ephemerides of the orbiter, and only turns on when the
orbiter is overhead; thanks to this aggressive power management, ICARUS sensors are able to last for multiple years
in the field with no maintenance. Table 4 shows preliminary performance parameters for the ICARUS system.
4.2.5. Communication Protocols
In typical spaceflight applications, the communication topology is straightforward: surface assets communicate to
an orbiter which, in turn, relays the information to Earth, and vice versa. In contrast, in distributed instruments,
individual sensors may wish to communicate with each other to perform autonomy functions (discussed in Section
4.3), e.g., to trigger follow-on observations in response to an event of interest observed by a single sensing unit. The
flight-proven delay- and disruption-tolerant networking (DTN) communication protocol (Burleigh et al. 2003) can be
used to perform multi-point communications in an environment where individual sensors are unable to directly talk
to each other, and an orbiter is only available sporadically.
24Table 4. Specifications of the ICARUS radio system (Max Planck Institute 2015).
Frequency Band VHF
Encoding CDMA
Range 800 km
Uplink bandwidth 1.5 MHz
Downlink bandwidth 50 kHz
Data rate « 500 bps
TX duration 35 s
TX power (ground) 6 mW
TX power (space) 100 W (unoptimized)
Payload size 200 bytes per pass
Weight 5 g
Figure 14. ICARUS COTS ultra-low-SWaP transponder. Image credit MPI f. Ornithology/ MaxCine
4.3. Adaptive Sampling and Science Autonomy
4.3.1. Science at a distance
Commanding a network of sensors to take coordinated, spatially separate recordings as one instrument will bring new
operations challenges. We will explore two core challenges here.
First, returning the complete record of science data will likely be challenging or infeasible. Missions using distributed
instruments are likely to collect significantly more data compared to monolithic missions, especially for applications
such as seismometry. Additionally, the impending increase in crewed exploration to the Moon and Mars will further
ration DSN availability (Deutsch et al. 2016). If a distributed instrument generates data faster than it can transmit –
a likely scenario given these considerations – there must exist a way to intelligently distill that information to remain
within bandwith limits.
Second, radio signals take on the order of minutes to hours to cross the interplanetary distances between Earth and
planetary surfaces of interest, which imposes a serious hurdle if ground teams need to react quickly to time-varying
phenomena. An Earth-in-the-loop communication cycle requires time to downlink information, analyze the data from
the many sensor nodes, and uplink commands in response. Thus, if there is an event short enough to encroach upon
this time window, the distributed instrument must react on its own, or risk missing scientifically valuable data.
4.3.2. Opportunities for science autonomy
On-board science autonomy – software capable of intelligently sampling, selecting, or prioritizing scientific data – is
one tool capable of mitigating both bandwidth limitations and communications delays (Azari et al. 2020; Theiling
et al. 2022) through knowledge compression, data prioritization and reactive observation of events of interest.
4.3.2.1. Knowledgecompression—Knowledgecompressiongoesbeyondclassicdatacompressionalgorithms(e.g.,JPEG
orZIP)byexcisingandsummarizingthemostscientifically valuable representationoftherawdata. On-boardscience
25Downlink
Priority
2
A 5.3
1
B 6.7
Seismograph
Network
3
C 3.2
B
Time
C
A
Save raw data
Quake
Save summary statistics
Hypocenter
Figure 15. Autonomy will facilitate selection and downlink prioritization of scientifically valuable data. Left: Three spatially
separated seismographs record ground motion from quakes, impacts, or other events that produce ground motion. Right: The
raw seismograph data will contain rare, scientifically interesting events (e.g., quakes) against a background of less interesting
data. Autonomy allows each instrument to detect seismic onsets and then select a window of raw data (red) for return to
ground. Data from other times (light gray) can be summarized with simple statistics (e.g., mean and variance). Furthermore,
the quake magnitude (red numbers) can be used to determine downlink priority (far right).
instrumentautonomysoftwareforJPL’sOceanWorldsLifeSurveyor(OWLS;Wronkiewiczetal.(2024);Maucerietal.
(2022)) is one example of a project relying on knowledge compression. Several microscopes aboard the OWLS project
record video of water samples. On-board software identifies life-like particles that appear to swim under their own
power, and summarizes their appearance and movement. By transmitting a spatiotemporal time series (i.e., x, y, and
time points) and a single image crop of life-like particles, the software can compress scientifically valuable information
by over three orders of magnitude compared to the raw videos. Another example is the Content-based On-board
SummarizationtoMonitorInfrequentChange(COSMIC;Doranetal.(2020))project. COSMICisaimedatdetecting
changes in a remote sensing data stream that is being continually acquired, e.g., monitoring for large surface changes
like fresh impacts or seasonal polar cap variations aboard a Martian orbiter (e.g., the Mars Reconnaissance Orbiter).
Rather than downlink all collected data, COSMIC prioritizes the transmission of orbital images containing the most
scientifically interesting surface changes.
On distributed instruments, knowledge compression will represent a valuable capability as operating a network dis-
tributedsensorscancreatesubstantiallymorerawdatathanpreviousmonolithicmissions. Forexample,adistributed
network of Mars seismographs might offer a more holistic view of Mars’s internal dynamics and impact events (shown
inFigure15). However,largeseismicandimpacteventsarerare(Ceylanetal.2022). Scienceautonomycouldidentify
scientifically interesting time intervals (i.e., when a seismic event occurred) and limit data transmission to the raw
recordings around the time of the events. Data outside that range can be summarized and transmitted as simple
statistics (e.g., mean and standard deviation) to save valuable data bandwidth.
4.3.2.2. Data Prioritization—Rank ordering data is a separate technique useful for triaging the most valuable data
to downlink. For scientific targets that are especially far away (e.g., Jupiter, Saturn, or Uranus) or residing in
environments known to quickly destroy hardware (e.g., Venus and the moons of Jupiter), properly ordering data for
transmissioncanreducetheriskthatcrucialsciencedataiscollectedbutnottransmittedtogroundteams. Therefore,
generatingestimatesofscientificutilityforeachparcelofdataisanimportantcapabilityforanautonomousdistributed
instrument. Continuingthepreviousexample,anautonomousdistributedinstrumentcoulddownlinkdatafromseismic
events in an order determined by their magnitude — a simple proxy for scientific utility. Successfully implementing
this type of capability requires that scientists and software engineers collaborate to develop a prioritization algorithm
that makes reasonable and transparent decisions. A generalized software platform is underway at NASA to permit
simultaneous data prioritization for multiple sensors (Doran et al. 2023).
26
edutingaM4.3.2.3. Reactive systems—Some phenomena transpire on timescales incompatible with ground commanding, e.g.,
transient weather events such as dust devils or trace gas plumes. On-board science autonomy could permit near-
instantaneous reactions, making it well-suited to detect and respond to ephemeral events.
The Opportunity rover deployed one such autonomous algorithm to identify dust devils (Castano et al. 2008). The
systemanalyzedtemporalsequencesofimagesandidentifiedlargeblobsofpixelchanges,whichcorrespondedprimarily
todustdevilevents. Opportunitythenprioritizedtheseimagesforreturn. TheCuriosityandPerseveranceroversalso
use an autonomous algorithm called AEGIS (Autonomous Exploration for Gathering Increased Science) to identify
nearby geologic targets for ChemCam sampling (Francis et al. 2017). AEGIS allows the rover to autonomously
select ChemCam targets immediately after a drive, before the ground team has analyzed the rover’s surroundings.
Importantly,theAEGISautonomoussystemisacollaborationbetweenscientistsandautonomyexperts,withthefinal
tuning carried out by mission scientists.
Distributedinstrumentsareparticularlywell-suitedtoreacttotransientphenomenabecauseanyoneindividualsensor
canactasa“sentinel” andtriggerareactionfromthebroadernetwork. Withgasplumes,forexample,ifasensingunit
detects anomalous changes in the atmospheric composition, it can instruct all nodes of the distributed instrument to
increase their sampling rate to capture the gas diffusion pattern in detail. Martian dust storms are another potential
scientific target of distributed instruments. Many of these events are small and short lived while a few grow into
much larger storms, and this transition is poorly understood. If each component of the distributed instrument could
detect deviations in wind speed, atmospheric pressure, or suspended dust, it could instruct other, spatially separate
sensorsinthedistributedinstrumenttostartspendingmoreon-boardresourcesondatacaptureinanticipationofthe
approachingstormfront(Figure16). Theresultinghighresolutionin-situdatawouldbevaluableforinformingfuture
atmospheric studies and models.
4.3.3. Future directions
Science autonomy holds promise to empower scientific discovery by mitigating key limitations related to data band-
width, adaptive sampling, and response times. However, it remains a relatively new technology that requires more
development for some of the aforementioned scenarios. To achieve this vision, three key directions for future research
areofinterest. First,atightcollaborationisneededbetweenthescientistswhowillconsumethedatafromdistributed
instruments and the software team crafting the autonomous system to capture it. The best outcomes will occur when
scientists are involved in the development of this technology as well as its operation during the mission. Creating the
culture and tools to achieve this environment will require more research. Second, it is critical for autonomous systems
to be explainable and transparent, in order to be worthy of the scientists’ trust (Mandrake et al. 2022). Such systems
must convey information on how the system arrives at consequential decisions (e.g., why one data set was returned
before another), and provides context around important data points (e.g., several minutes of background recordings
before and after a large quake). Toward this goal, algorithmic complexity (e.g., black box vs. glass box models) must
be evaluated to identify the appropriate tradeoff between performance and transparency. Finally, the autonomous
system should fail gracefully. It’s infeasible to predict every situation an autonomous distributed instrument might
encounter. Therefore, the system must have built in safety valves to permit manual overrides after undesirable au-
tonomousdecisions. Thesystemshouldalsoincludevalidationcheckstorecognizewhenitisoperatingoutsidenormal
conditions and then refrain from making decisions that could jeopardize the mission’s science return (e.g., detect if
one sensor in an instrument suite is broken, to prevent the squandering of precious bandwidth on its tainted data).
4.4. Sensor Placement
Different science objectives result in different requirements for the spatial distribution of sensors, ranging from global
distribution for, e.g., climate science, to accurate regional placement for, e.g., detection of gas plumes. Realizing the
desireddistributionandplacementofsensorsisasignificanttechnologychallenge. Anumberoftechnologieshavebeen
developed in the last decade to land and place multiple sensors on planetary surfaces, covering a wide range of values
for spatial range, emplacement precision, and cost (Table 5, Figure 17).
Technologies for deploying sensors on planetary surfaces can be broadly classified into three categories: independent
landers, air deployment during descent and landing, and deployment from a single landed asset.
4.4.1. Independent Landers
27Figure 16. Autonomy will allow distributed instruments to increase science return by detecting and reacting to rare events
whilepreservingsystemresources. Topleft: Threespatiallyseparatedweatherstationsregularlycommunicatewitheachother.
Top right: A dust storm approaches and is detected by one station. The event triggers a network response to initiate high
frequencydatacollectionacrossallstations. Bottom: Exampledatacollectionfromallthreeweatherstationsbeforeandduring
a dust storm. By default, the network records wind speed at low rates to conserve energy and data volume. However, once
a rare weather event is detected at Station A, the distributed instrument increases its sampling frequency at all locations to
capture the approaching storm in detail.
Table 5. Key properties and performance parameters for selected sensor assets.
Name Deployment Range Placement Accuracy Placement Forces Payload Size
Microlanders Global ≈80×≈6kmlandingellipse <2000 Earth g’s for ≤8 10kg(6kgforscience)
(SHIELD) msec
Penetrators Global ≈5−10km 15000−20000Earthg’s 19 kg (payload, power,
thermal,comm)
Gliders (Prandtl- ≈30 km, when deployed N/A Impact landing on sur- 605 g (230 g flight sys-
M) at ≈3.6 km altitude dur- face tem, 375 g payload and
ingEDL comm)
TensegrityLander N/A N/A Survive a landing speed 5−10kg
of≈15m/sec
Name Planetary Bodies Design life TRL Unit cost
Microlanders Mars, Venus, Titan 1year 4 <$50million
(SHIELD) (needsatmosphere)
Penetrators Moon, Enceladus, 1-2years 8 $10M
comets, Ceres, Mars
polarcaps
Gliders (Prandtl- Mars, Venus, Titan, N/A(survivesflight) 3 ≈$1M
M) Jupiter,
TensegrityLander Mars, Titan, other rocky N/A 3 N/A
bodies
28Figure 17. Sensor placement assets for sensor deployment on planetary surfaces, with increasing range after deployment.
Sensors can be deployed to the surface by independent landers, either carried by separate spacecraft or released by a
single vehicle upon approach to the body of interest. Independent microlanders like Mars (Staehle et al. 2015)
DROP
andtheSmallHighImpactEnergyLandingDevice(SHIELD)(Barbaetal.2019b),andpenetratorslikeDeepSpace2
(Smrekaretal.1999)arewell-suitedforestablishingaglobalnetworkofsensors, enablingaccesstomostlatitudesand
allowing individual sensors to be independently placed across a planetary surface.
MicrolanderslikeSHIELD(Barbaetal.2019b)andMars (Staehleetal.2015)(Figure18(a))areeachfittedwith
DROP
their own EDL package, and travel independently to their landing site.
Penetrators such as Deep Space 2 [Smrekar et al. (1999), Figure 18(b)] are typically carried by a single “carrier”
spacecraft to the planetary target body. Ballistic penetrators detach from the carrier, plummet towards the surface
without a parachute, and bury deep inside the planetary surface.
4.4.2. Deployment during Entry, Descent and Landing (EDL) or Approach, Descent and Landing (ADL) Phase
In a second family of approaches, a single “carrier” spacecraft protects all sensor assets during the bulk of Entry,
Descent, andLanding(EDL)(or, inthecaseofairlessbodies, Approach, Descent, andLanding, orADL).Thesensors
are then deployed at much lower altitudes and velocities compared to independent landers. This approach can result
in a reduction in the mass and volume allocated to EDL/ADL for individual sensors, increasing the overall science
payload capability. However, the lower deployment altitude makes this approach more suited to regional and local
sensordistributions,wherethemaximumdistancebetweensensorsisontheorderoftensofkilometers(Bandyopadhyay
et al. 2020).
Gliders and tensegrity landers/rovers can further increase the deployment range. For instance, the Prandl-M glider
[Levine(2015),Figure19(a)]isbeingdesignedforaMarspiggy-backmissionattheNASAArmstrongFlightResearch
Center (AFRC); deployed at an altitude of ≈3.6 km, it is designed to achieve a range of ≈30 km thanks to a lift-to-
dragratioof≈8. Tensegritylanders,deployedduringlanding,canactasairbagsubstitutesforthesensorswithinand
also provide mobility once on the surface. Several tensegrity landers have been developed to TRL 4-5, including the
SUPERball v2 robot [Vespignani et al. (2018), Figure 19(b)] and the sphere-like tensegrity landers (Garanger et al.
2020;Rimoli2016). Placementforcesdependonthepayloadandtheconfiguration, butingeneralitwouldexperience
loads much lower (1 or 2 orders of magnitude lower) that in any traditional truss-based enclosure.
Deployment during EDL/ADL is especially promising as as an infusion path for distributed instruments as secondary
payloads. For instance, Martian rover missions typically carry multiple tungsten ballast masses (weighing ≈150 kg),
which are released during EDL to change the center of gravity of the spacecraft. A proposed concept (Jet Propulsion
29Laboratory 2014) suggests replacing some of these ballasts with deployable sensor modules which could be distributed
over a region spanning tens of kilometers (Bandyopadhyay et al. 2020).
4.4.3. Direct Deployment using Rover or Lander
Finally, it is possible to also deploy the sensors directly from a rover or lander. For example, the Mars 2020 mission
carried the IngenuityMars Helicopter, a small rotorcraft that demonstrated the ability for small aerial vehicles to
traverse large distances. Miniaturized sensors (e.g., (Short & Van Buren 2012)) could be deployed by a traditional
rover or by small, light-weight robotic platforms such as PUFFER/CADRE (Karras et al. 2017). The key advantages
ofdirectdeploymentarethehighaccuracyofsensorplacementandthelowdynamicloadduringdeployment;however,
the spatial extent and distribution of the sensor network is limited by the carrier vehicle’s range, which typically
precludes large regional or global distributions.
(a)SHIELDLanderconcept(Barbaetal.2020) (b)Ballisticpenetrator: DeepSpace2(Smrekar
etal.1999)
Figure 18. Independent Microlanders and Ballistic Penetrators
4.5. On-board Computing
Distributedinstrumentsrequireon-boardcomputingcapabilitiestoperformdataacquisitionandanalog-to-digitalcon-
version from sensors, signal processing and filtering, including implementing the data synthesis algorithms described
in Section 4.3, localization, synchronization, power and thermal management, and health monitoring, and communi-
cations with other sensors and with Earth (possibly through multi-hop protocols such as delay-tolerant networking
DTN (Burleigh et al. 2003)).
Computing and radiation tolerance requirements will vary significantly depending on the science goals and planetary
destination. For instance, a seismology application will require more on-board signal processing capabilities compared
toaclimatescienceinstrument;and,forthesamemissionduration,adistributedinstrumentonEuropawillbesubject
to a harsher radiation environment than a mission to the Martian surface, requiring higher radiation tolerance.
Space missions beyond Earth’s magnetosphere have typically relied on radiation-hardened processors such as BAE
systems’ RAD750 family and, more recently, the LEON processor developed by the European Space Agency (ESA).
NASAandtheAirForceResearchLaboratoryarealsoinvestinginthedevelopmentoftheHighPerformanceSpaceflight
Computing (HPSC) chipset (Doyle et al. 2013), a rad-hard multi-core processor designed to support vision-based
applications, model-basedreasoningtechniquesforautonomy, andhigh-ratedataprocessingforfuturespacemissions.
30(a)Artist’sillustrationofPrandtl-MglideratMars. (b)SUPERballv2robotatNASAAmes(Vespignani
(Levine2015) etal.2018)
Figure 19. Gliders and tensegrity landers can be deployed during the final phases of EDL, distributing sensors across regions
tens of kilometers across.
Recently, there has also been a surge in the adoption of COTS computing solutions for deep space applications, as
exemplified by the use of the Qualcomm Snapdragon 801 processor on the Mars Helicopter (Bayard et al. 2019).
However,theseprocessorsandcomputingplatformshavehighpin-counts,highcostand,critically,comparativelyhigh
power consumption in the tens of watts; this motivates interest in lower-power computing platforms for low-SWaP
distributed instruments.
Space-qualified, low-SWaP computing solutions can be classified in two categories: (i) simplified versions of rad-hard
processors such as LEON designed for embedded applications, and (ii) low-power COTS microcontrollers that have
undergone the qualification process for space applications.
The LEON3FT microcontroller (Habinc et al. 2015), a reduced version of the LEON2-FT processor core developed
through funding by ESA, is a good example of the first approach. The critical specifications of the LEON3FT are
listed in Table 6.
A wide range of ultra low-power microcontrollers are available for industrial, automotive and military embedded
applications. Thanks to the recent explosion in the number of commercial, low-Earth orbit satellite constellations,
many of these components are now also available in space-qualified versions that have undergone radiation testing
and provide increased temperature range, reliability and radiation tolerance. The radiation-hardened version of Texas
Instrument’sTI-MSP430microprocessorprovidesarepresentativeexample. TheMSP430consumes100µA/MHzand
carries 64 kB of non-volatile ferroelectric RAM (FRAM), which offers higher radiation tolerance compared to SRAM.
The specifications of some of these radiation tolerant processors and microcontrollers are listed in Table 6. Note that
all these microcontrollers can be under-clocked to reduce their power consumption, increasing their adaptability for a
wider range of applications.
Another alternative is to use commercially available, radiation-tolerant field programmable gate arrays (FPGAs).
WhileFPGAstypicallyhavehigherpowerconsumptioncomparedtomicroprocessors,theycanbeeasilyoptimizedfor
the specific data processing needed for a given science application. Xilinx provides rad-hard FPGA solutions that can
tolerate300kradofTIDandhavesingleeventlatch-upthresholdof100MeV.cm2/mg. Theirproductsarespecifically
advertised for interplanetary and deep-space applications.
4.6. Power for Distributed Sensors
31Table 6. Comparing the specifications and radiation tolerance of various COTS computing solutions.
Name
LEON3FT ESA, Gaisler 50 100 118 192 kB EDAC-protected, 300 mW @25 MHz N/A
16 MB ROM, (FPGA-
256 MB SRAM dependent)
MSP430FR5969-SP Texas Instruments 16 50 85 64 kB FRAM 330 µ W/MHz active -55 – 105
SAMV71Q21RT Microchip 300 30 60 2 MB Flash, 15 mW @ 12 MHz, -55 – 125
384 kB SRAM 300 mW @ 300 MHz
ATmegaS128 Microchip 8 30 62.5 128kB Flash, 4kB SRAM 20 mW @ 10 MHz -55 – 125
Figure 20. (A) MESUR concept, (B) MASER concept, (C) DS-2 Mars Microprobe, and (D) Mars concept.
DROP
Individual sensor nodes within a distributed instrument will require a power source capable of operating on the plan-
etary surface of interest. The required power levels will vary depending on the choice of processor, radio, instruments,
and required heating and duty cycle of the electronics. Choice of a specific power source will depend on mission
duration, distance from the Sun, expected temperature levels, radiation levels, and requirements related to impact
resistance. Several small Mars missions or concepts have been developed over the years, which can serve as reference
32
rerutcafunaM
)zHM(
ycneuqerF
kcolC
mumixaM
)dark(
esoD
gnizinoI
latoT
)gm/2mc.VeM(
dlohserht
UES
yromeM
rewoP
)C◦(
egnaR
erutarepmeT
gnitarepOmissionstohighlightdifferentpowersourceapproachesfordistributedsensornetworks(Fig. 20). TheMESURconcept
(Hubbard et al. 1991) proposed use of a small radioisotope thermoelectric generator (RTG); The DS-2 microprobes
(Smrekar et al. 1999) were powered by low-temperature-capable primary batteries only; the Meteorology and Seismol-
ogy Enabled by Radioisotopes (MASER) concept (Lorenz et al. 2014) was baselined using a small RTG, employing
a radioisotope heating unit (RHU) heat source along with supercapacitors to support peak power requirements; and
the Mars concept (Staehle et al. 2015) proposed the use of small solar arrays, in combination with lithium-ion
DROP
batteries for energy storage. A detailed summary of options is provided in the sections below.
4.6.1. Primary Batteries
Primary batteries are capable of providing electrical power to various loads, without the ability to recharge. Since
they are not rechargeable, a wider range of electrode materials can be chosen relative to state-of-the-art secondary
technologies, such as lithium-ion chemistries. All sensors can, in principle, be powered by high specific energy, non-
rechargeable primary batteries, with the mission duration dictated by the specific energy of the batteries, the mass
allocated for these batteries, and the average power of the loads. They are typically considered for missions lasting
days to weeks, although longer missions with extended low power/quiescent periods could be considered, particularly
with the availability of new high specific energy chemistries. Recent capacity vs. voltage data are shown for a range
of battery types and chemistries, in Fig. 21 (Krause et al. 2018).
Figure 21. Representative primary batteries at 0◦ C. From Krause et al. (2018).
ThehighspecificenergyLi/CF chemistryinaD-cellformatseeninFig. 21isauniquedesignwithnoflightheritage.
x
Thiscell,whichwasdevelopedbytheEuropaLanderPre-ProjectHandetal.(2022)offersaveryhighcell-levelspecific
33energy (>700 Wh/kg), and is ideal for low rate applications. D-sized cells now have a capacity approaching 20 Ah
and a mass of ≈ 70 g each, and provide 2.6 V continuously under load. These cells typically deliver approximately
50 Wh of total energy each. Therefore, two cells in series can provide 1 W average electrical power at 5 V for ≈ 100
hours. In addition, these cells can produce a nearly constant amount of thermal energy during discharge, depending
on the discharge rate, meaning ≈ 1 W is available for thermal management. One concern is the voltage delay, or
th
dropinvoltage,whichispresentatstart-up,inparticular,whenoperatingatlowtemperatures. However,withproper
thermal design, the heat generated during discharge can be retained in the battery pack to keep the cells sufficiently
warm. In fact, heat generation is such an issue that terrestrial packs typically use a modified form, Li/CF -MnO ,
x 2
to reduce the amount of heat generation. Alternatively, if inherently low temperature operation (−40◦ C and below)
is required and higher rate capabilities needed (>1 A), a liquid cathode chemistry such as Li/SO or Li/ SOCl can
2 2
be used (Bugga & Brandon 2020). These cell types have significant flight heritage. In fact, a modified version of the
Li/SOCl chemistry was developed for the DS-2 mission, for very low temperature operations. For high temperature
2
Venus probes, batteries capable of operating at Venus surface temperatures (+465◦C) are being developed under the
NASA HOTTech program (Bugga et al. 2020).
4.6.2. Solar Cells
SeveralsolarcelloptionsexistforsurfacemissionsontheMoonandonMars. Althoughsolarcellscanbeusedinlarger
orbiters and fly-by missions to Jupiter and even to the Ice Giants, use of solar cells for power generation in landers
(and in particular in distributed instruments comprised of small sensors) is practically limited to the surface of Mars
duetothemuchlowersolarfluxatJupiterdistances(≤50W/m2 dependingonlatitudeandseasonvs. 1366W/m2 at
Earth) and beyond. Spacecraft solar arrays are typically very large at these distance, in order to produce appreciable
power levels. They would not be practical, for example, for small distributed sensors on planetary surfaces/moons
such as Europa, Enceladus or Titan (with the latter’s atmospheric opacity introducing a further challenge to use
of solar cells). State-of-the-art cells are represented by those on the Mars Helicopter, using inverted metamorphic
multi-junction (IMM) type cells with an efficiency approaching 35% (beginning-of-life, 28◦C and under the standard
spectrum outside the Earth’s atmosphere or Air Mass 0 [AM0] conditions) (Sharps et al. 2017). Accumulation of
dust degrades power output in the Mars environment. Due to the extreme temperatures and need for robust thermal
management, application in lunar environments for small, long-duration probes is unlikely.
4.6.3. Radioisotope Power Sources
As seen with the proposed MESUR and MASER probes on Mars, small RTGs can be considered for use as both a
heat and electrical power source. The RTG uses an arrangement of power-generating thermocouples, which generate
a voltage across the temperature difference between the couple and space. The heat is provided by small amount of
radioisotope “fuel” (typically Pu-238, although alternative fuels such as Sr-90 are under consideration). To fit in such
small spaces, a fractional General Purpose Heat Source (GPHS) can be used, which produces ≈ 250 W of thermal
energy from the decay of Pu-238 at the time of manufacture. Alternatively, the standard 1 W RHU can be used to
th
generate mWs of power. These concepts are depicted in Fig. 22 (Schmidt et al. 2005).
AwiderangeofmissionscouldbeenabledbythesesmallRTGsystems. AsummaryofpaststudiesisgiveninFig. 23,
below. RTGs in the <50 mW to 25 W range can be envisioned, using an RHU heat source (27-500 mW), a fractional
GPHS (3-9 W) or a full GPHS (12.5-25 W). Another potential technology for consideration are beta-voltaic devices,
which use a p-n junction to generate a voltage when exposed to a beta-emitter such as tritium (Revankar & Adams
2014); however, to date, these devices have only demonstrated <µW power levels.
4.6.4. Energy Storage
To support peak power requirements, or to provide power during nighttime for solar-powered missions, some form
of energy storage is needed. Typical space-rated options include lithium-ion batteries and supercapacitors (Bugga &
Brandon 2020). Small cylindrical lithium-ion cells suitable for use in small probes and manufactured by companies
such as Sony, Panasonic and LG Chem have been used for the last 20 years in space, going back to the first use in the
PROBA small satellite mission (European Space Agency). These cells typically require no cell balancing electronics,
and offer 3.5 Ah of capacity at up to 4.1 V. Cells are typically rated for use to about -20◦C, although cells customized
with low temperature electrolytes can operate to -40◦C or below. Supercapacitors rely on energy storage at the
electrochemical double-layer between an electrolyte and a high surface area carbon material. These devices are also
34Figure 22. Range of radioisotope thermoelectric generators, producing power from about 40 mW to >100 W. From Schmidt
et al. (2005).
known as electrical double-layer capacitors (or EDLCs). The advantages of this technology include very high specific
power (>10 kW/kg), very long cycle life (106 cycles) and very wide temperature operation (typically rated between
-40 and 60◦C). The high specific power results from the very low internal resistance of these devices. Testing of
actual devices at JPL has indicated EDLCs can operate to -50◦C, and prototype devices with modified electrolytes
have been constructed and tested for operation down to -80◦C. The major disadvantage is the low specific energy
(5 Wh/kg) relative to traditional battery technologies. They are ideal when short bursts of energy are needed, for
example, in communications. A very low power draw sensor with periodic high pulse conditions would be an ideal
use case for pairing a supercapacitor with a long-life source such as a small RTG. This configuration could support
operations to very low temperatures with reduced thermal management requirements, and would feature a very long
life (with no concerns over life-limiting mechanisms associated with lithium plating in lithium-ion batteries charged
at low temperatures). For applications where greater energy is required, hybrid battery/supercapacitor modules may
still be advantageous (Bugga & Brandon 2020). This allows the battery to provide a constant source of energy, with
the supercapacitor providing pulse power. This allows the battery to be sized smaller, with the battery being buffered
from any high current pulses (thus extending life time of the energy storage element).
4.6.5. System Considerations
Apart from a limited subset of missions to the Martian surface, future deep space sensor networks are likely to require
some type of primary battery power source, or, alternatively, a radioisotope-based power source producing power in
the <1 to 10 W range. The MASER mission concept study offers a scoping of requirements for a power system for
a small distributed sensor node. The instrument package for this Mars probe featured pressure/temperature sensors
(2.6 mW) generating 10 bps of data and a seismometer (65 mW) generating 30 bps. These values included margin,
and assumed that the sensors would be continuously on. In addition, an optical monitor (26 mW) generating 1.6 bps
data and a wind sensor (325 mW) generating 24 bps were included, both operating at an approximate duty cycle of
8%. The telecommunication capability required by the data generated was assumed to be about 5 Mbit/day. The
transmitterwasassumedtorequire3.3W,atadutycycleof1.4%,withtheelectronicsrequiring65mWofcontinuous
electrical power. This resulted in a power draw of approximately 200 mW continuous, and an energy requirement of
about 4 Wh/day.
35Figure 23. Missions concepts enabled by small RTG power sources. From Schmidt et al. (2005).
36The power bus was assumed to operate at 5 V. The design assumed the use of six 40 mW RHU RTGs, generating a
e
total of 240 mW . The balance of 1 W thermal from each RHU could be used for thermal management (along with
e
use of aerogel insulation assumed at 0.016 W/m.K). To provide the peak power needed for data transmission, four 2.7
V, 650 F supercapacitor cells were included, with two in series to support the 5 V bus and two more in parallel to
increase capacity of the energy storage element. A generalized block diagram for a small power source is depicted in
Fig. 24, along with a summary of power source options (Table 7).
Figure 24. Simplified distributed sensor network power system block diagram.
Table 7. Summary of Representative Power Source Technologies for Distributed Sensor Systems
Power Source Technology Specifications Performance Comments
PrimaryBattery Li/SO2 (Saft) D-cell, 85 g, T=-60 to 7.5 Ah, 3.0 V, ≈ 300 Lowtemperatureperfor-
85◦C Wh/kg mance;flightqualified
PrimaryBattery Li/CFx (EaglePicher) D-cell, 70 g, T=0 to 20 Ah, 2.6 V, ≈ 700 Generates ≈ 1 W ther-
100◦C Wh/kg mal power for every 1
We; (developed for the
Europa Lander concept
mission)
SolarArray ZTJ 3rd Generation Coverglass Intercon- 29.5% efficiency (max- Used for InSight,
Triple-Junction Solar nected Cell available for imum power point), M2020,MarsHelicopter
Cell and IMM LILT integration onto solar Voc=2.726 V, Jsc=17.4
SolarCell(SolAero) panels mA/cm2 (AM0), 84
mg/cm2 cellmass,(35%
forIMM)
SmallRTG RHU-RTG(Hi-Z) Bi-Te thermocouples 35mWat5Vperunit Uses 1.1 W radioiso-
th
withRHUheatsource topeheaterunit
Beta-voltaic Tritium Hydride Thin T=-50to150◦C Voc=0.77V,Isc=500nA Currentproductline
FilmDevice(CityLabs)
4.7. Thermal Control
The thermal design of a distributed instrument depends heavily on the target body. Ambient temperatures and the
presence or absence of an atmosphere have a major impact on the solutions that need to be implemented at each
sensornode. Broadlyspeaking,twoclassesofthermalmitigationstrategiescanbeadopted,namely,passiveandactive
strategies.
4.7.1. Passive Solutions
Passive solutions involve the use of:
1. Thermal coatings to change the emissivity of the radiative surfaces;
2. Manufacturing materials chosen smartly, keeping in mind their thermal properties;
3. Multi-layer insulation (MLI) blankets for thermal isolation. In the presence of an atmosphere, the layers can be
thermally shorted; in this case, hydrogel-based solutions can be used for thermal isolation;
4. Heat straps for effective transfer of heat across components.
37Other solutions such as heat pipes don’t tend to work very well in the presence of gravity, and are less relevant at the
length scales typical of miniaturized sensor packages. Batteries tend to be the most thermally sensitive sub-system in
many applications; hence, the goal is often to locate the battery so as to maximize the transfer of heat generated by
the electronics to the battery module. Additional thermal constraints could be imposed by the specific sensors and
their operational temperature range.
4.7.2. Active Solutions
As far as active solutions are concerned, heating pads and coils can be employed in the design of the system. This
essentially turns the thermal problem into a power problem: the question of how long the temperature of the system
can be kept within the desired range becomes a question about how much electrical power is available. One solution
for a resource-constrained system is to have short bursts of activity when the module is brought up to its operating
temperature, and then put into a cold sleep mode for the remaining period to save energy resources.
RHUsthatcontainasmallamountofPu-238asasourceofheathavebeenusedonspacemissionsinthepast;however,
these tend to be expensive and are challenging in terms of planetary protection, safety concerns and other procedural
burdens that they impose on the system.
Tosummarize,thechallengesassociatedwiththethermalmanagementondistributedinstrumentscanbesolvedusing
a combination of existing mature techniques and by designing a smart, resource-aware concept of operations. The
thermal management solutions devised for the Mars Helicopter (Cappucci et al. 2018) serve as a good example of how
thermal control can be achieved on miniaturized systems in a small form factor.
4.8. Fit with Science Concepts and Technology Gaps
We are now in a position to assess whether state-of-the-art technologies are sufficiently mature to support the science
concepts in Section 3, and identify technology gaps.
4.8.0.1. Localization and Synchronization—The high-priority science concepts discussed in Section 3 only require com-
paratively modest localization requirements, which can be readily fulfilled with state-of-the-art orbital localization
techniques. Seismology requires accurate clock synchronization, but a combination of RF synchronization (aided by
an orbiter) and high-precision on-board clocks (e.g., a chip-scale atomic clock) hold promise to provide extremely
accurate synchronization. For other concepts, low-power, on-board oscillators and occasional synchronization with an
orbiter are likely to deliver sufficient synchronization accuracy.
4.8.0.2. Communications—Distributed instruments for global climate investigations, trace gas detection, and mag-
netometry will generate modest data volumes. In contrast, data rates for seismology distributed instruments are
extremely high, and likely to be higher than what can be relayed to Earth from planetary surfaces beyond the Moon
with existing communication technology; for instance, InSight was unable to downlink all the data collected by even a
single seismometer from Mars. On-board data summarization techniques can partially address this problem by com-
pressing data to only capture relevant events, and are therefore highly attractive for seismic distributed instruments.
The regional and global scale of the proposed distributed instruments makes direct sensor-to-sensor communication
highly challenging; therefore, any sensor-to-sensor communication is likely to have to be mediated by an orbiter, or
relayedthroughEarth. Forlandedassets, asmallSWaPisdesirableforEDLreasons. Forthisreason, anorbiterisan
especially attractive solution to relay data to Earth, since the use of an orbiter relay removes the need for a high-gain
antenna on individual landed assets.
The science concepts discussed in Section 3 do not require extreme hardware miniaturization: the number of required
sensing units is four to sixteen, and the SWaP of the proposed sensors, alone, is in the range of tens of grams to
a few kilograms. Accordingly, communication transponders and low-gain antennas developed both at NASA and in
the private sector, which offer state-of-the-art capabilities in a 1/4U to 1U package, are likely to be adequate for
surface-to-orbitercommunications. Forwhatconcernscommunicationprotocols,DTNisaproventechnologythatcan
provide multi-hop communication over time-varying RF links, supporting data relay and instrument autonomy.
4.8.0.3. Data Synthesis, Spatial Estimation, and Adaptive Sampling—On-board instrument autonomy is critical for data
reductioninseismologyapplications,wheresensingnodeswillproducedatavolumesthatarelikelytoexceedavailable
bandwidth to Earth. In addition, on-board autonomy could allow distributed instruments for atmospheric science
38and trace gas detection to implement reactive science paradigm where the DI is quiescent until an event of interest is
observedbyasensornode,resultinginsignificantlyreducedpowerusage. Whilealgorithmsforknowledgecompression,
data prioritization, and reactive science exist, further maturation is required before these can be incorporated in
distributed instruments.
4.8.0.4. EDLandSensorPlacement—Technologiesfordeliveryandplacementofsensingunitsarehighlysensitivetothe
destination body. This contrasts with other technology areas such as localization, synchronization, communications,
computing, and autonomy, which are less sensitive to the target planetary surface.
The high-priority science concepts under consideration all require regional-to-global coverage; accordingly, EDL and
sensor placement solutions based on independent landers appear most suitable, whereas deployment during EDL and
direct deployment from vehicles are less applicable (with the possible exception of trace gas detection). The selection
of a specific lander asset is unique to the sensor suite and planetary surface of interest; our analysis suggests that
microlanders and penetrators hold promise to satisfy the requirements of distributed instrument under consideration,
while offering higher technology maturity compared to gliders and tensegrity structures. None of the science concepts
under consideration strictly requires local mobility after landing to achieve their primary science goals.
While a number of technologies to deliver multiple small payloads on planetary surfaces are under development,
all existing approaches except for penetrators (which impose steep mechanical constraints on instruments) are at
comparatively low TRL. Accordingly, additional technology development focused on specific bodies of interest is
required before distributed instruments can be realized; efforts such as SHIELD (Barba et al. 2019b) are well-aligned
with this goal.
4.8.0.5. On-board Computing—For atmospheric science, trace gas detection, and magnetometry, the need for on-board
computing is comparatively limited: a straightforward mission concept might simply task the distributed instrument
with collecting and forwarding readings. Accordingly, existing COTS rad-hard, low-power computing units are likely
adequate. Forapplicationsrequiringon-boardautonomy, e.g.,seismology,existingcomputingsolutionssuchasLEON
are also highly likely to be adequate, at the price of increased power demand.
4.8.0.6. Power for Distributed Instruments—A limited subset of concepts requiring regional deployment on the Moon or
Marsatlowlatitudes(e.g.,aregionaltracegasdistributedinstrumentonMars,oraseismicnetworkontheMoon)may
beabletousesolarpanelsandrechargeablesecondarybatteriesforlong-termoperations. Incontrast,mostdistributed
instruments for planetary surface science will require some type of primary battery power source or, alternatively, one
using a radioisotope-based power source producing power in the <1 to 10 W range. Even in favorable environments
suchastheMartiansurface,RTGsourcesorlargeprimarybatterieswillbecriticaltoenablesurvivalathighlatitudes,
which is necessary where the underlying science question requires global data collection. High specific energy primary
battery cells based on the Li/CFx chemistry and in a D-sized cell format with a specific energy >700 Wh/kg have
beendevelopedaspartoftheEuropaLanderconceptdevelopmentproject. SmallRTGpowersourcesareunderactive
development, but significant additional investment is required to bring them to maturity.
4.8.0.7. Thermal Control—Thermal control for small landed packages is a relatively well-understood problem: the
thermal management solutions devised for the Mars Helicopter (Cappucci et al. 2018) can serve as a good reference
forhowthermalcontrolcanbeachievedonminiaturizedsystems. However,thermalcontrolislikelytobeakeydriver
of power and energy requirements, further emphasizing the need for technology advances in that area.
Insummary,additionalresearchanddevelopmentin(i)EDLandsensorplacementsolutions,(ii)instrumentautonomy
(in particular for seismology applications), and (iii) power solutions are required to bring distributed instruments to
reality, whereas all other technology areas are comparatively mature.
Figure 25 summarizes these conclusions, classifying the suitability of state-of-the-art technologies to support each of
the science concepts presented in Section 3.
5. CONCLUDING REMARKS AND RECOMMENDATIONS
The goal of this paper is to assess the science promise and technology feasibility of distributed instruments, and,
specifically, to (i) survey high-priority scientific questions that can be uniquely addressed by distributed instruments
39n
o
ositi
p
m
o
nalC ather
Technology
Magnet
Glo om be alt Sr eiy C slf
io mmr
ola
TI
t o
rn
e g
at cye
a
er nd GasWe Detection
Localization
Synchronization
Communications
Instrument Autonomy
EDL and Sensor Placement
Computation and Storage
Power
Thermal
: the technology is sufficiently mature for infusion in flight missions (7–9 TRL)
: the technology is currently under development, but quite mature (5–6 TRL)
: the technology is currently under development, but not very mature (3–4 TRL)
Figure 25. Maturity of enabling technologies for each of the science concepts presented in Section 3.
with existing or tipping-point technologies; and, (ii) identify and survey technologies that should be further developed
to ensure the technology feasibility and to maximize the scientific returns of promising distributed instruments;
We are now in a position to report our findings.
5.1. High-Priority Science Questions
Distributedinstrumentsareuniquelywellpositionedtoaddressanumberofhighpriorityscientificquestions.
Our survey unequivocally shows that distributed instruments hold unique promise to address high-priority questions
that cannot be addressed with either remote sensing from orbiters, or point measurements from individual landers or
rovers.
We identified four broad scientific areas that can only be investigated through geographically distributed, spatially
and temporally correlated measurements — i.e., the type of measurements that can only be provided by a distributed
instrument, and which are clearly identified as high priority in Decadal Surveys, and could feasibly be addressed with
existing and tipping-point technologies:
• global climate and weather on Mars;
• localization of seismic events on rocky and icy bodies;
• magnetometry for internal composition across the Solar System; and
• trace gas detection, with a focus on Mars.
For each of these topics, we identified its scientific importance according to the most recent Decadal Survey, drafted
a high-level distributed instrument architecture, identified critical technological challenges that should be addressed,
and laid out a preliminary strategy for overcoming these challenges.
Weremarkthat,inoursearch,wefocusedexclusivelyonthescientificneed fordistributedinstruments,i.e.,onquestions
that require geographically distributed, spatially and temporally correlated observations. Distributed instruments
could also offer additional engineering benefits (e.g., faster coverage, lower cost, or higher resilience) compared to
40monolithic instrument for other science questions. The investigation of such engineering benefits is beyond the scope
of this paper, and is an interesting direction for future research.
5.2. Enabling Technologies
The majority of required technologies are mature and ready for incorporation in a distributed instrument
architecture. However, additional focused research and development are needed.
We surveyed the state-of-the-art in enabling technologies for distributed instruments, namely, EDL and sensor place-
ment, localization and synchronization, communications, on-board computation and storage, instrument autonomy,
power, and thermal control. For each of these technologies, we compared the state-of-the-art with the likely require-
ments of a distributed instrument architecture for each of the science topics identified above (Figure 25).
Remarkably, the majority of required technologies are quite mature and ready for incorporation in a distributed
instrument architecture. However, further research and development is required in three key areas:
• EDL and sensor placement techniques that can ensure global access to planetary surfaces, tailored to
specific Solar System bodies of interest;
• Compactandlong-lastingpowersolutionsforsensingunits,especiallyforhighlatitudesandforexploration
of bodies in the outer Solar System;
• Science autonomy, especially data compression for distributed seismology and active sampling techniques to
curtail power requirements for all classes of distributed instruments.
5.3. Next Steps
Distributed instruments are uniquely well-positioned to address a number of high priority scientific questions, and key
technologiesareeithermatureorwellontheirwaytofeasibility. Tofullyrealizethepromiseofdistributedinstruments,
we envision that additional research and development work will need to focus in two areas.
First,continuedresearchanddevelopmentinEDLandsensorplacement,compactandlong-livedpowersolutions,and
instrument autonomy will be critical to fill technology gaps in these areas and bring them to a technology readiness
level sufficient for inclusion in future mission proposals.
Second, while this paper provided a high-level exploration of the technology challenges inherent in distributed instru-
ments, detailed architecture studies need to be conducted to identify scientific requirements and resolve system-level
trades for future distributed instruments. For each of the science questions identified in Section 3, systems-level stud-
ies will have to quantitatively define the number of sensors carried by a specific distributed instrument, their desired
placement on the surface of the target body, the required measurement frequency and overall duration of the mission,
and the sensitivity of individual sensors, in order to inform the selection of relevant flight opportunities and drive
follow-on technology development.
We envision that, together, these areas will bring the promise of distributed instruments closer to reality, and bring
the planetary science community closer to unlocking key questions in planetary science.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This research was carried out at the Jet Propulsion Laboratory, California Institute of Technology, under a contract
with the National Aeronautics and Space Administration (80NM0018D0004).
The work was sponsored by a grant furnished by JPL’s Office of Strategic Planning. The authors would like to thank
Dr. Leon Alkalai and Dr. Adrian Stoica for their support of this work.
The authors would also like to thank Adrian Agogino, Greg Allen, Nathan Barba, Dave Berger, Bruce Bills, John
Bodylski, Albion Bowers, Samuel Case Bradford, Kar-Ming Cheung, Steve Chien, Keith Chin, Lance Christensen,
Christine Gebara, Louis Giersch, Kris Gorski, Laura Kerber, Stefano Morellina, Hiro Ono, Mark Panning, Ryan
Pavlick, Julian Rimoli, Bill Smythe, Steve Vance, Massimo Vespignani, William Walsh, and Wayne Zimmerman for
the invaluable feedback and for lending their scientific and technical expertise to this study.
41We are grateful to David Hinkle from the JPL Studio for the wonderful concept art.
Finally, we would like to thank the A-Team core team: Melle Amade, Mark Chodas, Benji Donitz, Karla Hawkinson,
Valerie Scott, Rashmi Shah, Austin Tran, and Randii Wessen, for organizing and running an exceptional A-Team
study.
©2024 California Institute of Technology. Government sponsorship acknowledged.
Pre-decisional information – for planning and discussion purposes only.
REFERENCES
Acuna, M., Connerney, J., Ness, N., et al. 1999, Science, Beauchamp, P., Cwik, T., Eigenbrode, J., et al. 2018, 2018
284, 790 Workshop on Autonomy for Future NASA Science
ARGOS. 2016, Argos User’s Manual. Missions: DRM Team Summary Reports, Tech. rep.,
https://www.argos-system.org/manual/ Nasa Science Mission Directorate.
Azari, A. R., Biersteker, J. B., Dewey, R. M., et al. 2020, https://science.nasa.gov/technology/2018-autonomy-
Integrating Machine Learning for Planetary Science: workshop/output-results
Perspectives for the Next Decade, Tech. rep., White Brain, D., Lillis, R., Ma, Y., & Ramstad, R. 2020, The
Paper submitted to the Planetary Science and Influence of Planetary Magnetic Fields on Atmospheric
Astrobiology Decadal Survey 2023-2032. Retention and Habitability, Tech. rep., White Paper
https://arxiv.org/abs/2007.15129 submitted to the Planetary Science and Astrobiology
Bandyopadhyay, S., de la Croix, J.-P., Nesnas, I., et al. Decadal Survey 2023-2032
2020, in International Astronautical Congress,
Buehler, M., Chin, K., Seshadri, S., et al. 2007, in 2007
Washington D.C., USA
IEEE Aerospace Conference, IEEE, 1–19
Banerdt, W. B., Smrekar, S. E., Banfield, D., et al. 2020,
Bugga, R., Jones, J., Pauken, M., et al. 2020, in Proc. 51st
Nature Geoscience, 13, 183,
Lunar and Planetary Science Conference, Houston, TX
doi: 10.1038/s41561-020-0544-y
Bugga, R. V., & Brandon, E. J. 2020, The Electrochemical
Banfield, D., Schindel, D. W., Tarr, S., & Dissly, R. W.
Society Interface, 29, 59
2016, The Journal of the Acoustical Society of America,
Burch, J., Moore, T., Torbert, R., & Giles, B. 2016, Space
140, 1420
Science Reviews, 199, 5
Banfield, D., Rodriguez-Manfredi, J., Russell, C., et al.
Burleigh, S., Hooke, A., Torgerson, L., et al. 2003, IEEE
2019, Space Science Reviews, 215, 1
Communications Magazine, 41, 128
Banfield, D., Stern, J., Davila, A., et al. 2020, Summary of
Cappucci, S., Pauken, M. T., Moulton, J. A., & Hengeveld,
the Mars Science Goals, Objectives, Investigations, and
D. W. 2018, in Thermal & Fluids Analysis Workshop
Priorities, Tech. rep., MEPAG
(TFAWS), Galveston, TX
Barba, N., Diniega, S., Stamenković, V., & Edwards, C.
Castano, A., Fukunaga, A., Biesiadecki, J., et al. 2008,
2019a, Mission Concept Engineering Assessments to
Mach. Vis. Appl., 19, 467,
support ICE-SAG, Tech. rep., MEPAG
doi: 10.1007/s00138-007-0081-3
Barba, N., Giersch, L., Stamenković, V., et al. 2019b, in
Ceylan, S., Clinton, J. F., Giardini, D., et al. 2022, Physics
American Geophysical Union, Fall Meeting
of the Earth and Planetary Interiors, 333, 106943,
Barba, N., Komarek, T., Stamenkovi’c, V., et al. 2020, LPI,
2874
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.pepi.2022.106943
Chen, Q., Schissel, C., Kimura, Y., et al. 2023,
Bayard, D. S., Conway, D. T., Brockers, R., et al. 2019, in
Environmental Science & Technology, 57, 1788,
AIAA Scitech 2019 Forum (American Institute of
Aeronautics and Astronautics Inc, AIAA), doi: 10.1021/acs.est.2c06990
doi: 10.2514/6.2019-1411 Cheung, K., Lee, C., Jun, W., & Lightsey, G. 2019, in 2019
Beaty, D. W., Carr, M., Abell, P., et al. 2012, Analysis of IEEE Aerospace Conference,
Strategic Knowledge Gaps Associated with Potential doi: 10.1109/AERO.2019.8742181
Human Missions to the Martian System: Final report of Chien, S., Mclaren, D., Doubleday, J., et al. 2019, Journal
the Precursor Strategy Analysis Group (P-SAG), Tech. of Aerospace Information Systems (JAIS), 16, 107,
rep., MEPAG doi: 10.2514/1.I010672
42Chien, S., Cichy, B., Davies, A., et al. 2005, IEEE Given, D. D., Allen, R. M., Baltay, A. S., et al. 2018,
Intelligent Systems, 20, 16 RevisedtechnicalimplementationplanfortheShakeAlert
Chien, S., Doubleday, J., Mclaren, D., et al. 2011, in system-An earthquake early warning system for the West
InternationalGeoscienceandRemoteSensingSymposium Coast of the United States, Tech. Rep. 2018-1155, US
(IGRSS 2011), Vancouver, BC. https://ai.jpl.nasa.gov/
Geological Survey, doi: 10.3133/ofr20181155
Gómez-Elvira, J., Armiens, C., Castañer, L., et al. 2012,
public/papers/chien-igarss2011-spacebased.pdf
Space science reviews, 170, 583
Clancy, R., Grossman, A., Wolff, M., et al. 1996, Icarus,
Haberle, R., Gómez-Elvira, J., de la Torre Juárez, M., et al.
122, 36
2014, Journal of Geophysical Research: Planets, 119, 440
Davis, E., Dunn, C., Stanton, R., & Thomas, J. 1999, in
Habinc, S., Johansson, F., Sturesson, F., et al. 2015,
1999 International Astronautical Congress
ESASP, 732, 8
Delin, K. A., & Jackson, S. P. 2000, in 2000 IEEE
Hand, K. P., Phillips, C. B., Murray, A., et al. 2022, The
Aerospace Conference. Proceedings (Cat. No.
Planetary Science Journal, 3, 22,
00TH8484), Vol. 7, IEEE, 465–472 doi: 10.3847/PSJ/ac4493
Deutsch, L. J., Townes, S. A., Liebrecht, P. E., Vrotsos, Horne, W. D., Hastrup, R., & Cesarone, R. 1997, Space
P. A., & Cornwell, D. M. 2016, in SpaceOps 2016 Technology, 17, 205
Conference (American Institute of Aeronautics and Hubbard, G. S., Wercinski, P. F., Sarver, G. L., Hanel,
Astronautics), doi: 10.2514/6.2016-2373 R. P., & Ramos, R. 1991, in Proc. Workshop on the
Doran, G., Wronkiewicz, M., Lightholder, J., et al. 2023, Martian Surface and Atmosphere Through Time,
SYNOPSIS: Science Yield improvemeNt via Onboard Boulder, CO
Prioritization and Summary of Information System. InSight Marsquake Service. 2023, Mars Seismic Catalogue,
InSight Mission; V13 2023-01-01, ETHZ, IPGP, JPL,
https://github.com/NASA-AMMOS/synopsis/
ICL, Univ. Bristol, doi: 10.12686/a19
Doran, G., Lu, S., Liukis, M., et al. 2020, in 2020 IEEE
Jet Propulsion Laboratory. 2014, NASA’s Balance Mass
Aerospace Conference (IEEE),
Challenge: Using “Dead Weight” on Mars Spacecraft to
doi: 10.1109/aero47225.2020.9172337
Advance Science and Technology, Press Release.
Doubleday, J., Mclaren, D., Chien, S., & Lou, Y. 2011, in
https://www.nasa.gov/solve/marsbalancechallenge
International Joint Conference on Artificial Intelligence
—. 2019, A Neil Armstrong for Mars: Landing the Mars
Workshop on Artificial Intelligence in Space (IJCAI
2020 Rover, Press Release 2019-131.
2011), Barcelona, Spain. https://ai.jpl.nasa.gov/public/
https://www.jpl.nasa.gov/news/news.php?feature=7442
papers/doubleday-ijcai2011-using.pdf
Jiménez Ruiz, A. R., & Seco Granja, F. 2017, IEEE
Doyle, R., Some, R., Powell, W., et al. 2013, in Proceedings Transactions on Instrumentation and Measurement, 66,
of the Workshop on Spacecraft Flight Software 2106
Egan, H., Jarvinen, R., Ma, Y., & Brain, D. 2019, Monthly Johnson, A., & Golombek, M. 2012, in Concept and
Notices of the Royal Astronomical Society, 488, 2108 Approaches for Mars Exploration, Houston, Texas
Ellis, P., Van Rheeden, D., & Dowla, F. 2020, IEEE Access, Johnson, A., Aaron, S., Chang, J., et al. 2017, in AAS
8, 12907 Guidance Navigation and Control Conference,
Breckenridge, Colorado
ENSCO. 2019, ENSCO Timing, Communications, and
Johnson, A. E., & Montgomery, J. F. 2008, in 2008 IEEE
Ranging Device (TCR-D).
Aerospace Conference, 1–10
https://www.ensco.com/national-security/pnt
Kang, C.-k., Fahimi, F., Griffin, R., et al. 2019,
Fonti, S., Mancarella, F., Liuzzi, G., et al. 2015, A&A, 581,
Marsbee-Swarm of Flapping Wing Flyers for Enhanced
A136, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/201526235
Mars Exploration, Phase i: Final report;, NASA
Formisano, V., Atreya, S., Encrenaz, T., Ignatiev, N., &
Innovative Advanced Concepts (NIAC)
Giuranna, M. 2004, Science, 306, 1758
Karras, J. T., Fuller, C. L., Carpenter, K. C., et al. 2017, in
Francis, R., Estlin, T., Doran, G., et al. 2017, Science
IEEE International Conference on Robotics and
Robotics, 2, doi: 10.1126/scirobotics.aan4582 Automation (Institute of Electrical and Electronics
Garanger, K., del Valle, I., Rath, M., et al. 2020, arXiv Engineers Inc.), 5459–5466,
preprint arXiv:2003.10999 doi: 10.1109/ICRA.2017.7989642
43Khurana, K., Kivelson, M., Stevenson, D., et al. 1998, —. 2023, Icarus flies faster, further.
Nature, 395, 777 https://www.icarus.mpg.de/117652/
Klein, H. P., Horowitz, N. H., & Biemann, K. 1992, in news_publication_20614880_transferred
Mars, ed. H. H. Kieffer, B. M. Jakosky, C. W. Snyder, & —. 2024, ICARUS Initiative - Projects. https:
M. S. Matthews, 1221–1245 //www.icarus.mpg.de/29085/project-icarus-tracking
Klipstein, W. M., Arnold, B. W., Enzer, D. G., et al. 2013, Microsemi. 2019, SA.45s Space Chip Scale Atomic Clock
Space Science Reviews, 178, 57 (CSAC) Datasheet.
Kobayashi, M. M. 2018, State-of-the-Art Status for https://www.microsemi.com/document-portal/
Deep-Space SmallSat Telecom, 2018 International doc_download/1243238-space-csac-datasheet
Planetary Probe Workshop Short Course on Small Mischna, M., Luo, Y., Yung, Y. L., Lin, J. C., & Fasoli, B.
Satellites. 2020, in AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 2020,
https://www.colorado.edu/event/ippw2018/sites/ American Geophysical Union (AGU), San Francisco, CA,
default/files/attached-files/9_-_ippw18_mmk_deep- P087–07
space_comm_revd_urs_cl18-2755.pdf Mocquet, A. 1999, Planetary and space science, 47, 397
Mumma, M., Novak, R., DiSanti, M., Bonev, B., &
Kobayashi, M. M., Towfic, Z., Spurgers, C., et al. 2023, in
Dello Russo, N. 2004, in Bull. Amer. Astron. Soc.,
2023 IEEE Aerospace Conference, IEEE, 1–18
Vol. 36, 1127
Krasnopolsky, V. A., Maillard, J. P., & Owen, T. C. 2004,
NASA. 2019, NASA Announces US Industry Partnerships
Icarus, 172, 537
to Advance Moon, Mars Technology, Press Release
Krause, F. C., Jones, J.-P., Jones, S. C., et al. 2018,
2019-063. https://www.nasa.gov/press-release/nasa-
Journal of The Electrochemical Society, 165, A2312
announces-us-industry-partnerships-to-advance-moon-
Lambert, A., Furgale, P., Barfoot, T. D., & Enright, J.
mars-technology/
2012, Journal of Field Robotics, 29, 426,
NationalAcademiesofSciences,Engineering,andMedicine.
doi: 10.1002/rob.21412
2022, Origins, Worlds, and Life: A Decadal Strategy for
Lange, C., Sohl, F., Coustenis, A., et al. 2011, in
Planetary Science and Astrobiology 2023-2032
EPSC-DPS Joint Meeting, Vol. 1, 1878
(Washington, DC: The National Academies Press),
Levine, J. 2015, Could This Become the First Mars
doi: 10.17226/26522
Airplane?
National Research Council. 2011, Vision and Voyages for
Lin, R. 1979, Physics of the Earth and Planetary Interiors,
Planetary Science in the Decade 2013-2022 (Washington,
20, 271
DC: The National Academies Press), doi: 10.17226/13117
Lorenz, R., Oleson, S., Cataldo, R., et al. 2014, in 2014
National Weather Service. 2023, NOAA Observation
IEEE Aerospace Conference, IEEE, 1–11,
Systems.
doi: 10.1109/AERO.2014.6836397
hhttps://www.weather.gov/about/observation-equipment
Lyness, E., Eigenbrode, J., Matthies, L., Falker, J., &
Neal, C., Weber, R., Amato, M. J., et al. 2020, The Lunar
Manning, R. 2019, in AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts, Vol.
Geophysical Network, Tech. rep., Planetary Mission
2019, American Geophysical Union (AGU), San
Concept Studies. https://smd-cms.nasa.gov/wp-
Francisco, CA, IN34A–07
content/uploads/2023/05/LunarGeophysicalNetwork.pdf
Mahaffy, P. R., Webster, C. R., Cabane, M., et al. 2012,
Neal, C. R., Weber, R. C., Banerdt, W. B., et al. 2019, in
Space Science Reviews, 170, 401 AGU Fall Meeting Abstracts, Vol. 2019, P33D–05
Mandrake, L., Doran, G., Goel, A., et al. 2022, in 2022 Parkinson, C. 2003, IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and
IEEE Aerospace Conference (AERO), 1–20, RemoteSensing,41,173,doi:10.1109/TGRS.2002.808319
doi: 10.1109/AERO53065.2022.9843322 Piqueux, S., Kleinböhl, A., Hayne, P. O., et al. 2015,
Matthies, L., Daftry, S., Rothrock, B., et al. 2020, in 2020 Icarus, 251, 164
IEEE Aerospace Conference, 1–16 Prieto-Ballesteros, O., Kargel, J. S., Fairén, A. G., et al.
Mauceri, S., Lee, J., Wronkiewicz, M., et al. 2022, Earth 2006, Geology, 34, 149
and Space Science, 9, e2022EA002247, Project Canary. 2023, Advanced Continuous Emissions
doi: https://doi.org/10.1029/2022EA002247 Monitoring, Tech. rep., Project Canary.
Max Planck Institute. 2015, Animals on the air. https: https://www.projectcanary.com/white-paper/advanced-
//www.icarus.mpg.de/28874/sensor-animals-tracking continuous-emissions-monitoring-cem-guide/
44Pugh, M., Kuperman, I., Aguirre, F., et al. 2017, in 2017 Styczinski, M. J., & Harnett, E. M. 2021, Icarus, 354,
IEEE Aerospace Conference, 1–14 114020
Rahmani, A., Bandyopadhyay, S., Rossi, F., et al. 2018, Theiling, B. P., Chou, L., Da Poian, V., et al. 2022,
Swarm of Space Vehicles and Future Opportunities, Blue Astrobiology, 22, 901
sky studies report, Jet Propulsion Laboratory - Tokekar, P., Vander Hook, J., Mulla, D., & Isler, V. 2016,
California Institute of Technology. https: IEEE Transactions on Robotics, 32, 1498
//bluesky.jpl.nasa.gov/studies/swarmofspacevehicles/ Ungar,S.,Pearlman,J.,Mendenhall,J.,&Reuter,D.2003,
Revankar, S. T., & Adams, T. E. 2014, J. Energy Power IEEE Transactions on Geoscience and Remote Sensing,
Sources, 1, 321 41, 1149, doi: 10.1109/TGRS.2003.815999
Richardson, M. I., Toigo, A. D., & Newman, C. E. 2007, US Geological Survey. 2017, Advanced National Seismic
Journal of Geophysical Research E: Planets, 112, System–current Status, Development Opportunities, and
doi: 10.1029/2006JE002825 Priorities for 2017-2027, Tech. Rep. Circular 1429, US
Rimoli, J. J. 2016, in 57th AIAA/ASCE/AHS/ASC Geological Survey, doi: 10.3133/cir1429
Structures, Structural Dynamics, and Materials Vance, S. D., Kedar, S., Panning, M. P., et al. 2018,
Conference, 1511 Astrobiology, 18, 37, doi: 10.1089/ast.2016.1612
Rincon Research. 2020, AstroSDR. Vectron. 2019a, Space Oscillators.
https://www.rincon.com/products/space-systems/ https://www.vectron.com/products/space/space.htm
astrosdr-family —. 2019b, Oscillator Specification, Hybrid Clock. https://
Rodriguez-Manfredi, J. A., De la Torre Juárez, M., Alonso, www.vectron.com/products/military/xo/DOC204900.pdf
A., et al. 2021, Space science reviews, 217, 1 —. 2019c, Specification, Hybrid TXCO, Hi-Rel Standard.
Russell, C., Coleman Jr., P., & Goldstein, B. 1981, Proc. https://www.vectron.com/products/military/tcxo/
Lunar Planet. Sci., 12B, 831 DOC200103.pdf
Sakata, R., Seki, K., Sakai, S., et al. 2020, Journal of —.2019d,OX-249SpaceQualifiedOvenControlledCrystal
Geophysical Research: Space Physics, 125 Oscilaltor.
Schmidt, G. R., Abelson, R. D., & Wiley, R. L. 2005, in https://www.vectron.com/products/ocxo/OX-249.pdf
AIP Conference Proceedings, Vol. 746, American Vespignani, M., Friesen, J. M., SunSpiral, V., & Bruce, J.
Institute of Physics, 295–302 2018, in 2018 IEEE/RSJ International Conference on
Sharps, P., Aiken, D., Cho, B., et al. 2017, in E3S Web of IntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),IEEE,2865–2871
Conferences, Vol. 16, EDP Sciences, 03002 Villarreal, M., Lillis, R., Luhmann, J., et al. 2020, The
Shearer, C.2011,Lunar Geophysical Network(LGN), Tech. Importance of Plasma and Magnetic Investigations in
rep., Mission Concept Study for the Planetary Science Small Body Missions, Tech. rep., White Paper submitted
Decadal Survey 2013-2022. to the Planetary Science and Astrobiology Decadal
https://solarsystem.nasa.gov/studies/203/lunar- Survey 2023-2032
geophysical-network-lgn/ Vulcan Wireless Inc. 2020, Products.
Short, K., & Van Buren, D. 2012, Printable spacecraft: https://www.vulcanwireless.com/brochures
Flexible electronic platforms for NASA missions, Tech. Weaver, G., Garstecki, J., & Reynolds, S. 2010, The
rep., NASA Innovative Advanced Concepts (NIAC), performance of ultra-stable oscillators for the Gravity
Phase 2 Recovery And Interior Laboratory (GRAIL), Tech. rep.,
Smrekar, S., Catling, D., Lorenz, R., et al. 1999, Journal of Johns Hopkins University Applied Physics Laboratory
Geophysical Research: Planets, 104, 27013, Webster, C. R., Mahaffy, P. R., Atreya, S. K., et al. 2015,
doi: 10.1029/1999JE001073 Science, 347, 415
Spiga, A., Banfield, D., Teanby, N. A., et al. 2018, Space Webster, C. R., Mahaffy, P. R., Pla-Garcia, J., et al. 2021,
Science Reviews, 214, 109 A&A, 650, A166, doi: 10.1051/0004-6361/202040030
Squyres, S. 1995, Advances in Space Research, 15, 179 Whiteway, J.,Daly, M.,Carswell,A., etal. 2008,Journal of
Staehle, R. L., Eby, M. A., Williams, R. M. E., et al. 2015, Geophysical Research: Planets, 113
in AIAA/USU Small Satellite Conference Withers, P., Bougher, S., & Keating, G. 2003, Icarus, 164,
Stevens, N. F., Garbeil, H., & Mouginis-Mark, P. J. 2004, 14
Remote Sensing of Environment, 90, 405, Wronkiewicz, M., Lee, J., Mandrake, L., et al. 2024,
doi: https://doi.org/10.1016/j.rse.2004.01.012 Planetary Science Journal
45Wu, Z., Li, T., Zhang, X., Li, J., & Cui, J. 2020, Nature Zurek, R. W., & Martin, L. J. 1993, Journal of Geophysical
Communications, 11, 1 Research: Planets, 98, 3247
46