Impact of Network Size and Frequency of Information Receipt
on Polarization in Social Networks
Sudhakar Krishnarao1(cid:89)*, Shaja Arul Selvamani2(cid:89)*
1 Retired, Wayanad, Kerala, India.
2 Outshift by Cisco Systems Inc, USA.
(cid:89)These authors contributed equally to this work. * sudhakar.iitb@gmail.com, *
sharulse@cisco.com
Preprint Notice
This is the preprint version of an article published in Complexity journal. For citation
purposes, please refer to the final published version of the article:
https://doi.org/10.1155/2024/4742401
Abstract
Opinion Dynamics is an interdisciplinary area of research. Disciplines of
Psychology and Sociology have proposed models of how individuals form opinions
and how social interactions influence this process. Socio-Physicists have
interpretedtheobservedpatternsinopinionformationinindividualsasarisingout
of non-linearity in the underlying process and helped shape the models.
Agent-based modeling has offered an excellent platform to study the Opinion
Dynamics of large groups of interacting individuals. In this paper, we take recent
models in opinion formation in individuals. We recast them to create a proper
dynamical system and inject the idea of clock time into evolving individuals’
opinions. Thus the time interval between two successive receipts of new
information(i.e.,thefrequencyofinformationreceipts)byanindividualbecomesa
factorthatcanbestudied. Inrecentdecades,socialmediahascontinuouslyshrunk
time intervals between receipt of new information (i.e., increased the frequency of
informationreceipts). Therecastmodelsareusedtoshowthatasthetimeinterval
between successive receipts of new information gets shorter and the number of
individuals in one’s network becomes larger, the propensity for polarization of an
individual increases. This explains how social media could have caused
polarization. We use the word ‘polarization’ to mean an individual’s inability to
hold a neutral opinion. A Polarization number based on sociological parameters is
proposed. Criticalvaluesofthepolarizationnumberbeyondwhichanindividualis
prone to polarization are identified. These critical values depend on psychological
parameters. Thereducedtimeintervalsbetweenreceiptofnewinformationandan
increase in the size of groups that interact can push the Polarization number to
approach and cross the critical value and could have played a crucial role in
polarizing individuals and social groups. We also define the Extent of Polarization
as the width of the region around neutral within which an individual is unable to
have an opinion. Reported results are for values of model parameters found in the
literature. Our findings offer an opportunity to adjust model parameters to align
with empirical evidence. The models of opinion formation in individuals and the
understanding arrived at in this study will help study Opinion Dynamics with all
its nuances and details on large social networks using Agent-Based Modeling.
Keywords: Opinion Dynamics, Agent-Based Modeling, Polarization, Dynamical
System, Polarization Number
July 3, 2024 1/16
4202
luJ
1
]AM.sc[
1v88710.7042:viXraIntroduction
Individuals have opinions on ‘things’ that concern them or ‘things’ they care about.
‘Things’ could refer to other individuals, places, ideas, issues, ideologies, or any of the
other things. How does the opinion of an individual evolve? How do the opinions of a
group of individuals evolve collectively? When and why do groups of individuals get
polarized in their opinion? These and more complex, interesting, and important
questions form research topics in Opinion Dynamics. Google Scholar finds 1,730 papers
with the “Opinion Dynamics” phrase in their title and 19,800 anywhere in the article.
Close to 30 percent of these have appeared in the last 2 years. This indicates the
interest that this study is receiving. Researchers continue their efforts to improve
models to better understand and explain polarization. For example, Gaitonde et al. [1]
discussed novel opinion update models, and Musco et al. [2] explored new ways to
quantify polarization. Several survey papers exist in Opinion Dynamics [3–7]. Despite
this large volume of work, authors in [8] feel that ”the existence of polarization is
evident but explanations for polarization are piecemeal and not holistic.”
A meta-study reported by Lorenz-Spreen, et al. [9] stands out having
comprehensively reviewed 496 published articles in Opinion Dynamics. They report a
link between digital media and polarization. Biondi et al. [10] observed that widespread
usage of online social networks and social media seems to amplify the already existing
phenomenon of polarization. Lee [11] defined a polarization score and used that score to
show how the polarization score of citizens of Hong Kong towards its Government
increased by a factor of about 3 times over the period 2003 to 2014. The appearance of
major social media platforms Facebook (2004), Twitter (2006), and WhatsApp (2009)
correlates with this increasing polarization but without establishing any causation. Hunt
Allcott, et al. [12] reported interesting results of an experiment, where people were made
to deactivate Facebook accounts four weeks before the 2018 US election that made them
less polarized. This establishes some causation. Both these studies suffer from the
samples used, e.g. restricted nationality, etc. yet in that limited sense they show that
the appearance of digital media correlates and may have caused polarization. Bavel, et
al. [13] called for more work to establish if and how social media impacts political
polarization. This provides the primary motivation for our work. A large quantity of the
work in Opinion Dynamics invokes some form of Agent-based modeling (ABM) to arrive
at conclusions. Agent-based models (ABM) set rules for agents to interact with other
agents in a social group (here the term agent stands for an individual). There are rules
for updating an agent’s opinion based on the opinions of self and interacting agents.
Distribution of opinions across agents at the start is defined. Iterations are set to roll
allowing several rounds of interactions between agents, monitoring the group for signs of
polarization. The iterations in ABM represent advancing of time. But in most ABMs
there is no concept of how much time lapses from one iteration to the next. That time
could be 1 minute, 1 hour, or 1 day but that has no impact on the outcome; the results
will be the same. This is where our main contribution comes in. We attach a wall-clock
time interval to iterations and can study what happens to an individual/agent who
interacts with another agent once a day and compare that with what would have
happened if the interaction had happened twice a day, etc. Social media’s contribution
has been to shorten the time interval between two successive interactions (i.e. increase
the frequency of information receipts). This makes it possible for us to study the impact
of social media on opinion dynamics. (Socio)Physics has shaped models that explain
how individuals form their beliefs and opinions. The ‘Cusp Catastrophe’ surface [14] is
central to explaining the observed phenomena. The ‘Cusp Catastrophe’ surface is used
in [15] to graphically, and qualitatively build arguments about ‘belief’ that non-linearly
depends on evidence and ‘confirmation bias’. Maas, et al. [16] have modeled opinion
formation using equations whose steady state solutions (a.k.a fixed points) form a ‘Cusp
July 3, 2024 2/16Catastrophe’ surface. They [16] trace the basis of their models to [17,18]. They state 3
hypotheses and then test those hypotheses using Agent-based modeling [16]. We start
from the models proposed by [16] and thereafter significantly differ from [16] in how the
models are used. We first restate the models so that they form a proper dynamical
system. We then introduce the idea of wall clock time. We further employ techniques
from non-linear dynamics, like attractors and their stability to gain an understanding of
an individual. We believe that a good understanding of individual behavior is needed
before embedding such individuals in social networks to study group behavior. Opinion
Dynamics has become an interdisciplinary area of work. The present authors have
exposure to Flight Dynamics, Agent-based modeling and Engineering Systems Design.
We have always imagined humans as far more complex systems than any man-made
system we have studied. So, ‘modeling any aspect of human behavior using one or two
equations appears naive. But sometimes details do not seem to matter’ [19]. We use the
equations, as they are, knowing that they represent the most complex system and not
fully understanding the complexity they have simplified. Yet we go ahead to draw
precise conclusions. We believe our findings can be used to fine-tune parameters in the
opinion formation model using Parameter Identification techniques or in designing
experiments to measure the parameters. Fitting catastrophe models to data has already
been reported in this domain [20,21] and is routinely carried out in the larger context of
dynamics and introduced in several texts [22] We write this paper using standard terms
in Opinion Dynamics but may use terms in non-linear dynamics where necessary. We
hope that it shall communicate well with all those who are from other expert areas. In
Section 2 we describe the basic terminology in Opinion Dynamics, the variables in the
problem and briefly introduce ideas in non-linear dynamics. In Section 3 we discuss the
models and restate them as proper dynamical systems. In Section 4 we use the models
to gain insights into individuals’ behavior. This focuses on studying the impact of the
frequency of arrival of new information on an individual’s propensity to get polarized.
This is where we propose a Polarization number and define its critical values. In Section
5 we conclude.
2. Opinion Dynamics – Terms and what they mean
We shall first introduce the models proposed by [16]. We use the same notations where
possible but deviate in defining the parameters so they are more meaningful while
interpreting the resulting behavior.
2.1 Attitude
An Attitude object can be an issue, an ideology, an idea, an individual, etc. Attitude in
respect of an attitude object is formed over time and is influenced by learning. Learning
occurs when an individual comes into contact with new information about the attitude
object. An individual’s attitude towards an attitude object has 3 components, viz.
Affect, Behavior and Cognition [23]. Opinion is one aspect of the cognition component
of attitude and the present study focuses only on opinion.
2.2 Opinion
Opinion, O, is a judgment formed about an attitude object. In this paper Opinion
about an attitude object is taken as continuous and bounded −1≤O ≤+1. Here −1
indicates a stand extreme to one side and +1 extreme stand to the other side, and 0
indicates a neutral stand. Other contexts can use a simpler representation of O, e.g.
binary [0,1]. Yet other contexts can demand more complex representations of O.
July 3, 2024 3/162.3 Attention
“Attention is mind taking possession of one out of several possible attitude objects. It
implies withdrawal from some things to deal effectively with others” [24]. We represent
attention by A, where A≥0. Upper bound of A is left to the models to reveal.
2.4 Information
Information is a piece of fact provided or learned about an attitude object. We
represent a piece of information by i. Note that, −1≤i≤+1. When i=−1, it fully
validates one extreme stand; when i=+1, it fully validates the other extreme stand.
What is presented to an individual as fact can be fact or fake. This important
distinction is not made in the present study as it does not influence its findings. Such
distinction and many other nuances can be used to understand finer details of
polarization like the distribution of converged opinions of individuals, how many
individuals are in each polarized group, how far apart the opinions of the two groups
are, etc., using Agents-based modeling. At any instant in time, an individual has a
particular level of information about an attitude object which is the cumulative result of
all pieces of information received/learned till then. We represent this by I. When a new
piece of information, i, reaches an individual, they update their information, I. Note
that information is provided to an individual by other individuals or by media (print,
TV or social media). Information can also be purposefully learned by an individual.
2.5 Dynamics
Dynamics began as a branch of mechanics concerned with the motion of bodies under
the action of forces. A broader view of dynamics includes anything that changes with
time. Since the opinion of individuals changes with time, its study is referred to as
Opinion Dynamics. In dynamics, one has to identify the states. Once the states are
known the equations that govern their evolution with time must be arrived at by
modeling. The evolution of states can depend on the value of states and the values of
prime movers (i.e. what causes their change). It can also depend on a set of parameters.
The following are of interest while studying a dynamical system. More detailed
descriptions can be found in textbooks on dynamics, e.g. [14].
1. Simulation. For the desired set of initial values of the states, simulation can evolve
the states for as long a time as needed. Depending on the nature of the model and
equations, an appropriate solution strategy has to be used.
2. Attractors. For any arbitrary initial conditions if the simulation is carried out for
a long enough time we shall approach an attractor. An attractor can be a steady
state (a.k.a fixed point or equilibrium), a periodic attractor or a chaotic attractor.
This study shall be interested only in the first two attractors. A steady state is
where the rate of change in the states is zero. Periodic attractors endlessly retrace
the same trajectory in state space with a periodicity. There are techniques to
directly identify attractors of a dynamical system than through simulation.
3. Stability. This property is what distinguishes an attractor from a repeller. If a
dynamical system is slightly perturbed from an attractor it shall return to the
attractor. Dynamical systems can have fixed points or periodic solutions that are
repellers or unstable. The system can be carefully placed at these unstable
solutions but shall get pushed away from it by the smallest disturbances. There
are techniques to investigate a fixed point or a periodic solution for its stability. A
dynamical system, when left to itself shall be found at one of its attractors but
not at a repeller. This interesting property shall be invoked later.
July 3, 2024 4/164. Basin of Attraction: An attractor shall attract all trajectories in some
neighborhood to it; hence the name attractor. All attractors have a basin of
attraction. If the system is at states within the basin of attraction of an attractor
it will get attracted to it.
3. Opinion Dynamics: The Models
There are two states in the models proposed by [16], opinion (O) and attention (A).
The forcing function (prime mover) is Information (I). In addition, there are
parameters too. There are two equations governing the evolution of the two states. The
first of these is presented by [16] as a differential equation.
dO = −(cid:0) O3−{A−A } O−I(cid:1) (1)
dt crit
We have not retained the Wiener noise term from [16] as this study aims to understand
the dynamics of opinion formation of an individual under ideal conditions. A is a
crit
parameter and its role shall become clear later. It is the negative of the parameter Amin
in [16]. The solution that emerges from above has to be normalized to be bounded
within [-1, +1]. The scaling factor and bias, if any are required, shall be decided once
the solution emerges. The second equation governing attention, A is given by [16] as.
dA 2k
=− A+k(A −A) (2)
dt N2 max
The first term represents the decay of attention. The second term represents a spike in
attention each time new information is received (u=1 at the instant new information is
received and u=0 at all other times). The term dA on the left-hand side gives it the
appearance of a differential equation, but there is no dt. The rate of change in A is
supposed to be represented by d . So we relate d to dt by introducing the parameter
A A
k, d =kdt. As per results reported in [16] the second term is strictly not a spike in dA
A dt
but rather in A. i.e. it is not
∆(cid:0)dA(cid:1)
but ∆A. So we represent it accordingly. These
dt
changes recast it as a proper dynamical system. We further replace the parameter A∗
by A = 2 A∗. The subscript ’max’ is to suggest that this will be the maximum value
max
of A.
dA 2k
=− A+k(A −A) (3)
dt N2 max
where ∆A is a spike in A when new information is received and b= 2k. The time
N2
represented by ’t’ in equations [1] and [2] is in seconds. The parameter k is akin to
inertia in dynamics and to be more precise inverse of inertia. In response to a forcing
function, if k is small, A shall change gradually and shall change by smaller magnitude
and vice versa.
4. Opinion Dynamics: Individual Behavior Based on
Models
Before we try to understand the dynamics of a group of individuals, it is good to
understand individual behavior. An individual has two states, opinion O and attention
A. There is only one driving force, Information I. Equations 1 and 2 govern their
dynamics: Steady-state (a.k.a fixed point or equilibrium) can be found by equating
dO & dA to zero and solving for values of O & A. For each value of I there will be
dt dt
associated steady states. Note: Each I can have more than one steady state associated
with it. Each steady state can then be investigated for its stability to establish if it is an
attractor or repeller.
July 3, 2024 5/164.1 Dynamics of Attention
The equation 2 governing A is independent of O; i.e. it is decoupled. Hence its
evolution can be studied in isolation. The steady state of A, in the absence of any new
information reaching, can be found by setting dA =0. Inspection of equation 2 will
dt
confirm that A=0 is the steady state. Equation 2 can be integrated analytically to get:
A =A e−b t (4)
t 0
The analytical solution equation 4 shows that no matter the value of A at time t=0, it
shall eventually tend to the steady state A =0 as t tends to ∞. So, the steady state,
t
A=0, is an attractor and its basin of attraction is all of the space; i.e. it will attract all
states to it. Dynamics of A has another part, which is the spike in A when new
information is received. The arrival of new information causes the spike, but the value
of the spike does not depend on the information. We exploit this important fact and
model only the time instance when interaction with another agent happens (i.e. time
when new information is received) and do not find the need to model the information
exchange and the update logic. This makes it possible to do away with Agent-based
Modeling in our approach.
∆A=k(A −A) (5)
max
k =0.2 and A =2 are the values assigned to the parameters by [16]. It can be seen
max
that for A≤A , A+∆A≤A , i.e. starting from A≤A , A shall not grow
max max max
beyond A We have seen that the attention decays continuously and there is a spike
max
each time information is received. This raises an interesting question. At a given
periodicity, τ of information receipt how does A vary? The inverse of τ is the frequency
of information receipts. Henceforth we shall use τ as the variable. One may wonder why
periodicity in information arrival is of interest. Typically there is a rough periodicity in
receipt of information in an individual’s life. Some individuals may be meeting friends
every day in the evening, for some it may be only on weekends, some may be reading
print media (newspaper) delivered daily or maybe watching some specific TV news
bulletin at specific hours each day, or checking WhatsApp messages every 2 hours, etc.
Though these may not happen with precise periodicity, this idealized condition can give
important insights, as we shall soon see. We explore the behavior of A for periodicity of
information arrival, τ. Let A be the value of A at time t=0. Attention, A decays to
0
A e−bτ and then spikes by ∆A to take a value A at time τ; A =A e−bτ +∆A
0 τ τ 0
(cid:16) (cid:17)
=A e−bτ +k A − A e−bτ = A (1−k) e−bτ +kA For any arbitrary value
0 max 0 0 max
of A we shall not have A =A {Figure 1}. So, we set A =A ; and solve for A and
0 τ 0 0 τ 0
call it A A =A =A (1−k) e−bτ +kA
0τ 0 τ 0 max
kA
A = max (6)
0τ 1− (1−k) e−bτ
If at t=0, A=A and new information is received at periodicity of τ, then we shall
0τ
have a solution that is periodic, with periodicity, τ {Figure 1}. The periodic solution for
any τ is bounded by A and A ; whose values for any τ can be computed using:
Lτ Uτ
kA
A =A = max (7)
Uτ 0τ 1− (1−k) e−bτ
kA e−bτ
A = A e−bτ = max (8)
Lτ 0τ 1− (1−k) e−bτ
For τ =6 hours A =0.6034805 and A =0.2543506.
U6 L6
We now define the Polarization number, P as
τ
P = (9)
N2
July 3, 2024 6/16Fig 1. At time t=0, there exists a specific initial value of A that will decay with time
and when new information arrives after time τ, spike back to the same initial value. For
τ =6 hours, we illustrate the time history both for an arbitrary initial value and the
specific initial value.
Present authors are familiar with numbers like Reynolds number, and Mach number in
fluid flows. When these numbers cross a critical value the nature of fluid flow changes.
We shall similarly show that when Polarization number crosses a critical value the
nature of opinion formation in individuals changes. We rewrite equations 6, & ?? in
terms of P,
kA
A = max (10)
UP 1− (1−k) e−2kP
kA e−2kP
A = max (11)
LP 1− (1−k) e−2kP
Figure 2 shows the variation of A and A with P. Low P (i.e low τ or high N) can
UP LP
keep the attention high. This is nothing new. Zajonc [25] had shown, as early as 1968
that mere repeated exposure of an individual to a stimulus object enhances his attitude
toward it. But here the relationship is quantified. It may be noted that A takes its
upper bound value of A (which is 2 in this case) as P →0. This is consistent with
max
what we stated in Section 4.1. Now let us turn our attention to another interesting
behavior. For τ =6 hours consider two cases, N =100 and 500. Set A to some
arbitrary value at t=0, not equal to A . Say, A =1. Figure 3 shows that in both
0τ 0
cases the solutions quickly settle down to respective periodic solutions. This suggests
that these two periodic solutions act like attractors. So we investigate periodic solutions
to check if they are attractors. Consider a time period τ and associated A . If the
0τ
starting value of A =A ; we shall have as per definition;
0 0τ
A =A e−bτ +k{A −A e−bτ}=A
τ 0τ max 0τ 0τ
If the starting value of A is not A but A +a, where a is such that,
0τ 0τ
0≤A +a≤A ;
0τ max
A =(A +a)e−bτ +k{A −(A +a)e−bτ}
τ 0τ max 0τ
=A e−bτ +k{A −A e−bτ}+a(1−k)e−bτ
0τ max 0τ
=A +a(1−k)e−bτ
0τ
July 3, 2024 7/16Fig 2. For a given polarization number (P), Attention (A) oscillates between A and
UP
A . Both values increase with decreasing polarization number (P) and eventually
LP
converge to A , in this case, 2.
max
Fig 3. For a given periodicity of information arrival (τ), starting from any arbitrary
value, attention (A) quickly converges to the corresponding periodic solution. For τ =6
hours, two cases of N are illustrated.
July 3, 2024 8/16For 0<k <1, 0<(1−k)<1 we shall have ; a(1−k)e−bτ <a. We started at
A +a and after time τ ended up at A +a(1−k)e−bτ; i.e. closer to A than when
0τ 0τ τ
started. After n cycles (i.e. time nτ) the trajectory shall end up at
A(nτ)=A +a(1−k)ne−nbτ. With each cycle it is coming closer to A and shall
0τ τ
finally tend to A ; i.e get attracted to the periodic solution corresponding to τ
0τ
4.2 Dynamics of Opinion
Let us now turn our attention to equation 1 which governs the dynamics of Opinion.
We shall treat I as a constant (no receipt of new information).
dO = −(cid:0) O3−{A−A } O−I(cid:1)
dt crit
Steady states (a.k.a. fixed points) can be obtained by setting dO =0;
dt
O3−{A−A } O−I =0 (12)
crit
Let us take A =0.5 as in [16]. We shall see later what A represents. This is a
crit crit
non-linear cubic equation in O and shall have three roots. Real roots represent steady
states. For any pair of values {A,I} equation 12 can either have one real root and a
complex pair or three real roots. Let us consider our region of interest, 0≤A≤2 and
−1≤I ≤+1. Figure 4a is a plot of the surface O(A,I) that represents the steady
states. This is the typical ‘Cusp Catastrophe’ surface [14] . The region where we have 3
real roots shows up as a fold in the surface. The fold is for A>A . The parameter
crit
A controls the start of the fold. Let us represent any point on this surface as (OSS,
crit
ASS, ISS). This is a steady state. Let us investigate the outcome of a small disturbance
from that steady state to (OSS +o, ASS, ISS). If we substitute this in the differential
equation 1 and note that (OSS3 −(cid:8) ASS −A (cid:9) OSS −ISS =0, and set higher order
crit
terms in o, i.e. o3 and o2 to zero, we get
do1 =−(cid:16) 3OSS2 −(ASS −A )(cid:17)
dt o crit
The condition for stability (or to be an attractor) is do1 <0 ; which implies that if
dto
o>0, do <0 and if o<0, do >0. So, if we disturb the system from a steady state it
dt dt
tends to cancel that disturbance. Condition for stability;
(cid:16) (cid:17)
− 3OSS2 −(ASS −A ) <0 (13)
crit
If O is at an unstable steady state, any small disturbance that can result from any
source will result in O moving away from the steady state and settling at a stable
steady state. Hence we may not find any individual holding an O corresponding to any
of the unstable steady states. For a more detailed discussion on stable/unstable
solutions, bifurcations, jump phenomena, hysteresis etc. refer to the book on non-linear
dynamics [14]. Figure 4b is a cross-section of the Cusp Catastrophe surface at A<A .
crit
Figure 4c is a cross-section at A>A . Solid lines represent stable steady states
crit
(attractors) and dashed lines represent unstable steady states (repellers). For values of
A≤A , there is no fold and O changes in a continuous manner over the entire range
crit
−1≤I ≤+1 and is stable all along. An individual with A≤A , can have any value
crit
of O across the neutral region Figure 4b. For values of A>A , there is a fold and
crit
there is a band of values of O near neutral that have only unstable steady states. We
may not find any individual holding O within this band. O suddenly jumps
(discontinuously) across the band of unstable steady states at two critical values ±I .
sn
July 3, 2024 9/161
0.5
O
O
-0.5
0.5 0.5
0
1.5 -0.5 I
2.0 -1.0
O O
O in this band
is unstable
I
A
Fig 4. Parameter values: A =0.5, A =2.0, k =0.2. The Cusp Catastrophic
crit max
surface for O is scaled such that −1≤O ≤1 for 0≤A≤A and −1≤I ≤1. No
max
bias was required and the scaling factor used is inverse of max(A) = 1.475687. (A) The
Cusp Catastrophe Surface. The fold begins at A=A =0.5, and the surface extends
crit
until A=A =2.0. (B) The cross-section at A=0.3 reveals that O is stable over its
max
full range of values across neutral. (C) The cross-section at A=1.8 reveals no stable
opinions in the range −O ≤O ≤O . Individuals can either have opinions in the
sn sn
band −1≤O ≤−O or O ≤O ≤1. The extent of polarization at A=1.8 is
sn sn
E =O =0.46. (D) The shaded region indicates the area where no stable opinions are
p sn
possible. The extent of polarization, E , is the semi-height of the shaded region. E =0
p p
for A≤A and increases thereafter with A.
crit
July 3, 2024 10/16Corresponding values of Opinion are ∓O Figure 4c. The subscript is to suggest
sn sn
that they are Saddle Node bifurcation points. We use this to define the Extent of
Polarization of an individual as, E =|O |. Thus an individual cannot have an
P sn
opinion in the band −E <O <E . This is the band that separates two opposing
P P
polarized individuals. Note that an individual can have an opinion only in one of the
two bands, −1≤O ≤−E or E ≤O ≤1. For A≤A we have E =0. As A
P P crit P
crosses A , and increases to its limiting value 2, E increases monotonically from
crit P
zero. Variation of E with A is in {Figure 4d}
P
4.3 Some interesting observations
We have seen that for any given Polarization number, P the attention, A settles down
to a periodic solution corresponding to that Polarization number, P. This periodic
solution has A within the bounds A and A . Consider two limiting values of P
LP UP
denoted by P and P . If for P ≥P , A ≤A ; then A shall always be in the region
1 2 1 UP crit
where there is no fold, and E =0. i.e the extent of polarization is zero. Similarly if for
P
P ≤P , A ≥A then A shall always be in the region with fold, i.e. E ≥0 i.e.
2 LP crit P
prone to polarization. P and P can be estimated using equation ?? and ?? as follows:
1 2
Solving for P from
kA
A = max =A (14)
UP 1− (1−k) e−2kP crit
gives P
1
 (cid:16) (cid:17)
P =−
1 ln1− k AA cm ria tx 
(15)
1 2k 1−k
 
Solving for P from
kA e−2kP
A = max =A (16)
LP 1− (1−k) e−2kP crit
gives P
2
(cid:40) (cid:41)
1 1
P =− ln (17)
2 2k kAmax +1−k
Acrit
For k =0.2, A =0.5 and A =2 we have P =3.466 and P =1.175, Figure 5.
crit max 1 2
Individuals with a Polarization number greater than 3.466 have E =0 and can have
P
Opinions over its range across neutral. Individuals with a Polarization number less than
1.175 have E >0 and can have opinions only in one of the two polarized regions,
P
O <−E or O >E . P marks the threshold of polarization and P marks its
P P 1 2
completion. Individuals with a Polarization number in the range of 1.175<P <3.466
can exhibit a mixed behavior. This is an important finding. Let us take a fresh look at
the model. Time, t is the independent variable. k, A & A are parameters in the
max crit
model that are psychological. τ & N are more sociological variables. The Polarization
number P = τ combines the two sociological variables into one composite variable.
N2
Note that P is not a non-dimensional parameter. Critical values of Polarization number
beyond which an individual has a propensity to polarization, P & P , are functions of
1 2
only psychological parameters, k, A , A . We can map these boundaries in terms
max crit
of N and τ (Figure 6). One of the authors currently at the age of 75 recalls past years
when contact with others was entirely by landline telephones with τ ≈6−7 days ≈168
hrs and with group sizes of 5 to 10 and presently with τ ≈0.5 days ≈12 hrs and with
group sizes of 15 to 20. These are marked in green and red dots (Figure 6). We may
recall that the increase in political polarization from 2003 to 2014 in Hong Kong
correlates with the arrival of social media [11] and that abstaining from social media by
July 3, 2024 11/16Fig 5. Critical values of polarization numbers, P and P , bracket the transition region.
1 2
On one side lies the region where the extent of polarization, E = 0 and the other side
p
where E >0 respectively.
p
Fig 6. The transition region, as well as non-polarized and polarized regions, are
depicted on the τ vs. N diagram.
July 3, 2024 12/16some Americans reduced their polarization [12]. These studies tend to explain
polarization based on the content on social media. Our study shows that the underlying
reason is not the content itself but the frequency at which new content becomes
available and is accessed. The content only decides the side to which the individual gets
polarized. We agree with [13] that research so far has not established how social media
impacts polarization and we agree with [9] that explanations offered for polarization so
far are piecemeal and not holistic. Our explanation of polarization differs significantly
from what exists. Our explanation of polarization is argued with rigor starting with the
models that are borrowed. We have studied the ideal case where new information
arrival is periodic and happens at precise time intervals of τ. In real life, such clockwork
precision is unlikely. So we use simulation to study more realistic scenarios. Consider
the ideal case corresponding to τ =6 hours and N =100. We have seen that starting
from any arbitrary value of A, after a few cycles the solution is periodic and bounded by
A =0.6034805 and A =0.2543506. We shall refer to these as base values.
U,τ=6 L,τ=6
Now, consider a case where the time lapsed between two successive arrivals of new
information is Dτ =τ +e(0,wτ). Here e is a normally distributed random number with
mean µ=0 and standard deviation σ =wτ. Simulations for τ =6 hours and N =100
and realistic w values show A has its upper and lower values in each cycle close to their
respective base upper and lower bound values. Thus for a standard deviation σ of 10%
of τ; i.e. w =0.1 we have upper and lower values of A within approximately ±0.02 of
their respective base values. For a standard deviation σ of 20% of τ; i.e. w =0.2 we
have upper and lower values of A within approximately ±0.04 of their respective base
values. This confirms that the findings arrived at analytically for the periodic arrival of
new information are relevant even in realistic scenarios. We now use these models in an
Agent Based Modeling framework. We perform two simulations. The first simulation for
N =500 and τ =5 hrs corresponds to P =0.072<P i.e. all agents expected to be on
2
the surface with fold, i.e. polarized. The second simulation for N =100 and τ =100
hrs corresponds to P =36>P i.e., all agents expected to be fully on the surface
1
without fold, i.e. no polarization. We initialize I & O of agents randomly and uniformly
and let several iterations run. Figure 7 plots opinion (O) vs information (I) for all N
agents at the beginning and after several iterations. Figure 7(b) for N =500 and τ =5
hrs shows that agents are polarized, with no agent having near neutral opinion. Figure
7(d) for N =100 and τ =100 hrs shows agents have opinions spread over the entire
range from −1 to +1, i.e. no polarization. This confirms that the models when used in
an Agents Based Modeling framework produce the same outcome as was derived
analytically. We have used the same τ for all agents within each simulation only
because it is simple to set up.
5. Conclusions
Opinion formation in individuals is cast as a dynamical system. The dynamical system
is used to study the effect of social media that has made it possible for large groups of
individuals to stay connected and communicate faster, on polarization. Polarization
number and extent of polarization are defined. Polarization number is a function of
sociological parameters, viz, time interval at which new information is received by an
individual and the size of the individual’s network. Critical values of the Polarization
number are in turn functions of psychological parameters. We show that staying
connected with large groups of people and frequent consumption of information may
have a role in making individuals prone to polarization and may have played a role in
polarizing society. This finding is significant. Critical values of the polarization
parameter arrived at here correspond to values of the psychological parameter in [16].
The findings provide a framework to fine-tune these parameter values to align with the
evidence. If fine-tuning of parameters is not adequate to explain the evidence then this
July 3, 2024 13/161.0 1.0
0.0 0.0
-1.0 -1.0
-1.0 0.0 1.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0
Information I Information I
1.0 1.0
0.0 0.0
-1.0 -1.0
-1.0 0.0 1.0 -1.0 0.0 1.0
Information I Information I
Fig 7. Results from Agent Based Modeling. Figures (a) and (b) depict the dynamics of
500 agents (N =500) who interact every 5 hours (τ =5). (a) I and O of agents are
uniformly randomly initialized. (b) After a series of interactions, no agent retains an
opinion within a neutral band. This configuration, N =500,τ =5, corresponds to
P =0.072<P , indicating polarization. Figures (c) and (d) depict the dynamics of 100
2
agents (N =100) interacting every 100 hours (τ =100). (c) I and O of agents are
uniformly randomly initialized. (d) After a series of interactions, agent opinions are
distributed across the full range (−1<O <+1). For N =100,τ =100, the resulting
P =36>P suggests no polarization. Animated versions of these simulations, showing
1
values of I, O for each agent at periodic intervals, are available on this GitHub page.
July 3, 2024 14/16
O
noinipO
O
noinipO
O
noinipO
O
noinipOprovides a framework to explore changes in model structure by psychology and sociology
experts. Results can also help individuals to introspect and purposefully move their
respective polarization numbers to reduce the propensity for polarization. Actual details
of the society post-polarization, like how many individuals are in each polarized group
and how far removed the two groups are, etc can be obtained using agent-based
modeling.
Acknowledgements
Authors are thankful for the encouragement from Cisco in the form of payment of
Article Process Charges associated with publication of this paper. We are thankful to
many who have made access to literature easy and free. We are thankful to Han L J
van der Maas, Jonas Dalege & Lourens Waldorp for a highly readable paper that
motivated us to formulate and attempt this study. We look forward to the opportunity
to collaborate with experts from core disciplines of Opinion Dynamics. The first author
(Sudhakar) is thankful to Mr M.R. Ganesh for extending a conducive and excellent
environment for working on this problem.
References
1. J. Gaitonde, J. Kleinberg, and E´. Tardos, “Polarization in Geometric Opinion
Dynamics,” in Proceedings of the 22nd ACM Conference on Economics and
Computation (EC ’21), Budapest, Hungary, 2021, pp. 499–519.
2. C. Musco, I. Ramesh, J. Ugander, and R. T. Witter, “How to Quantify
Polarization in Models of Opinion Dynamics,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2110.11981,
2021.
3. Noorazar, H., Vixie, K., Talebanpour, A. & Hu, Y. From classical to modern
opinion dynamics. International Journal Of Modern Physics C. 31, 2050101
(2020,7), https://doi.org/10.1142
4. Xia, H., Wang, H. & Xuan, Z. Opinion Dynamics: A Multidisciplinary Review
and Perspective on Future Research. IJKSS. 2 pp. 72-91 (2011,10)
5. Lorenz, J. Continuous opinion dynamics under bounded confidence: A survey.
International Journal Of Modern Physics C. 18, 1819-1838 (2007)
6. Urena, R., Kou, G., Dong, Y., Chiclana, F. & Herrera-Viedma, E. A review on
trust propagation and opinion dynamics in social networks and group decision
making frameworks. Information Sciences. 478 pp. 461-475 (2019)
7. Anderson, B. & Ye, M. Recent advances in the modelling and analysis of opinion
dynamics on influence networks. International Journal Of Automation And
Computing. 16, 129-149 (2019)
8. Leonard, N., Lipsitz, J., Pitt, R. & Bertschinger, N. Nonlinear dynamics of the
public opinion. Frontiers In Physics. 8 (2021)
9. Lorenz-Spreen, P., Lewandowsky, S., Sunstein, C. & Hertwig, R. How behavioural
sciences can promote truth, autonomy and democratic discourse online. Nature
Human Behaviour. 4, 1102-1109 (2020)
10. Biondi, B., Baldovin, F. & Stella, A. Dynamics of radicalization under different
social network topologies. Scientific Reports. 13, 1479 (2023)
July 3, 2024 15/1611. Lee, F. Hong Kong citizens’ trust in China’s central government: assessing the
roles of the news media, political cynicism and value dissimilarity. China
Quarterly. 228 pp. 1070-1089 (2016)
12. Allcott, H., Braghieri, L., Eichmeyer, S. & Gentzkow, M. The welfare effects of
social media. American Economic Review. 110, 629-676 (2020)
13. Van Bavel, J., Baicker, K., Boggio, P., Capraro, V., Cichocka, A., Cikara, M.,
Crockett, M., Crum, A., Douglas, K., Druckman, J., Drury, J., Dube, O.,
Ellemers, N., Finkel, E., Fowler, J., Gelfand, M., Han, S., Haslam, S., Jetten, J.,
Kitayama, S., Mobbs, D., Napper, L., Pennycook, G., Peters, E., Petty, R., Rand,
D., Reicher, S., Schnall, S., Shariff, A., Skitka, L., Smith, S., Sunstein, C., Tabri,
N., Tucker, J., Linden, S., Lange, P., Weeden, K., Wohl, M., Zaki, J., Zion, S. &
Willer, R. Using social and behavioural science to support COVID-19 pandemic
response. Nature Human Behaviour. 4, 460-471 (2020)
14. Strogatz, S. Nonlinear dynamics and chaos: with applications to physics, biology,
chemistry, and engineering. (CRC Press,1994)
15. Scheffer, M. & Van Der Maas, H. Belief in models: on the fragility of convex
relationships. Evolutionary Human Sciences. 4 (2022)
16. van der Maas, H., Kolstein, R., Jansen, B. & Kievit, R. The double learning
process in belief dynamics. PLoS One. 15, e0242230 (2020)
17. Abe, S. On the Poincare-Bendixson theorem. Journal Of Physics: Conference
Series. 936, 012001 (2017)
18. Stanley, H. Introduction to phase transitions and critical phenomena. (Oxford
University Press,1987)
19. Ball, P. The physical modelling of human social systems. Complexus. 1, 190-206
(2002,12)
20. Grasman, R., van der Maas, H. & Wagenmakers, E. Fitting the cusp catastrophe
in R: A cusp package primer. Journal Of Statistical Software. 32 (2010)
21. Van Der Maas, H. & Molenaar, P. A sudden transition in the acquisition of a
response selection task. Journal Of Experimental Psychology: Learning, Memory,
And Cognition. 19, 1255 (2003)
22. Isermann, R. Identification of dynamical systems. (Springer,2011)
23. Daffin, L. Principles of social psychology. (Pressbooks,2021)
24. James, W. The principles of psychology. (Holt,1890)
25. Zajonc, R. Attitudinal effects of mere exposure. Journal Of Personality And
Social Psychology. 9, 1-27 (1968)
July 3, 2024 16/16