Memory GAPS: Would LLM pass the Tulving Test?
Jean-Marie Chauvet
February 27, 2024
Abstract
TheTulvingTestwasdesignedtoinvestigatememoryperformanceinrecog-
nition and recall tasks. Its results help assess the relevance of the “Synergis-
tic Ecphory Model” of memory and similar RK paradigms in human perfor-
mance. Thispaperstartsinvestigatingwhetherthemorethanforty-year-old
framework sheds some light on LLM’s acts of remembering.
Introduction
In his groundbreaking studies of memory, Endel Tulving (1927-2023) noted
that “one of the most compelling and salient characteristics of remembering
of past events is the individual’s subjective awareness of remembering” [1].
In order to include the rememberer’s recollective experience into the critical
constructs in the conceptualization of remembering, Tulving suggested an
“overall pretheoretical framework”, called the General Abstract Processing
System or GAPS. This paper investigates whether the GAPS also provides
insights when the subject is no longer human but a Large Language Model
(LLM).
Tulving championed the distinction of episodic from semantic memory,
successfullyarguingthatbeingfunctionallydifferent,theyrepresentseparate
but related systems. Both are placed on the same side of the cognitive
division between declarative memory (as episodic and semantic information
canbeexpressedthroughlanguage–e.g. repairingabicycle)ontheonehand,
and skills (which can be observed only in behavior–e.g. riding a bicycle) on
the other.
1
4202
beF
62
]IA.sc[
1v50561.2042:viXraThe GAPS and the Transformer
InTulving’sframework,asingleactofrememberingformstheunitofhuman
episodic memory. Remembering is a process thatbegins with the witnessing
or experiencing of an episode and ends with its recollective experience or
with the conversion of the remembered information into some other form,
or both. The GAPS specifies so called elements of remembering and their
interrelations in order to decompose this process.
The GAPS distinguishes two kinds of elements: observable events and
hypothetical constructs (processes and states); and it divides elements into
two categories: elements of encoding and elements of retrieval.
Figure1: TheGAPS:ElementsofEpisodicMemoryandtheirRelations.
The element of encoding is a process that converts the information about an ex-
perienced event or episode (in a particular setting, at a particular time) into an
engram or memory trace. The central element of the retrieval processes ecphoric
information, a synergistic product of the engram and the retrieval cue, which calls
on both episodic and semantic information. Source for figure: Ch. 7, [1, 7-1, p.
135].
Of particular interest to this study of applicability of the GAPS frame-
work to LLM are the possible transpositions of engram and ecphoric in-
formation into the domain of generative AI. In his seminal book, Tulving
2offers a very broad definition of engrams: “the product of encoding”, “con-
ditions for recollection of the experienced event”, or “differences between
the state of the memory system before and after encoding”. The latter is
closely related the original definitions of these terms introduced by Richard
Semon (1859–1918): “to represent the enduring changes brought about by
the energetic effect of stimuli in the organism” [2], [3]. Note that if, in
both clarifications, the nature of the changes are unknown, the term be-
came nonetheless broadly known in psychology research through the later
work of Karl Lashley (1890–1958) concluding, among other experimental
results on neural mechanisms involved in learning and memory, that “there
is no demonstrable localization of memory trace” [4].
Similarly inspired by Semon, Tulving suggested the terms ecphory and
ecphoric information to designate respectively the process that brings (i)
the relevant information in the retrieval environment into interaction with
(ii) the original or re-coded engram, and the output of this process. Such
ecphoric information determines the particulars of recollective experience in
the next phase of remembering: conversion. In the GAPS model, ecphoric
information is basically a task-free component of the retrieval process, it is
simply used by being converted into another form in the memory perfor-
mance.
The categories of encoding and retrieval in the GAPS are not without
analogies with the Transformer architecture of neural networks at the core
ofLLMs,whichpreciselyarticulatesencodersanddecoderstoprocessvector
embeddings representing words and sentences.
At this stage, from cursorily reviewing the architecture of both GAPS
and Transformer–and keeping in mind that Tulving’s psychological frame-
work is only “pre-theoretical” and “highly schematic”, while Transformers
are actual computer implementations–the practical analogy would unfold as
follows:
Tulving’s “direct comparison”: recognition versus recall
In order to further investigate the analogy and its grounds, we adopt Tulv-
ing’s design of “direct comparison” experiments to assess recognition versus
recall tasks in LLMs. Recognition and recall are both processes of retrieval
and both result in the rememberer’s awareness of a past event. The simple
episodes in the experiment are to be presentations of a list of English words
to be remembered. In this simplified situation of comparing recognition
and recall tasks, we consider only two independent dimensions: one has to
do with the type of retrieval information, or cue, available to the remem-
3Figure 2: The Transformer Architecture. Based on the 2017 paper [5] at-
tention mechanism, the Transformer architecture requires less training time than
previous recurrent neural architectures. Input text is split into tokens (sometimes
called n-gram, dangerously reminiscent of Semon’s engrams–see text), then con-
verted into vectors. Through different layers, each token is contextualized with
other tokens via parallel attention heads, calculating weights for each according to
its importance. The Transformer Architecture elaborates on softmax-based atten-
tion mechanism [6] and Fast Weight Controllers [7]. Source for figure: [5].
4Table 1: Hypothetical analogy between GAPS and Transformer. Se-
mantic memory, in Tulving’s conception, would be represented by the probability
distribution learned by the LLM during the pretraining phase. In Transformers it
determines the particulars of the output based on the input (prompt).
GAPS Transformer
Processes encoding encoder
re-coding encoder
ecphory encoder
conversion decoder
States engram vector embedding
ecphoric information output probabilities
memory performance output
berer; the second refers to the conversion process in the GAPS framework.
The retrieval information includes copies of the studied words and non-copy
cue words. As for the conversion process: in the recognition task, the re-
memberer has to express whether or not the cue word was in the study list
(familiarity); in the recall task, the rememberer has to identify a word in
the study list, if any, associated with the cue word (identification), thereby
expressing some other aspect of the original memorizing experience. Note
that in the GAPS framework, the first dimension involves processes ante-
rior to the construction of ecphoric information, while the second relates to
post-ecphoric processes. The experimental results are therefore captured by
the 2 x 2 matrix in Table 2
Table 2: Differences between recognition and recall tasks. Source for table: Ch.
[1, p. 14].
Retrieval information Conversion
Familiarity Identification
Copy Cue Word Recognition ?
Non-Copy Cue Word ? Recall
Conventionalrecognitionandrecalltestssitintwoofthefourcellsinthe
matrix. When the rememberer, however, declares a cue other than a copy
cue word to be familiar it is a false positive response from the conventional
perspective although psychologists might disagree on how to think about
such responses [8]. The other empty cell represents a situation where the
rememberer’s somewhat strange task is to repeat the cue word to confirm it
is associated with the copy in the study list. False negatives are of interest
5hereandTulving’sinterpretationwasthattheseentailedaformofcontinuity
between recognition and recall retrieval processes.
The direct comparison test design represents all four cells of the matrix.
In a typical session the LLM is prompted to memorize a list of 48 common
English words. In a group of experiments, the LLM is prompted with a cue
word and asked whether the cue is included or not in the studied list; in
another group, the LLM is prompted with a cue word and asked to retrieve
any strongly associated word in the studied list (or none if no such word is
evoked by the cue).
In each experiment 32 cue words are presented in the 32 prompts: eight
of these cue words were identical with eight words in the list (copy cues),
eight were strongly associated words (non-copy associated cues), eight were
rhymingwords(non copy rhymes cues),andeightwereunrelateddistractors
(non-copy unrelated cues). The 32 cue words are identical for both the
recognition and the recall task.
In order to introduce the distinction between immediate and delayed
retrieval of the original experimental design, the experiment is run twice
for each group: in the first run, memorization and retrieval are both in
each individual prompt (immediate); in the second, memorization is the
first prompt of a conversation (chat) with the LLM, followed by retrieval
prompts which continue the conversation (delayed).
Results
As a reference benchmark, the results of Tulving’s original experiments are
presented in Table 3 from Ch. [1, p. 14, Table 14.2]:
The memory performance of LLMs in the Tulving Test of direct com-
parison is presented along the same format in Table 4.
Within each result table, several comparisons are of interest. First the
probability that copy cues were familiar was higher than the probability of
identification and production of the target word in response to the copy
cue, in both the human (Table 3) and the LLM (Table 4) subject–here
mistral-7b-instruct-v0. Second, the probability that extra-list unre-
lated cues were (incorrectly) recognized as members of the memorized list
increased from the immediate to delayed test, in both human and LLM sub-
jects. Remarkably and contrasting with the human subject, in the imme-
diate recognition task the LLM never erred: no false positives for non-copy
cuesand100%familiarityforcopycues. Third, rhymewordsprovedinboth
casesmoreeffectivethanunrelateddistractorcuesinrecall. Fourth,strongly
6Table 3: Summary of memory performance in the original direct com-
parison experiment. Each proportion shown is based on 576 observations. The
data for the familiarity (recognition) task show proportion of cases in which the
human subjects regarded the cue word as included in the list. Hence the data
for copy cues represent ’correct’ responses, whereas the data from the other three
types of cues represent ’false positives’. The data for the identification (recall) task
indicate proportions of responses to the cue being any target word in the list.
Retrieval information Conversion
Familiarity Identification
Immediate Delayed Immediate Delayed
Copy Cue Word 0.78 0.71 0.69 0.60
Non-Copy Associated 0.15 0.20 0.54 0.37
Non-copy Rhyme 0.09 0.15 0.20 0.31
Non-copy Unrelated 0.08 0.18 0.04 0.02
Table 4: Summary of memory performance of the
mistral-7b-instruct-v0 LLM in the direct comparison experiment.
Each proportion is based on 384 observations (but see text). Interpretations of
proportions are the same as above Table 3.
Retrieval information Conversion
Familiarity Identification
Immediate Delayed Immediate Delayed
Copy Cue Word 1 0.46 0.46 0
Non-Copy Associated 0 0.47 0.49 0.40
Non-copy Rhyme 0 0.50 0.18 0.01
Non-copy Unrelated 0 0.41 0.08 0
7associated cues were considered members of the list with much higher prob-
ability in the immediate test, the difference being greatly reduced in the
delayed test. The case of the LLM subject varies a bit, since no false posi-
tivesareproducedintheimmediaterecognitiontest, whiletheyappearwith
similar probabilities in the delayed recognition test.
Stating the obvious when comparing the two tables: first, the LLM
performs immediate recognition faultlessly, while displaying much weaker
performance than human subjects on the delayed recognition: lower prob-
ability on copy cues, and significantly higher probabilities of false positives
(i.e. judging non-copy cues to be included in the list). Second, in the im-
mediate recall task the LLM memory performance is weaker than in the
human subject, more so for copy cues–which fail completely–than for asso-
ciate and unrelated cues–which seems paradoxical given the perfect match
in the recognition task. The LLM, however, displays an intriguing pattern
on the delayed identification task, comparable to human subjects when the
cue is an associate word but unable to recall any word in the list when the
the cued prompt is a rhyme word. The discussion section looks into the
context length and so-called hallucination phenomena as a possible cause
for this last observation.
In a separate series of tests designed to investigate a different aspect of
the list-memorizing episode, the recall test only was re-run with cues now
being ordinals (“What is the first word in the list?”), ranging from first to
twentieth. The results are summarized in Table 5 for the immediate and
delayed tests.
Table 5: Summary of memory performance of the
mistral-7b-instruct-v0 LLM in the direct comparison experiment
with ordinal cues. Each proportion is based on 60 observations. Interpretations
of proportions are the same as above Table 3.
Retrieval information Conversion
Ordering
Immediate Delayed
Ordinal cue word 0.233 0
Discussion
The LLM “Tulving Test” rests on the “encoding/retrieval paradigm” cham-
pioned bu Tulving. In the paradigm, both encoding and retrieval conditions
8are experimentally manipulated in order to reveal specificities of each. The
results presented in the previous section are part of a program of exper-
iments to explore the relevance of these specificities, as expressed in the
GAPS model above, to the current crop of LLMs in Generative AI.
In the original direct comparison experiment on human subjects, the
effectofcopycueswasfirstdiscussed. Thefindingthenpresentedaparadox.
The level of of performance with copy cues, i.e. cue words taken from the
previously studied list, was generally higher in the familiarity conversion
thanfortheidentificationconversion(seeTable3). Howcantherememberer
have difficulty identifying the name of a studied item in the list, when it is
the same word which is used in the cue in the recall test, whereas it is
asserted as a member of the list in the recognition test? Tulving suggests
two possibilities: (i) because of differences in task requirements, the nature
of the ecphoric process is different for the two groups of rememberers; and
(ii) different types of conversion require different kinds, different amounts,
or both of ecphoric information, namely that judgments of identification of
a particular aspect of an experienced episode requires ecphoric information
of “higher quality” than judgments that the cue word is familiar. Tulving
favored the latter over the former and suggested a theory of conversion
thresholds for different kinds of memory tasks.
ThesituationwithLLMrememberersissomewhatexacerbatedastothe
effects of copy cues. Not only the probability of recognition is higher than
the same in the human test, but it is a perfect 100%. In complete contrast,
the decrease gap in performance between recognition and recall immediate
tests with copy cues is much larger in the case of the LLM. And in the
delayed recall test, the LLM systematically fails on copy cues.
Recent AI research on prompt engineering [9] may point to the first of
Tulving’ssuggestionsasasensibleexplanationoftheaggravatedfindingsfor
theLLMrememberer. Differentstructuresintheprompts,expressingrecog-
nition requests versus recall requests, may indeed entail different ecphoric
processes rather than different quantity of information being required [10].
On the other hand, the conversion thresholds in the SEM are an attrac-
tive alternative as they are grounded into an ecphoric vector space, which
seems cogent to the vector space embedding found in the Transformer archi-
tecture. (The explanation or the interpretation of such embedding spaces
remains crucial for LLM acceptability in general [11]).
The effects of associative cues (non-copy cues) also call for discussions.
Data in Table 3 showed a dissociation between the tasks when associative
cues were used. Judgments of associative cues as included in the study list
(false positives) increased from the immediate to the delayed test, whereas
9Figure 3: The Synergistic Ecphory Model (SEM). Source for figure: Ch.14
[1, 14.3]. Schematic diagram depicting a given episode such as the appearance of a
familiar word in a particular study list. Variations of trace information, a, b and c
correspondtodifferentengramsresultingfrommanydifferentpossibleencodingsof
the same event, only some of which are realized on a particular occasion. Retrieval
information x, y, z correspond to the different potentially relevant retrieval cues
(recall) that may or may not be present on a particular occasion. (We simplify
here under the assumption of a single dimension for memory traces and a single
dimension for retrieval information, resulting in a bi-dimensional ecphoric vector
space.) Thecurvedlinesrepresentconversionthresholdsfordifferentmemorytasks,
here recognition/familiarity and recall/identification. According to the position of
thepointrepresentingthesynergyofretrievalandtraceinformationrelativetothe
threshold lines, the rememberer would pass or not the given test.
10their effectiveness at eliciting the target word, in the recall task, decreased.
What Table 4 first shows is that, even more acutely, the false positives ap-
pear only in the chat-based delayed test of recognition, whereas the LLM
rememberer failed to pass any chat-based delayed test of identification. In
order to quantify the correlation, Tulving introduced the measure of cue
valence [12] with respect to an aspect of an event or episode refers to the
probability with which that aspect of the event can be recalled in the pres-
ence of the cue. Table 3 allows the quantification of the negative correlation
between false positive response rate and the identification valence of asso-
ciative cues. The SEM above makes also sense here, in explaining out the
negative correlation by pinpointing the position in the ecphoric space rel-
ative to the conversion threshold curves. In Table 4 however, the memory
performance of the delayed recall tasks appears quite contrasted: a copy cue
does not recall a single word of the study list, even though the cue is itself
that target word! Rhyme cue words fail almost systematically at evoking a
targetwordinthelist. Associatecuewords, incontrast, triggercomparable,
if slightly better, recall performance than in human subjects and unrelated
are... unrelated.
Data from Table 5 may suggest that for LLMs the role of retrieval in-
formation might be at variance with its role in human memory ecphory as
posited by Tulving. In particular, examination of individual sessions with
ordinal cues reveals that:
• In immediate tests, the first four or five answers are generally correct,
i.e. the LLM properly respond to independent prompting of the first
to the fifth word in the study list. Higher ordinals, however, elicit
repetition of the last correct word or a random word of the list.
• In delayed tests, LLM answers are taken consistently from another
list than the study list. In one run, for instance, the LLM responses
wereallwithoutrepetitionediblefruits, certainlypickedupfromsome
pretraining data.
Similarly, in delayed recall tests of LLM with copy cue words, the re-
sponses were mostly correct associate words, whether or not included in the
study list, as if the pretrained associations took over the episodic memory
traces.
Tulvingcontemplatedthat“therememberer’srecollectiveexperiencede-
rive its contents not only from the engram in episodic memory but also from
the retrieval cue as interpreted by the semantic system and the general cog-
nitiveenvironmentinwhichretrievaloccurs”: thesynergisticecphorymodel
11[1]. Along these lines, the hypothesis that the joint contribution of retrieval
cue and engram information might be differently balanced in LLMs and
human subjects would account for the findings of Tables 4 and 5.
ThedirectcomparisonTulvingTestwhentakenbyLLMsresultinmem-
ory performance generally comparable to human memory performance with
significant extreme differentiation in the immediate recognition test, and in
the delayed recall test, in particular when prompted with copy cues or or-
dinal cues. (Rhyme cue words are also much less efficient in LLM recall.)
Within the GAPS framework and associated Synergistic Ecphory Model,
these data suggest that semantic memory information, built by pretraining
a LLM, and imported by cues into the retrieval information outweighs the
engram information of episodic memory.
In a famous paper of 1980, William K . Estes (1919-2011), asked “Is Hu-
man Memory Obsolete?” [13] noting that: “We evidently can conclude with
some confidence, then, that a person’s memory for elements of a sequence
of items such as letters, digits, or words is best represented by uncertainty
gradients portraying the way information about the remembered position
of each item is distributed over an interval of time, rather than by a series
of boxes or slots containing items of information.” Although Estes insisted
there on the difference between probability distributions for human mem-
ory traces versus on/off deterministic slot structures of raw computer mem-
ory, today’s Transformer architecture–which execution indeed uses the same
on/off computer memory–revolves also around probability distributions and
vector spaces, as in Estes’s human memory model. The Tulving Test helps
qualifying this analogy in memory performance, hinting at a different bal-
ance in usage of semantic information and cue/retrieval information in de-
layedrecallofepisodicmemoriesinLLMsandhumansubjects. Furtherwork
is required for a quantitative assessment of the variant ecphory processes in
human subjects and LLMs, more specifically on a possible analytical defini-
tion of Tulving’s cue valence based not on an estimate of observed memory
performance but directly on the general probability distributions learned by
LLMs in pretraining.
Methods
We transpose the direct comparison experiment, between recognition and
recall, described in [1, 14] to LLM subjects.
Individual experiments are programmed as Python scripts interacting
with LLMs through the LLM CLI utility and library [14] (Python 3.11.8
12on Windows 10). Results presented and discussed in this paper were ob-
tained with mistral-7b-instruct-v0 [15]. (Results with smaller models,
e.g. orca-mini-3b [16], were not reliable enough.)
48 simple English words were selected manually to constitute the study
listofto-be-rememberedwords. Firstly,48associatecuewordswereselected
from three sources: (i) prompting the LLM for one strongly associated word
to each of the 48 to-be-remembered words, (ii) synonyms of each of the
48 words, and (iii) antonyms of each of the 48 words. Antonyms and syn-
onyms were obtained using the Natural Language Toolkit [17]. Secondly,
48 rhyme cue words were obtained using the CMU Pronouncing Directory
[18]. Finally, 16 unrelated English words were picked up manually to act
as distractors. The 48-row by 3-column table of target word, associate cue
word, rhymecuewordstogetherwiththelistof16distractorsistheproduct
of these initial preparation scripts.
Each session is made of two tests, one on the recognition task (famil-
iarity), the other on the recall task (identification). Each test lists 32 cue
words submitted to the LLM for remembering either (i) if the cue word is
included in the study list, for recognition, or (ii) a word in the study list
evoked by the cue word, or “none” (recall). The 32 cue words are grouped
into 8 copy cues, 8 associate cues, 8 rhyme cues and 8 unrelated cues. Both
theorderofthe32cuesandtheselectionofcuetypesarerandomizedbefore
running each session.
The recognition and recall 32-word tests are run twice to differentiate
immediate from delayed performance. In immediate tests, each individual
prompt to the LLM contains the list of 48 words to be remembered before
the cue word. In delayed test, each test is a chat beginning with the first
instruction to memorize the list of 48 words, preceding a series of individual
prompts for each cue word, all within the same chat.
Each response of the LLM is analyzed and two counts are updated for
the presence of the target word in the response, and for the presence of any
word in the study list. (Note that the second count deliberately includes
false positives in the recognition task with non-copy cues.)
References
[1] E. Tulving, Elements of Episodic Memory. Oxford University Press,
1983.
[2] D. L. Schacter, J. E. Eich, and E. Tulving, “Richard Semon’s Theory
of Memory,” Journal of Verbal Learning and Verbal Behavior, vol. 17, no.
136, pp. 721–743, 1978, doi: https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/
S0022-5371(78)90443-7.
[3] R. W. Semon, Die Mneme als erhaltendes Prinzip im Wechsel des
organischen Geschehens. Engelmann, 1920. doi: 10.5962/bhl.title.10234.
[4] K. S. Lashley, “In Search of the Engram,” 1950.
[5] A. Vaswani et al., “Attention is all you need,” in Proceedings of the
31st International Conference on Neural Information Processing Systems,
in Nips’17. Long Beach, California, USA: Curran Associates Inc., 2017, pp.
6000–6010.
[6] D. Bahdanau, K. Cho, and Y. Bengio, “Neural Machine Translation
by Jointly Learning to Align and Translate.”
[7] J. S. Imanol Schlag Kazuki Irie, “Linear Transformers Are Secretly
Fast Weight Programmers.”
[8] M. K. Moshe Anisfeld, “Association, Synonymity, and Directionality
in False Recognition,” Journal of Experimental Psychology, vol. 77, no. 2,
p. 171, 1968, doi: 10.1037/h0025782.
[9] J. Wei et al., “Chain-of-thought prompting elicits reasoning in large
language models.” 2023.
[10]J.LiandJ.Li,“Memory,ConsciousnessandLargeLanguageModel.”
[11]G.Tennenholtzet al.,“DemystifyingEmbeddingSpacesusingLarge
Language Models.”
[12] E. Tulving and M. J. Watkins, “Structure Of Memory Traces,” Psy-
chologicalreview,vol. 82,no. 4,pp. 261–275,Jul. 1975,doi: 10.1037/h0076782.
[13] W. K. Estes, “Is human memory obsolete?,” Am sci, vol. 68, no. 1,
pp. 62–69, Jan. 1980.
[14] S. Willison, “LLM.” https://llm.datasette.io/en/stable/index.html,
2023.
[15] A. Q. Jiang et al., “Mistral 7B.”
[16] P. Mathur, “An explain tuned OpenLLaMA-3b model on custom
wizardlm,alpaca,anddollydatasets,”Github repository, huggingface reposi-
tory. https://github.com/pankajarm/wizardlm_alpaca_dolly_orca_open_llama_3b,
https://https://huggingface.co/psmathur/wizardlm_alpaca_dolly_orca_open_llama_3b;
GitHub, HuggingFace, 2023.
[17] S. Bird, E. Klein, and E. Loper, Natural language processing with
Python: analyzing text with the Natural Language Toolkit. O’Reilly Media,
Inc., 2009.
[18] Carnegie Mellon Speech Group, “The CMU Pronouncing Dictio-
nary.”
14Author information
Jean-Marie Chauvet is a co-founder of Neuron Data and served as its CTO
(1985-2000). He no longer maintains any affiliation.
J.-M. C. performed all analyses and wrote the manuscript as an inde-
pendent researcher.
Ethics declarations
The author declare no competing interests.
Electronic supplementary material
Data Availability
Results of the Tulving Tests analysed in the paper are publicly available
in the repository: https://github.com/CRTandKDU/TulvingTest/tree/
main/tulving/output
For each complete session, immediate and delayed recognition and recall
tests are kept in separate CSV files.
Code Availability
Python scripts for the Tulving Test and tabulation of their results are pub-
liclyavailableintherepository: https://github.com/CRTandKDU/TulvingTest/
tree/main/tulving
15