A Digital Human Model for Symptom
Progression of Vestibular Motion Sickness
based on Subjective Vertical Conflict Theory
Shota Inoue, Hailong Liu, and Takahiro Wada
Human Robotics Laboratory, Nara Institute of Science and Technology, Nara, 630-0192, Japan
ABSTRACT
Digital human models of motion sickness have been actively developed, among which
models based on subjective vertical conflict (SVC) theory are the most actively studied.
These models facilitate the prediction of motion sickness in various scenarios such as riding
in a car. Most SVC theory models predict the motion sickness incidence (MSI), which is
defined as the percentage of people who would vomit with the given specific motion stimulus.
However, no model has been developed to describe milder forms of discomfort or specific
symptoms of motion sickness, even though predicting milder symptoms is important for
applications in automobiles and daily use vehicles. Therefore, the purpose of this study was
to build a computational model of symptom progression of vestibular motion sickness based
on SVC theory. We focused on a model of vestibular motion sickness with six degrees-of-
freedom (6DoF) head motions. The model was developed by updating the output part of the
state-of-the-art SVC model, termed the 6DoF-SVC (IN1) model, from MSI to the MIsery
SCale (MISC), which is a subjective rating scale for symptom progression. We conducted
an experiment to measure the progression of motion sickness during a straight fore-aft
motion. It was demonstrated that our proposed method, with the parameters of the output
parts optimized by the experimental results, fits well with the observed MISC.
Keywords: Motion sickness, digital human model, subjective vertical conflict theory, symptom
progression
INTRODUCTION
The introduction of autonomous driving has amplified the importance of
addressing motion sickness owing to the increased potential for motion sickness
onset resulting from the increased chances of engaging in a variety of subtasks,
including changes in the driving algorithm from human drivers (Diels & Bos, 2016;
Sivak & Schoettle, 2015; Wada, 2016). Modeling studies of motion sickness are
being actively conducted because the prediction or quantification of sickness is
essential to reduce symptoms, while the factors triggering sickness remain unclear.
In the ISO 2631-1, motion sickness dose value (MSDV)(ISO2631-1, 1997),
which is defined such that "higher values correspond to a greater incidence of
motion sickness" is described as a function of integrating frequency-weighted
acceleration in the vertical direction. The MSDV is widely accepted and utilized
in a variety of scenarios. However, while MSDV is known to be correlated with
the motion sickness incidence (MSI), which is defined as the percentage of people
who vomit, its ability to describe milder forms of discomfort or specific symptoms
of motion sickness remains unclear. In addition, several mathematical models
12
based on the hypothesis of the mechanism of motion sickness have been developed.
Oman (Oman, 1990) was the first to model sensory conflict theory(Reason, 1978),
which postulates that the accumulation of discrepancy between afferent neural
signals obtained by sensory organs and those expected based on our experiences
leads to motion sickness. This model is based on a hypothetical mechanism of
human motion perception, which is performed by an internal model thought to be
built into the central nervous system (CNS). However, it should be noted that the
Oman model is conceptual; as such, the unit or physical meaning of the model
output and the source of the conflict are not clearly defined.
The Subjective Vertical Conflict (SVC) theory (Bles et al., 1998) is the only
hypothesis in which the source of conflict in SC theory has been clearly defined.
SVC theory postulates that the error between the direction of gravity sensed by the
sensory organs and the expected direction obtained by the CNS leads to motion
sickness. Bos and Bles developed the first mathematical model of the SVC theory
for 1 dof vertical motion (Bos & Bles, 1998) based on human motion perception
with the idea of the internal model hypothesis. The output of the model is MSI,
which was validated by comparing the calculated results with the MSI observed
experimentally in (McCauley et al., 1976). Computational models of the SVC
theory for 6 dof motion including rotation, have been developed by expanding the
internal model framework of motion perception with only OTO in a 1 dof model
(Bos & Bles, 1998) to a multisensory structure with the otolith-canal
interaction(Inoue et al., 2023; Kamiji et al., 2007; Khalid et al., 2011; Wada et al.,
2018). The multisensory integration structure allows us to build several versions
of SVC theory models: the inclusion of visual flow(Braccesi et al., 2011)(Wada et
al., 2020)(Sousa Schulman et al., 2023; Tamura et al., 2023), static visual
vertical(Liu et al., 2024), and the effect of human motion predictability by
incorporating hypothetical mechanisms of learning exogenous motion
dynamics(Wada, 2021).
As described above, several motion sickness models have been developed;
however, MSI is the only model output that can be experimentally measured.
Practically, it is desirable to predict or quantify the degree of milder symptoms or
the progression of symptoms rather than vomiting. In addition, the onset of motion
sickness varies significantly among individuals, although considering such
individual differences is important when deriving methods to reduce motion
sickness. No model, however, can deal with both of them. Looking beyond the
SVC model, there is a model, which outputs the MIsery SCale (MISC)(Bos et al.,
2005), an 11-point subjective rating scale based on symptom progression (Irmak
et al., 2021). This model (Irmak et al., 2021) uses a 1 DOF lateral acceleration
signal instead of the sensory conflict in Oman's SC theory model(Oman, 1990),
meaning that the model is not based on the SC theory nor the internal model
hypothesis related to motion perception. As such, the model cannot deal with
factors that can be addressed in the SVC model families developed thus far, such
as multi-DOF motion, including head rotation and motion prediction.
In this context, the purpose of the present study was to develop a motion sickness
model to predict symptom progression of motion sickness for six-DoF motions of
the head for each individual based on the SVC theory. We developed a model basedDigital Model for Symptom Progression of Vestibular Motion Sickness 3
on (Inoue et al., 2023) among the SVC model families, because it was optimized
to fit the observed MSI results and confirmed that it can describe the perceived
gravity direction. There are several options for nonlinear mapping from conflict
signals related to the discrepancy between the sensed and expected verticalities of
MISC. In the present study, we introduce and compare four types of nonlinear
dynamics: the one used in the Original SVC model for MSI output(Bos & Bles,
1998; Inoue et al., 2023), the one introduced by Oman for generic sickness severity
output(Oman, 1990), and their various combinations. We conducted an experiment
to measure the progression of motion sickness during straight fore-aft motion.
Based on the experimental results, the parameters of the output parts of the
proposed models were optimized to fit the MISC observed for each participant.
COMPUTATIONAL MODEL OF SYMPTOM PROGRESSION OF
MOTION SICKNESS
MODEL STRUCTURE
Fig.1 shows the structure of the proposed model. The SVC part, which calculates
the conflict from the sensory signals from head motions, has the same structure as
the SVC models that output the MSI(Inoue et al., 2023). For the output part, which
is a dynamic mapping that connects the conflict to the MISC, we propose four
different types and compare their performances.
A. SVC part
In (Inoue et al., 2023), the model structure for the error feedback part of the 6DoF-
SVC model (Kamiji et al., 2007)(Wada et al., 2018) and the parameters were
revisited to investigate the accuracy of self-motion perception for verticality, as
well as to increase the accuracy of motion sickness. This study found that the best
model was the one in which the integral exists only in the feedback part for the
Gravito-inertial acceleration
OTO
Angular velocity LP
SCC
MISC MISC
∫ Inertial output part
acceleration OTO
LP  SCC
Internal model
SVC part
Figure 1: Structure of the proposed model. Left hand side of the mode, where
subjective vertical conflict Dv is calculated from vestibular motion input is referred to as
SVC part. The SVC part is adopted from one of the version of 6DOF-SVC model (Inoue
et al., 2023). The MISC is calculated from the subjective vertical in the MIS output part.
In the present study, four different types of MISC output part (shown in Fig.2) are
introduced and compared.
f
ω
a K
K
a
ω
a
+
+
+
+
ˆg
++
ˆf
ˆω
+
K
K
K
ωc
ac
vc
+
−
+
−
ω
s
Δ ω
Δ a
Δ v
v
s
+
−
ˆω s
a
s
+
−
ˆa s
ˆv s
+
− Δ vFigure 1: Structure of the proposed model. Left hand side of the mode, where
subjective vertical conflict v is calculated from vestibular motion input is referred to
as SVC part. The SVC part is adopted from one of 6DOF-SVC models (Inoue et al.,
2023). The MISC is calculated from the subjective vertical in the MISC output part.
Four different types of MISC output part (shown in Fig.2) are introduced and
compared.
4
error in the subjective vertical direction, which was referred to as the In-1 model
in prior work (Inoue et al., 2023). Therefore, the In-1 model was adopted for SVC.
The outputs of the SVC part is the subjective vertical conflict , which is
defined as the sensed vertical ( ) and the expected one ( ) calculated in the
internal model. The inputs of the SVC part are Gravitoinertial acceleration (GIA)
of the head in the three-dimensional space , which is defined as ,
where aand denote the inertial and gravitational accelerations, respectively,
while  is the head angular velocity.
OTO and SCC denote the dynamics of the otolith and semicircular canals,
respectively, while and represent the internal models in the CNS.
In the present study, OTO and were set to the unit matrix, and the transfer
functions identified in previous studies (Merfeld et al., 1993) were used for the
SCC and as follows:
 
    (1)
 
where the vectors with subscripts, such as  , denote afferent signals obtained
from the sensory organs or expected signals obtained from the internal model.
According to Einstein's equivalence principle, otoliths receive GIA f, but not a,
directly. In order to obtain a and g, some calculation is required. For the GIA
resolution, illustrated by the LP block in Fig.1, the generalized Mayne equation
(Bos & Bles, 2002) is used:
 , (2)

where v denotes the gravity acceleration vector obtained from the sensory organs.
s
Similar calculations were performed in the internal model.
Vectors representing discrepancies between the sensed and expected ones by the
internal model    are fed back to the respective
internal model of the sensory organs to obtain better self-motion perception.
Given the above, input to the internal model blocks are given as
fˆ =a+K a+K v()d, ˆ =+K . (3)
ac vc wc
The vectors a and  denote signals that are the summation of multiple sources of
information that contribute to self-motion perception, such as effect copy,
information from other senses (i.e., somatosensory), and the effect of motion
prediction (Wada, 2021). In the present study, signals are generated by
multiplying the gains by the physical motions (Kamiji et al., 2007)(Wada et al.,
2018) for the sake of simplicity.
B. MISC output part
The MISC output part calculates the MISC and symptom progression from the
subjective vertical conflict v . Regarding the dynamics connecting sensory
conflict to a generic symptom level, Oman proposed a structure that combines two
parallel, interacting, critically damped second-order transfer functions with fast
and slow dynamics(Oman, 1990). In addition, power scaling is used in the output
of the dynamics to calculate generic symptoms in(Oman, 1990). A modified
version of the model was developed to describe individual differences by
introducing parameters to be tuned in fast and slow pathways(Irmak et al., 2021).

S
R
C
3
C
g
 a =
O
a
T
s
O
− ˆa
s
, 
S
=
v
s
C C
O
s
T O
=
d v
s
d t
−s
d
=
ˆ
sds
+
1
, s
1
(
v
f
f 
,
−s
= v
s
v
s
3R
ˆ =s
) −s
ˆ− v
s
sds
+d
 vs
s
1
ˆ
ˆv
s
 v
f = a + gDigital Model for Symptom Progression of Vestibular Motion Sickness 5
Based on the above, the present study introduces four types of MISC output parts
as follows (Fig. 2).
[(a) MSIbase] is composed of a combination of the Hill function and a second-
order transfer function, used in the conventional SVC models that outputs MSI as
(Bos & Bles, 1998; Inoue et al., 2023; Kamiji et al., 2007).
[(b) OmanAP] has the same structure as in prior research(Irmak et al., 2021;
Oman, 1990). The power-scaling part was placed after the fast and slow pathways.
[(c) OmanBP] has the same structure as that used in previous research. The power-
scaling part is placed before the fast and slow pathways (Oman, 1990).
[(d) OmanHILL] is a model in which the input power scaling of OmanBP is
replaced by the Hill function used in a prior study(Bos & Bles, 1998). We newly
have introduced this structure as a natural expansion of the conventional SVC
model by replacing the final path for MSI with fast and slow pathways.
The dynamics of the fast and slow pathways used in OmanAP, OmanBP, and
OmanHILL in common are given as follows (also see Fig.2-(b)):
, (4)
 
Input u and output MISC for three models are defined as follows:
i
OmanAP: (5)
OmanBP: (6)
(||v||/b)2
OmanHILL: u = , MISC=u (7)
i 1+(||v||/b)2 o


(a) MSIbase (b) OmanAP, (c) OmanBP, (d) OmanHill
Figure 2: MISC output parts.
MODEL PARAMETER
We assumed that individual differences in motion sickness susceptibility is
mainly determined by the sensitivity of the MISC output part. The parameters for
the SVC were as follows: K =0.1, K =0.1, K =0.5, K =10.0, K =5.0, =2.0, and
a w ac wc vc
=7.0, which were adopted from the In-1 model in(Inoue et al., 2023).
d
The four different types of MISC output parts had three or four model parameters
(Fig.2), all of which were positive and   . These parameters were determined
for each experimental condition and participant by minimizing the function (8):
conNtimeN
J:=(MISCobs −MISCmdl)2 (8)
j,i j,i
j=1 i=1
where and are the MISC observed in the experiment and those
calculated using the computational model, respectively. The scalars conN(=2) and
timeN(28)denote the numbers of experimental conditions used.
M I S C
u
o b sj,i
o
= u
s
+
M
u
I
f
S C m dlj,i
u
s
=
(
2
u =i
u :=i
 v
1
u ,i2s
+ 1 )
||  v ||,
M( ||  v ||) B
uP re- iscaling
1
2
u
M
,P
f
I
=
S
M
1
( s +1
C = ( u
I S C =
K
2( )s + 11
1
2( )s + 12
21 )
M)o
u
o
+
u
s
u
A P
+
us
uo
i
P ost-scaling M IS C6
EXPERIMENT
APPARATUS
An electric wheelchair WHILL model CR
(WHILL Co., Ltd.) was automated by us and
used in the experiment (Fig.3). An LED tape
light attached to the wheelchair comprised
multiple LEDs spaced 7 mm apart, each
capable of changing color independently.
Among the LEDs, only one was illuminated
green at any given time. This specific LED
could change over time so that the participants'
head postures were guided to the GIA if they Figure 3: Apparatus.
pursued the currently illuminated green LED
using head movement without eye movement. The two LEDs positioned directly
above and below the green LED are indicated were illuminated in red. An IMU
was attached to the helmet to measure the acceleration and angular velocity acting
on the heads of the participants. The WHILL moved in the fore-aft direction at a
maximum speed of 1.67 m/s over a distance of 3m.
DESIGN
Eleven participants were exposed to the fore-aft motion of an automated
wheelchair while seated. The head-tilt condition, which was either move or static,
was considered the primary experimental factor. In the movement condition,
participants were instructed to pursue a green LED by tilting their heads with
minimum eye movement. The position of the illuminated LED was determined
such that the head was aligned with the GIA. In the static condition, they were
instructed to gaze at the illuminated LED that was not moved so that the head was
fixed in the Earth’s vertical direction. Each participant performed two different
head tilts on two different days, with the minimum interval of two days between
the two experiments. The order of conditions was almost counterbalanced.
PROCEDURE
This study was approved by the Ethics Review Committee of Nara Institute of
Science and Technology, Japan (approval number: 2021-I-34). All participants
provided written informed consent to participate after receiving an explanation of
the experiment. Each participant was seated in an automated wheelchair in an
upright posture and wore a helmet and seatbelt. The geometric relationship
between the eye and LEDs was adjusted to accommodate individual differences
among participants. Each participant was subsequently exposed to four
consecutive sets of fore-aft linear wheelchair movements. The set was defined as
a 5-minute movement of the wheelchair movement. A break of approximately 30-
seconds was left between sets, during which the position of the wheelchair was
initialized. During the motion exposure, the participants orally reported the MISC
every minute. It should be noted that the motion challenge was stopped if the MISC
reached 6, indicating the onset of nausea, or if the participants wanted to stop even
when the four sets of the motion challenge were not completed. After the motion
challenge, the participants were asked to remain seated in a stationary wheelchair
to observe recovery from motion sickness every minute for 5 min.Digital Model for Symptom Progression of Vestibular Motion Sickness 7
PARTICIPANTS
Eleven participants (nine males, two females), with a mean age of 25.4 years
(range 22–36 years), were recruited for the study. The percentiles of the motion
sickness susceptibility questionnaire (MSSQ) score measured by the short version
of the MSSQ (Golding, 2006)ranged from 0% to 85.2%, with a mean of 48.5% and
a standard deviation of 30.4%.
RESULT
OBSERVED MISC
Fig. 4 shows the time history of the observed MISC for each participant and each
head tilt condition, together with the model-predicted MISC using the head
movements measured during the experiment. Three participants who exhibited no
symptoms (MISC=0) during the experiment were excluded from Fig.4.
MODEL-PREDICTED MISC
Time series of the MISC was predicted by inputting the head IMU data to the
proposed models with optimized parameters (Fig.4).
Correlation analysis using the Pearson correlation coefficient between the
observed and model-predicted MISC for all participants, excluding the three
participants who exhibited no sickness throughout the experiment, showed very
strong positive correlations in the OmanBP (0.92), OmanAP (0.90), and
OmanHILL (0.93) models, whereas a strong correlation was observed in MSIbase
(0.81). All correlations were statistically significant (p<0.000).
The mean absolute error of the observed and model-predicted MISC, defined in
Eq.(9) for the four output conditions is shown in Fig. 5.
1 timeN
mean absolute error= |MISCExp −MISCmdl | (9)
timeN i i
i=1
static move static move static move
Participant 1 Participant 2 Participant 3
static move static move static move
Participant 4 Participant 5 Participant 6
static move static move
Observed
(a) MSIbase
(b) OmanAP
(c) OmanBP
(d) OmanHILL
Participant 7 Participant 8
Figure 4: MISC observed for each participant under each condition. The
model-predicted MISCs are also plotted. Three participants whose MISCs
were zero for both head-tilt conditions were excluded.8
A one-way repeated-measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) for the mean
absolute error revealed the significance of the main effects of the output factor
(F(3,45) = 3.84, p = .016). The post-hoc test using the paired t-test with Holm
correction revealed that errors with MSIbase were significantly larger than those
with OmanBP (p<.0029) and OmanHILL (p<.00037), and that errors with
OmanAP were significantly larger than those with OmanHILL, while no
significant difference was found between the other combinations.
DISCUSSION AND CONCLUSION
The very strong positive correlations in the correlation analysis and the small
mean absolute error for the three types of output parts with the Oman dynamics
indicate that the proposed method combined with the Oman dynamics can
accurately represent individual MISC changes, regardless of whether scaling is
applied before or after the dynamics. Statistical analysis results indicated that
OmanHILL and OmanBP were the most promising; however, it should be noted
that comparing them under various scenarios is essential in the future.
A study (Irmak et al., 2021) previously proposed a model to describe individual
differences in MISC by directly connecting the Oman dynamics used in the present
study to the observed acceleration signals, rather than sensory conflict. Therefore,
the contribution of the present study is the first to develop a model that calculates
individual MISC based on the SVC theory and validates its effectiveness. The In1
model used in the SVC part of the present study was also partially validated for
human perception in the direction of gravity, making it the first model capable of
representing both motion perception and individual MISC. This characteristic is
expected to play an important role in future additions such as the incorporation of
visual inputs.
This study has several limitations which should be mentioned. Firstly, the
motion scenarios tested in this study were limited. As such, the validation of more
extensive motion scenarios, including rotation, is required. Additionally, the same
***
**
*
Outputpart
Figure 5: Mean absolute error of the observed and predicted MISC.
(*:p<.05, **: p<.01, ***:p<.001)Digital Model for Symptom Progression of Vestibular Motion Sickness 9
data were used for model parameter identification and validation, suggesting that
although the descriptive capability of the proposed method was confirmed, it is
unclear whether the parameters obtained could be applied to other scenarios. This
is also practically significant and requires further verification. Furthermore, this
study focuses on vestibular motion sickness. Expansion to models that can address
vestibular-visual interaction remains a future research direction. Note that the
results in the present study, as well as such expansion, have been partially included
in a Master’s thesis, which is currently under embargo (Inoue, 2023).
ACKNOWLEDGMENT
This work was supported by JSPS KAKENHI (Grant Number 21K18308,
24H00298), Japan.
REFERENCES
Bles, W., Bos, J. E., de Graaf, B., Groen, E., & Wertheim, A. H. (1998). Motion
Sickness: Only One Provocative Conflict? Brain Research Bulletin, 47(5), 481–
487.
Bos, J. E., & Bles, W. (1998). Modeling Motion Sickness and Subjective Vertical
Mismatch Detailed for Vertical Motions. Brain Research Bulletin, 47(5), 537–542.
Bos, J. E., & Bles, W. (2002). Theoretical considerations on canal-otolith interaction and
an observer model. Biological Cybernetics, 86, 191–207.
Bos, J. E., MacKinnon, S. N., & Patterson, A. (2005). Motion sickness symptoms in a
ship motion simulator: effects of inside, outside, and no view. Aviation, Space, and
Environmental Medicine, 76(12), 1111–1118.
Braccesi, C., Cianetti, F., & Elia, A. (2011). Motion sickness. Part I: development of a
model for predicting motion sickness incidence. International Journal of Human
Factors Modelling and Simulation, 2(3), 163–187.
Diels, C., & Bos, J. E. (2016). Self-driving carsickness. Applied Ergonomics, 53, 374–
382.
Golding, J. F. (2006). Predicting individual differences in motion sickness susceptibility
by questionnaire. Personality and Individual Differences, 41(2), 237–248.
Inoue, S. (2023). Development of Computational Models To Predict Motion Sickness
Symptom Levels Considering Visual and Vestibular Sensations [Master thesis].
Nara Institute of Science and Technology.
Inoue, S., Liu, H., & Wada, T. (2023). Revisiting Motion Sickness Models Based on
SVC Theory Considering Motion Perception. SAE Technical Paper.
Irmak, T., Pool, D. M., & Happee, R. (2021). Objective and subjective responses to
motion sickness: the group and the individual. Experimental Brain Research,
239(2), 515–531.
ISO2631-1. (1997). Mechanical Vibration and Shock –Evaluation of Human Exposure to
Whole-body Vibration- Part1. International Organization for Standardization.
Kamiji, N., Kurata, Y., Wada, T., & Doi, S. (2007). Modeling and validation of
carsickness mechanism. Proceedings of International Conference on
Instrumentation, Control and Information Technology, 1138–1143.
Kato, K., & Kitazaki, S. (2006). A Study for Understanding Carsickness Based on the
Sensory Conflict Theory. SAE Paper 2006-01-0096.10
Khalid, H., Turan, O., & Bos, J. E. (2011). Theory of a subjective vertical-horizontal
conflict physiological motion sickness model for contemporary ships. Journal of
Marine Science and Technology, 16(2), 214–225.
Liu, H., Inoue, S., & Wada, T. (2024). Subjective Vertical Conflict Model With Visual
Vertical: Predicting Motion Sickness on Autonomous Personal Mobility Vehicles.
IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Transportation Systems, 1–17.
McCauley, M. E., Royal, J. W., Wylie, C. D., O’Hanlon, J. F., & Mackie, R. R. (1976).
Motion Sickness Incidence: Exploratory Studies of Habituation, Pitch and Roll, and
the Refinement of a Mathematical Model. Technical Report 1733-2, Human
Factors Research Inc., Santa Barbara Research Park, Goleta, California, USA.
Merfeld, D. M., Young, L. R., Oman, C. M., & Shelhamer, M. J. (1993). A
Multidimensional Model of The Effect of Gravity on The Spatial Orientation of
The Monkey. Journal of Vestibular Research, 3, 141–161.
Oman, C. M. (1990). Motion sickness: a synthesis and evaluation of the sensory conflict
theory. Canadian Journal of Physiology and Pharmacology, 68(2), 294–303.
Reason, J. T. (1978). Motion Sickness Adaptation:A Neural Mismatch Model. Journal of
the Royal Society of Medicine, 71(11), 819–829.
Sivak, M., & Schoettle, B. (2015). Motion Sickness in Self-driving Vehicles. In UMTRI
Technical Report: Vol. UMTRI-2015.
Sousa Schulman, D., Jalgaonkar, N., Ojha, S., Rivero Valles, A., Jones, M. L. H., &
Awtar, S. (2023). A Visual-Vestibular Model to Predict Motion Sickness for Linear
and Angular Motion. Human Factors: The Journal of the Human Factors and
Ergonomics Society.
Tamura, Y., Wada, T., & Liu, H. (2023). Generating Visual Information for Motion
Sickness Reduction Using a Computational Model Based on SVC Theory. 2023
IEEE 26th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation Systems (ITSC),
5066–5071.
Wada, T. (2016). Motion Sickness in Automated Vehicles. In G. Meyer & S. Beiker
(Eds.), International Symposium on Advanced Vehicle Control. Springer
International Publishing.
Wada, T. (2021). Computational Model of Motion Sickness Describing the Effects of
Learning Exogenous Motion Dynamics. Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 15.
Wada, T., Fujisawa, S., & Doi, S. (2018). Analysis of driver’s head tilt using a
mathematical model of motion sickness. International Journal of Industrial
Ergonomics, 63, 89–97.
Wada, T., Kawano, J., Okafuji, Y., Takamatsu, A., & Makita, M. (2020). A
Computational Model of Motion Sickness Considering Visual and Vestibular
Information. 2020 IEEE International Conference on Systems, Man, and
Cybernetics (SMC), 1758–1763.