IEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 1
Preserving Real-World Finger Dexterity Using a
Lightweight Fingertip Haptic Device for Virtual
Dexterous Manipulation
Yunxiu Xu, Siyu Wang, Shoichi Hasegawa
Abstract—Thisstudypresentsalightweight,wearablefingertip
haptic device that provides physics-based haptic feedback for
dexterous manipulation in virtual environments without hin-
dering real-world interactions. The device’s design utilizes thin
strings and actuators attached to the fingernails, minimizing
the weight (1.76g each finger) while preserving finger flexibility.
Multiple types of haptic feedback are simulated by integrating
the software with a physics engine. Experiments evaluate the
device’s performance in pressure perception, slip feedback, and
typicaldexterousmanipulationtasks.anddailyoperations,while
subjective assessments gather user experiences. Results demon-
stratethatparticipantscanperceiveandrespondtopressureand
vibrationfeedback.Theselimitedhapticcuesarecrucialasthey
significantlyenhanceefficiencyinvirtualdexterousmanipulation
tasks. The device’s ability to preserve tactile sensations and
minimize hindrance to real-world operations is a key advantage
over glove-type haptic devices. This research offers a potential
solution for designing haptic interfaces that balance lightweight,
hapticfeedbackfordexterousmanipulationanddailywearability.
IndexTerms—Virtualreality,lightweighthapticdisplay,tactile
devices, dexterous manipulation, wearable haptics Fig.1. Thefingertiphapticdeviceisdesignedtobewornonthefingernail,
providinghapticfeedbackthroughathinstringdrivenbyamotor.Thisdesign
keeps the pad of the fingertip unobstructed, allowing the user to feel real
I. INTRODUCTION
objects while receiving haptic sensations. The device weighs 3.57g for the
Researchers and engineers are working on creating a new thumband1.76gfortheotherfingers.
world capable of reproducing the multi-sensory experiences
found in the real world. In this exploration process, how hu-
mansinteractwiththeworldthroughtouchhasbecomeafocal to the study by Aoki et al. [4], to meet the demands of
point of study, particularly in the field of virtual reality(VR). dailylong-timewear,fingertipwearablehapticdevicesshould
As hands are our primary tools for interacting with the world, weigh less than 2.1g, ideally even lighter at 1.4g. Moreover,
developing technologies that simulate the haptic experiences many studies primarily focus on developing devices capable
ofthehandsisoneofthecoretopicsinhaptics.Itcanenhance of simulating specific haptic experiences. While these devices
users’ abilities to interact with, sense, and manipulate three- are good at displaying limited particular haptic sensations,
dimensionalitemsinvirtualworlds.Thelackofeffectivehand adding additional types of haptic feedback while maintaining
haptic feedback can lead to inconsistencies between visual an acceptable size and weight presents a challenge. Given the
perceptionandbodilyperceptioninvirtualenvironments.This difficulty of replicating all sensations, choosing to preserve
inconsistency not only reduces the users’ sense of immersion the haptic cues that are more critical to virtual interactions
and satisfaction but also decreases the accuracy and success becomes important for the device’s miniaturization.
rate of operations [1]–[3]. The second limitation is that many haptic devices may
A major challenge for haptic devices is making haptic
hinder users’ natural manipulation of physical objects. To
technology more appealing to users in everyday life. The
encouragethefrequentdailyuseofhapticdevices,itiscrucial
common use of such devices faces two main limitations:
that they minimally impact users’ ability to manipulate real
Thefirstlimitationisminiaturizationandlightness.According
objects while providing haptic sensations of virtual objects.
Even if it’s not possible to fully satisfy comfort requirements,
ThisworkwassupportedbyJST,theestablishmentofuniversityfellowships
towards the creation of science and technology innovation, Grant Number it should at least ensure that users do not tend to frequently
JPMJFS2112,andJSPSKAKENHIGrantNumber23H03432. remove the device when switching between virtual and real
Y.XU,S.WangandS.HasegawaarewiththeDepartmentofInformation
environments. While grip [5] or pen-style [6] devices provide
andCommunicationsEngineering,SchoolofEngineering,TokyoInstituteof
Technology,Japan,e-mail:{yunxiu,siw131,hase}@haselab.net accuratemanipulationandrequireminimaltimetoputon,they
0000–0000/00$00.00©2021IEEE
4202
nuJ
42
]CH.sc[
1v53861.6042:viXraIEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 2
do not allow for full finger grasping. Replicating the finger-
grasping functionality will require a full-finger device.
This study focuses on providing a solution: developing
haptic devices that are both compact and lightweight, do not
interferewithdailylife,andcaneffectivelyprovidefull-finger
physics-based, high-precision haptic feedback for dexterous
manipulationinthevirtualworld.Researchershavedeveloped
various wearable haptic devices for virtual and mixed reality,
simulating tactile sensations through stimuli like skin defor-
mation, pressure, vibration [7], and multi-degree-of-freedom
force feedback [8]. However, these devices often occupy the
fingertip area and require further miniaturization and weight
reduction.
Someapproachesforminiaturizationincludethinfilmstruc- Fig. 2. a) A sample physics-based dexterous manipulation scene where
participants can perform tasks such as stacking objects, placing objects
tures [9], which may sacrifice the texture and friction infor-
in holes, and sliding objects. b) The virtual hand is composed of virtual
mation of real objects; Electroosmotic devices may cover the couplings,withtheforceoutputproportionaltothepenetrationdepthofthe
finger pad [10], while hydraulic devices require large pumps realhand’sposition(ingreen).Themeasuredphalangesandphalangesinthe
physicsengineareconnectedbyvirtualsprings.Also,adjacentphalangesare
[11], and electro-tactile devices [12], which are compact
connected by ball joints. c) In the fingertip pressure perception experiment,
but struggle to stimulate all mechanoreceptors and simulate participants were asked to grasp an object and find the smallest grasp force
frictionandpressure.Also,toavoidhinderingfingerflexibility, that would not cause the object to drop. d) The ”Re-Grasp” experiment.
participants were asked to slide an object and re-grasp it before it fell to
somestudiesapplyfeedbacktothewrist,fingerbase[13],and
the ground. e) Peg-in-hole, a typical dexterous manipulation task, requires
otherlocations.However,theseareasusuallyhavelowertactile participantstoinserttheobjectintoadesignatedhole.
sensitivity compared to the fingertips. Another approach is to
remove the actuator when the display haptic is not needed
[14], but it needs time for the actuator to react. manipulationmayneedtoobtainthemotionstateoftheobject,
The main challenge is to generate pressure-based haptic the contact state between the object and the fingers, and the
without occupying the palmar side of the hand and hindering frictioncharacteristics.Somestudieshaveexploredthecontrol
finger movement. It’s also important to avoid generating principles of the human brain for dexterous manipulation.
additional forces outside the expected feedback area. Since Previous research [17] [18] believes that when an object un-
mostofthereceptorsarelocatedatthefingertips,weproposea dergoes unexpected acceleration due to instantaneous sliding
methodthatusesthinstringsastheprimarysourceoffingertip between the fingertips and the object, automatic adjustment
haptic feedback and attaches the actuator to the fingernail. of the grasping force can be observed. Flanagan et al. [19]
This approach omits the implementation of external forces to shows that human grip force is finely adjusted with changes
control finger movement, but we expect users still to have in load force, indicating a coupling between grip force and
a response similar to the presence of resistance. Combined load force. Wiertlewski et al. [20] found that the central
withaphysicsengine,theproposeddevicecansimulatehaptic nervous system can perceive the movement state of an object
such as pressure, collision, friction, and stick-slip in a virtual through vibrations between the skin and the object’s surface
environmentwhilestillbeingabletointeractwithrealobjects. and adjust the grasping force to terminate sliding. To create
To maintain the portability of the device, our design does not hand haptic, we need to stimulate mechanoreceptors critical
include the presentation of tangential forces. Therefore, we for manipulation [21], [22]. If we can provide the necessary
further investigated the extent to which the tactile feedback information based on physical simulations, improving the
provided by the device alone, without tangential forces, facil- experience of dexterous manipulation of virtual objects is
itates common dexterous manipulation tasks and tested their possible.
perceptionofpressureandtheirsubjectiveexperiencewiththe Next, we discuss the research on devices for reproducing
device. haptic. Haptic displays can be considered devices that gener-
ate mechanical impedances [23]. Currently, there are various
haptic devices aimed at applying impedances to the fingers to
II. RELATEDWORKS
present tactile sensations, such as haptic gloves [24], hand-
Oneofourprimarygoalsistoachievedexterousmanipula- helddevices[25],[26],anddevicesthatcontrolfingeractivity
tion in the virtual world. Han et al. [15] defined dexterous throughlockingmechanisms[27]–[29]usesshoulder-mounted
manipulation, considering the workspace limitations of the cabledrivestolockthehandjoints.Thesedevicescontrolhand
fingers, using rolling and finger gaiting to adjust the grasping movements to display pressure sensations, requiring a stable
posture,andchangingthecontactpointsthroughfingerrolling support point like the wrist, arm, or shoulder to withstand the
and sliding. Bicchi et al. [16] believe that controlled slippage reactionforce.Therefore,theoverallvolumeofthesesolutions
and rolling contact can improve the sensitivity of robotic is difficult to reduce, and they decrease hand comfort and
manipulation. To achieve this, it is necessary to predict the freedom.
occurrence of slippage and detect changes in the contact However, many studies focus on implementing forces only
point position on the finger surface. The process of dexterous atthefingertips,withoutapplyingimpedancestotheentirefin-IEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 3
ger to control finger movement. These are finger-worn haptic
devices.Schorretal.[30]developedadevicethatcangenerate
lateral skin deformation. There are also some researches that
use a dual-motor mechanism to reproduce the deformation
of the finger pad [31] [32]. Prattichizzo et al. [8] proposed
a 3-degree-of-freedom wearable fingertip tactile device that
can achieve tangential force and pressure feedback. Girard
et al. [33] display two-degree-of-freedom(DOF) shear force
feedback on the fingertip, and Leonardis et al. [34] achieves Fig. 3. The schematic diagram illustrates the information flow and main
deformation of the fingertip in three 3DoF. Yem et al. [7] componentsofthesystem.
createdadevicethatcanpresenthigh-frequencyvibrationsand
skin deformation. The above studies aim to achieve tangential
forceorshearforcewhileallowingrelativelyfreefingermove-
ment,buttheyrequireacertainvolumeofmechanicalstructure
tobeplacedonthefingertip.Moreimportantly,whenwearing
VR devices, we still need to perform real-world operations
frequently, such as using a real keyboard, which becomes
very difficult if fingertip devices hinder natural sensations and
fingermovements.Additionally,somedevicesalsorequirethe
integrationoffingerposturesensorsormarkers,whichfurther
increases the size of the devices.
Furthermore, some researchers choose not to implement Fig.4. Thehardwarecomponentsaremountedonthefingertip,withtheshell
adheredtothefingernailforstability.Thedevicehasaweightof3.57grams
tangential force or shear force to reduce the device volume.
tothethumb’sfingertipand1.76gramstoeachoftheotherfingertips.
Forexample,Vechevetal.[35]designedasmallactuatorarray
with a smaller individual volume (1cm3) but still needs to be
placed on the palmar side. Therefore, some studies attempt al. [12] used electrostimulation to achieve tactile sensations
to ”clear” the palmar side to preserve the tactile sensation of on the palmar side without placing electrodes on this side.
the fingertips. One method is to directly transfer the tactile However, it cannot achieve continuous pressure feedback.
actuator to other parts of the hand, such as placing it on Moreover, the electrostimulation method cannot selectively
the fingernail [36]–[38]. Other studies relocate hand tactile stimulate Pacinian corpuscles [52], which may lead to dif-
sensations to the wrist [39]–[42] or install the device on the ficulty in achieving tactile sensations above 100Hz, which are
proximal phalanx [43]. Maeda et al. [44] place two motors on closely related to sliding. Withana et al. [9] present a thin-
both sides of the finger and compress the skin by rolling to film tactile actuator that can achieve almost bare-skin tactile
free the finger pad. Although these methods can preserve the sensitivity, but this method still affects users’ perception of
skin’s tactile sensation of the fingertips and are easy to wear, texture.Furthermore,thecontactareacanalsobereduced.Han
theycannotcreatepressurestimulationatthefingertips,which et al. [53] use fluid to provide pressure on the finger pad, but
is common when grasping objects. it is not easy to generate high-frequency tactile signals. The
One approach is to move the palmar side components to actuator can also be placed on the fingernail side to stretch
other positions when not needed, not contacting the fingers light and small objects. Aoki et al. [4] placed the actuator
in the non-contact state [14], [45]–[47]. The disadvantages on the fingernail and used a thin string, which can generate
include the inability to touch real and virtual objects simulta- pressure at the finger pad. Our work is also based on this
neously, the longer response time required by the mechanical research,butthisresearchhasnotyetachievedfullinstallation
structure and the actuator, and sometimes being too large on all five fingers and hasn’t achieved physics-based tactile
to be fixed to fingers or hands, these additional structures rendering. In addition,the static tension was toosmall to feel,
also increase the volume. Additionally, Tsai et al. [48] use and dynamic modulation was needed. Based on our previous
extendable and retractable supports on the fingers to render work [54], this paper removes the ring structure that occupies
the tactile shape of virtual objects. Due to its size, this device the palmar side and conducts user studies and performance
limits dexterous interactions with virtual and real objects. evaluations.
Another method is to completely remove the actuator from
the human body, such as ultrasound [49], air [50], and syn-
III. SYSTEMOVERVIEW
theticjets[51].Thesemethodsprovidecontactlesstactilefeed-
A. Implementation
back. However, they often require a relatively unobstructed
transmission, and if the device is not ”encounter-type” [47], The system overview is shown in Figure 3.
the effective range is usually limited. 1) Hardware: Our hardware was composed of a mi-
The proposed device keeps the actuator on the palmar side, crocontroller, motor driver, and actuator. We chose the
an approach that has also been explored in several studies. PIC32MK0512MCJ064-I/PT for the microcontroller, which
Electrostimulation does not require mechanical structures and receives serial port signals from the PC containing haptic
is suitable for achieving thin tactile sensations. Tanaka et information. This controller is capable of outputting up to 9IEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 4
channels of PWM signals, which can meet our requirements
to control multiple motors. We employed the driver with the
current controller DRV8434e to control the output current
of each motor. Then, we can convert the haptic signals into
currents to control the motors.
Regarding the actuator and shell, we chose coreless motors
with a size of 6mm in diameter and 12mm in length (7mm
Fig. 5. a): Measuring the pulling force of the motor using a force sensor,
in diameter and 16mm in length for the thumb). This type of
the clamp fixed the system to decrease vibration. b): Comparing the shapes
motor is light and cheap. of coreless motors for the thumb and other fingers; 612 denotes a diameter
To attach the device to the fingernail, we used acrylic- of6mmandalengthof12mm,while716indicatesadiameterof7mmand
alengthof16mm.
modified silicone adhesive (CEMEDINE BBX909), which
can be pasted and peeled off, maintaining adhesiveness after
multiple uses. We are using PE string with a diameter of
0.260mm.Aboutthedesignoftheaxleforwindingthestring,
assumingthemotor’storqueisTandtheradiusofthemotor’s
axle is r, the pull force F on the finger can be approximated
as:
T
F = (1)
r
Therefore, the radius of the motor’s axle should be as small
aspossible.Afterexperimentingwithvariousaxledesigns,we
ultimately chose to use the motor’s own axle due to its thin
diameter of 0.8mm. The length of the string is also crucial.
According to the Capstan equation:
T =T eµθ (2)
1 0
T is the tension in the rope as it leaves the cylinder. T is
1 0
the tension in the rope as it contacts the cylinder. θ is the
angle, in radians, that the string wraps around the cylinder.µ
isthecoefficientoffrictionbetweentheropeandthecylinder.
The equation shows that minimizing the rope length around
the motor’s axle reduces resistance. However, overly short
ropesmaintainmaximumtensionandlimitpressure.Wefound
that the optimal rope length just touches the finger surface
withoutapplyingpressurewhenthemotorisoff.Thefingertip
hardware is shown in Figure 4.
2) Software: Forthesoftwarecomponent,weutilizedUnity
to create virtual scenes and visual effects. Regarding the
physics engine and high-quality haptic rendering, we em-
ployedSpringhead1 asthephysicsengine.ComparedtoUnity,
Springheadcanobtainricherinformation,suchascontactforce Fig. 6. a): Motor pulling force response to software control. b): Frequency
responseofmotorvibrationintensity.Itcanbeobservedthattherearestrong
between rigid bodies and dynamic or static friction states. We
resonancepointswithintherangeof80to100Hz.c):Frequencyresponseof
used virtual couplings to build hands, which helps maintain motorcurrent,thecurrentcanalmostremainstablebelow1500Hz
systemstabilityandensuresthatthecalculatedfeedbackforce
is proportional to the penetration depth , as shown in Figure
the haptic signal (e.g., the moment of collision). The gener-
2b. After constructing the virtual scene, we obtained the
ation of haptic signals is handled by a separate independent
penetrationforceofthefinger’srigidbodythroughthephysics
program.
engine, corresponding to the pressure generated by the haptic
device. The instant when the penetration force changes from
B. Hardware evaluation
absent to present correspond to the collision vibration, and
the moment when the friction force transitions from static to Ourfocusonthedevice’shardwareperformanceistheforce
dynamic friction corresponds to the stick slip. and the vibration the motor can provide. These two metrics
We need a high update rate to generate high-quality, stable are crucial in determining the pressure and vibration feedback
multi-channel haptic signals. To avoid impacting Unity’s per- levelwecandelivertothefingertips.Oursystemused2types
formance, we set it only to transmit changing components of of motors shown in Figure 5 b(larger one for thumb).
We first measured the motor’s output force to test the
1https://springhead.info/ feasibilityofachievinglinearforcecontrolandtodetermineitsIEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 5
output range. We used a PCB Piezotronics 208B force sensor
to measure the force, with the measuring system shown in
Figure 5a. We designed this measuring structure to simulate
the proposed device, enabling sensors to measure the pressure
exerted by the string.
The results are shown in Figure 6a. The pulling force for
the612motor,afterabout15%ofthecurrentoutput,basically
remains stable, reaching its saturation point of approximately
260mN. Also, the 716 motor exhibits a more significant in-
crease in pulling force. The maximum pulling force is around
540mN. The current and pulling force showed a generally
linear relationship. According to a study by Lederman et al.
[55], the average human finger skin perception threshold is Fig. 7. a) In the experimental setup for the fingertip pressure perception
experiment,participantswereinstructedtoweartheproposeddeviceanduse
0.031N. Therefore, we need to output at least 4% current for
a Leap Motion controller as an input device to complete the experiment. b)
it to be perceptible to users. TheexperimentalsetupforHMD.
Next, we assessed the frequency response of the device’s
vibrationintensity,inputtingwaveformsofvariousfrequencies
and measuring the peak-to-peak value of the vibration inten- virtual rigid body hand. The virtual scene is shown in Figure
sity while keeping the current constant. Additionally, it was 2 c. We used a cube with a length of 5 cm and a density of
necessary to understand the changes in current by different 1.00 for manipulation. We assigned the cube a static friction
frequencies. We achieved this by connecting a 1 Ω cement coefficient of 4.00 and a dynamic friction coefficient of 3.00.
resistor in parallel to obtain the peak-to-peak current values. Thislargefrictionwaschosentopreventthecubefromsliding,
TheresultsareshowninFigure6bandFigure6c.Theresults allowingtheexperimenttofocusonpressurefeedbackwithout
indicate that both types of motors have distinct resonance the interference of sliding sensations. The physics engine’s
within the 80 to 100 Hz range. Furthermore, the current timestepwas0.01s.Throughouttheexperiment,real-timedata
response of both motors decreases with increasing frequency werecollectedonthevirtualobject’sheightandthesumforce
and remains nearly stable below 1500 Hz. of the user’s thumb’s rigid body.
3) ExperimentalProcedure: Duringtheexperiment,partic-
ipants wore the proposed device and were instructed to grasp
IV. FINGERTIPPRESSUREPERCEPTIONEXPERIMENT
the cube in the virtual environment. They received a prompt:
Compared to similar devices, the unique feature of the pro-
”Please try to grasp the object with the smallest force, but do
posed device is its ability to create pressure on the fingertips.
not let the object slide or drop. If too much force is applied,
However, due to our aim to design a slim device, the force
the glass will break.” Before the experiment, participants had
it can exert is relatively mild. When the user’s fingers grasp
time for free play to become familiar with the environment.
a virtual object, the proposed device cannot apply a force
The virtual cube is transparent, and if the user applies a force
to stop the fingers’ movement, meaning it cannot provide a
greaterthan15N,thecube’spositionresets,indicatingthatthe
kinestheticconstraint.Thisisakeydifferencefrommanyother
”glass” has ”broken.” It was repeatedly emphasized to use the
devices. Consequently, it is crucial to assess user perception
minimal force possible for grasping. The formal experiment
to determine whether they can truly feel the pressure and if
beginsoncetheuserbelievestheyhaveachievedtheminimum
this pressure can influence user behavior, resulting in reduced
grasping force.
pinch distance.
In the formal experiment, the glass never breaks to reduce
thenumberofattemptsandexpeditetheprocess.However,this
A. Methods information is kept confidential from the participants. Also,
1) Participants: A total of 12 participants, 8 male, and 4 users were informed of the procedure before each attempt to
female) participated in the experiment after giving informed prevent forgetting to use minimal force. When users believe
consent. The participants were between the ages of 23 and they have reached the minimum force, the trial is finished.
32 and were one left-hand dominant. No special treatment for To investigate if haptic feedback affects pinch distance when
theleft-handdominantparticipants.Theexperimentprocedure grasping objects, we faced an issue where the index finger
was approved by the Tokyo Institute of Technology Review might be obscured in the tracking camera view. So, we
Board. recorded the thumb tip’s normal force on the object in the
2) System Set-Up: The user wore the proposed device on physics engine as a substitute for pinch distance.
their right hand and used a Leap Motion Controller for hand The experiment had three conditions: ”no haptic”, ”contact
recognition. Due to the high refresh rate required for the vibration” and ”pressure” with the order counterbalanced
followingexperiment,amonitorwitha180Hzrefreshratewas across participants. Each completed 3 rounds of cyclic trials
usedasthedisplaydeviceinsteadofaHeadMountedDisplay for every condition. ”Contact vibration” refers to a damped
(HMD).Theexperimentwasconductedwithinavirtualobject sinusoid signal generated during virtual contact between a
manipulation environment (Figure 7 a), with the same scale finger and any rigid body, proportional to the relative velocity
as the real world. Users interacted with virtual objects using a between the fingertip and the object, providing a cue forIEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 6
of the contact force, which helps in perceiving the grasping
state of the object. This could be because continuous pressure
feedback stimulates SA1 receptors, and when the fingertips
receive pressure stimulation, the brain naturally perceives that
the fingers are touching and grasping a real object, even
though finger movement is not actually obstructed. Moreover,
applying a varying pressure gradient to the fingertips can
simulate tactile changes during grasping. For example, grad-
ually increasing pressure can represent the fingers gradually
tightening their grip on the object.
However, There was no significant difference in ”contact
vibration” compared to no haptic feedback. The conclusion
is similar to previous research [4]. The condition ”contact
vibration” can provide information about the start of contact
but does not convey continuous information about the applied
force. ”Contact vibration” alone may not be sufficient to alter
Fig.8. Theresultofparticipantscompletedthegraspingtaskofvirtualobjects
under three different feedback conditions; participants were required to grip users’ behavior in grasping tasks.
objects made of glass with the minimum force, as we were told excessive
forcewouldresultintheobjectbreak(***p<0.001,*p<0.01,*p<0.05).
V. SLIPVIBROTACTILEFEEDBACKEXPERIMENT
In our previous research [56], we observed that participants
contactstart.”Pressurefeedback”isdeliveredthroughthethin
could grasp an object with their fingers, gently release it to
string exerting force on the fingertips.
allow sliding, and then immediately grasp it again using only
vibration feedback, even in the absence of tangential force.
B. Results This is a common and challenging dexterous manipulation
The user-estimated minimum grip force under three dif- task. Our prior work also noted that there was no increase in
ferent conditions is shown in Figure 8. 4 data points were reaction delay compared to situations where tangential force
eliminated because they used the middle phalange to grasp is present. The device proposed in the current paper cannot
objects, resulting in no pressure data detected at the finger- displaytangentialforce.Therefore,wewillinvestigatewhether
tip. Summary statistics revealed that the median values for vibrationorpressurealone,generatedbytheproposeddevice,
conditions ”no haptic”, ”contact vibration”, and ”pressure” can significantly improve users’ reaction speed when sliding
were 8.166N (SD=5.881, SEM=0.994), 8.158N (SD=4.725, objects.
SEM=0.788), and 4.743N (SD=2.966, SEM=0.516), respec-
tively. The Shapiro-Wilk test showed that the data for con- A. Methods
ditions ”no haptic” (W=0.958, p>0.05) and ”contact vibra-
1) Participants: Same as the fingertip pressure perception
tion” (W=0.958, p>0.05) were normally distributed, while
experiment(section IV).
thedataforcondition”pressure”(W=0.929,p<0.05)deviated
2) System Set-Up: The hardware setup is the same as the
from normality. Levene’s test was performed to evaluate ho-
fingertip pressure perception Experiment(section IV). In the
moscedasticity, which indicated unequal variances among the
experimentalscene,weusedavirtualcubeof15cminlength,
conditions (W=6.085, p<0.01). Given these results, we used
5cminwidth,and5cminheight.Thestaticfrictioncoefficient
anon-parametrictesttocomparetheconditions.TheKruskal-
was set to 0.15, the density is 1, and the dynamic friction
Wallis test results showed a significant difference among the
coefficientwassetto0.10foreasysliding,asshowninFigure
conditions (H(2)=8.796, p<0.05).
2d.
To investigate the pairwise differences between conditions,
3) ExperimentalProcedure: Beforetheformalexperiment,
Mann-Whitney U post-hoc tests with Bonferroni correction
participants started pre-training. They could repeatedly prac-
were conducted. The post-hoc tests revealed no significant
tice the task with visual feedback until confident enough to
difference between conditions ”no haptic” and ”contact vi-
perform it independently. Participants had to lift and main-
bration” (p=1.000, Hedges’ g=-0.154). However, significant
tain their grasp on an object. After steadily grasping the
differenceswerefoundbetweenconditions”contactvibration”
object for a period, they had to control the object to slide
and ”pressure” (p<0.05, Hedges’ g=0.698) and between con-
between virtual fingers and immediately attempt to re-grasp
ditions”nohaptic”and”pressure”(p<0.01,Hedges’g=0.765).
it to prevent dropping. However, participants were prohibited
from quickly releasing and immediately pinching their fingers
C. Discussion
without feedback to complete the action, as it violates the
Theresultsindicatethattheproposeddevice’spressurefeed- requirement to keep the object sliding. The experiment had 4
back can change the grasping task’s behavior, suggesting that conditions:”Nohaptic”,”pressure,”,”pressureandvibration”,
pressure feedback alone can enable users to find a relatively and ”vibration”. Pressure feedback involves applying normal
smaller grasping force. This outcome implies that a device force to the fingertips through strings. Vibration feedback
applyingpressuretothefingertipscanprovidehapticfeedback occurs when virtual fingers slide on the object’s surface andIEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 7
ditions ”no haptic” and ”pressure and vibration” (p<0.001)
andbetweenconditions”nohaptic”and”vibration”(p<0.01).
C. Discussion
Vibration can significantly reduce participants’ response
time when re-grasping a sliding object, this conclusion aligns
with our previous research [56]. However, pressure feedback
only is insufficient to improve users’ reaction speed in this
specific task. This could be due to the pressure feedback
primarily providing information about the normal force rather
than the tangential force associated with sliding. Additionally,
itmaybebecausefrictionforcewasnotusedforthefeedback,
whichmaybealteredbychangingthehapticrenderingdesign.
Duringtheexperiment,participantsoftensay,”Theobjectfeels
completely smooth, and it’s difficult to perceive the sliding”
when switching to the pressure-only mode. Despite the lower
minimum value in the ”pressure” condition compared to ”no
haptic,” most participants couldn’t use pressure feedback to
Fig.9. Responselatencyunder4differenthapticfeedbackconditionsinthe
improve reaction time in predicting when the object would
”re-grasp” task. The moment when the object started to slide was defined
as T2, and the moment when the fingers exhibited a grasping response was fall.Moreover,theinsignificantdifferencesamong”pressure,”
definedasT1.ThelatencyisT1-T2. ”pressure and vibration,” and ”vibration” conditions imply
that combining pressure and vibration feedback may not
considerably enhance reaction speed.
during stick-slip. Condition order was counterbalanced, with
Compared to our previous study [56], the current study
each condition attempted five times. If the ”re-grasp” was
shows longer reaction times, likely due to increased latency
unsuccessful (object not re-grasped after sliding or falling),
from the hand tracker and software. The reaction time differ-
the result was still recorded, but the fingers’ grasping reflex
ence between no haptic and vibration conditions was around
hadtobeobserved.Ifnoreflexwasobserved,theattemptwas
90ms in the previous study, but only around 35ms in the
retried.
current one. We speculate this could be due to two reasons:
The moment the object started sliding was defined as T2,
1. The previous study required successful grasping, collecting
andthemomentthefingersexhibitedagraspingresponsewas
only the fastest reaction data, while the current experiment
T1.WerecordedT1-T2foreachattemptandconsidereditthe
onlyobservedpinchreflexwithoutrequiringsuccessfulmanip-
response latency.
ulation.2.Thesmalldevice’sweakvibrationsmaybedifficult
to perceive during the low-speed initial sliding phase, further
B. Results increasing reaction delays. Additionally, previous studies in-
volved grasping real objects(the handle of the device), while
Figure9displaystheexperimentalresults.7datawereelim-
the current experiment requires finger movement to decrease
inated from the analysis because the speed of finger opening
distance, potentially causing differences. We selected data
was too fast, and there was a lack of sliding friction(which
from four participants who participated in both experiments
wasn’t detected when experiencing). The median values for
under vibration-only conditions.
conditions ”no haptic”, ”pressure”, ”pressure and vibration”,
and ”vibration” were 270.88ms (SD=52.910, SEM=6.831),
248.58ms (SD=60.206, SEM=7.838), 228.77ms (SD=58.512,
VI. EVALUATIONOFHAPTICINTERACTIONAND
SEM=7.618), and 241.72ms (SD=41.774, SEM=5.439), re-
WEARABILITY
spectively. The Shapiro-Wilk test showed that the data for
all conditions ”no haptic” (W=0.991, p>0.05), ”pressure” We will test whether the proposed device improves dexter-
(W=0.986, p>0.05), ”pressure and vibration” (W=0.961, ous manipulation efficiency and understand users’ subjective
p>0.05), and ”vibration” (W=0.970, p>0.05) were normally experienceswithit.Wedesignedanevaluationtogaininsights
distributed. Levene’s test was performed to evaluate ho- into participants’ thoughts and experiences, focusing on: 1.
moscedasticity, which indicated equal variances among the Manipulatingvirtualobjects:Participantsreportedonthereal-
conditions (W=2.356, p>0.05). ismofhapticfeedback,theaccuracyofforcefeedback,andthe
Given that the data were normally distributed and had smoothness of operation, along with their operation times. 2.
equalvariances,aparametricone-wayANOVAwasused.The Comparisonwiththerealworld:Participantscomparedvirtual
results showed a significant difference among the conditions grasping using the haptic device to real-world sensations. 3.
(F(3,233)=6.722, p<0.001). Tukey’s HSD post-hoc tests were Device-wearingexperience:Comfortandconvenience,consid-
conducted to investigate the pairwise differences between ering factors like weight, size, wearing, and potential fatigue
conditions. Significant differences were found between con- or discomfort.IEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 8
alternated between haptic feedback on and off, with the order
being balanced. In ”haptic on ”, all of the feedback provided
bytheproposeddevicewasturnedon.Iftheobjectfelloutof
the scene, it would be reset to its initial position. We allowed
users to intentionally do this, but the timing would not be
reset. After the experiment, the participant was asked to fill
out the interview questionnaire.
Questions:
• What sensations or impressions do you have while using
the device for grasping and manipulation?
• How do you think this method of operation is similar to
or different from the experience of the real world?
• Do you think certain feedback modes (such as touch vi-
bration,slidingvibration,etc.)haveapositiveornegative
impactonyouroperationalexperience?Canyoudescribe
it in detail?
• Do you have comments on the wearing of the device, or
what do you think the device can affect with your real-
world behaviors?
• Doyouhaveanyotherfeelingsorsuggestionsaboutyour
experience using the device?
B. Results
Thepeg-in-hole’sresultisshowninFigure10.Weusedthe
Fig. 10. Manipulation time data for the peg-in-hole task. a) Each subplot Wilcoxon signed-rank test to analyze the effect of conditions
representsdatafrom8trialsofasingleparticipant,withthehorizontalaxis
on the results(W=263.0, p<0.001), indicating a statistically
showingthemanipulationtimeandtheverticalaxisindicatingthetrialorder
(from the first to the eighth attempt). The trials alternated between haptic significant difference between the haptics on and off. The
feedback being on or off, with half of the participants starting with haptic statistical data for the ”Haptic on” condition are as follows:
feedback on and the other half starting with it off. b) A box plot of the
median of 9.14 (SD=14.53, SEM=4.21). For the ”haptic off”
manipulationtimedataforallparticipants.
condition, the statistical data are as follows: median of 11.64
(SD=42.67, SEM=12.31).
A. Methods
Thesentimentanalysisresultsfromtheinterviewareshown
1) Participants: Same as the fingertip pressure perception in Figure 11. The majority of participants (9 out of 14) pro-
experiment(IV). vided positive feedback on device usage, noting that vibration
2) System Set-Up and Experimental Procedure: Regarding feedback improved grip control and realism in virtual object
the hardware setup, we used an HMD due to the better manipulation. One participant remarked, ”I like the vibration
experience it provides for dexterous manipulation in stereo whensliding;ithelpsadjustforce,”andanothersaid,”Thefeel
vision.WeutilizedtheMetaQuestProasthedisplayhardware of touching the object aids in delicate operations.” However,
and attached a Leap Motion Controller (as it performed better some participants (5 out of 14) found the haptic feedback
than the built-in hand tracking), shown in Figure 7 b. Both limited in precise tasks, with comments like, ”I can feel
hands were equipped with the proposed device. the touch, but it’s debatable if it makes operations easier.”;
Then, we conducted a variation of peg-in-hole task, which Opinions on virtual versus real-world operations were mixed.
requiredthe usertoinsertan objectintothe holefrombottom Five participants felt virtual grasping was comparable to real
to top, as shown in Figure 2 e. The object was placed on the touch pressure and position sensing. One noted, ”Touch feels
table,measuring3.5cminlength,3.5cminwidth,and10cmin different, but with practice, it’s as good as real in sensing
height. The setup included a platform with its lower surface positions.” Conversely, seven participants highlighted gaps in
24 cm above the ground. This platform had a thickness of touch realism and contact area, with remarks like, ”The oper-
2.5 cm and contained a through square hole, the hole on the ation demands more visual input than in the real world,” and
platform has a square shape and the area is 3.95*3.95cm. A ”Theforceandcontactareaareinconsistent.”;Allparticipants
part of the platform is semi-transparent, allowing participants had a non-negative attitude regarding the implemented haptic
to see the inner surface of the hole, this design was made pattern.”Thetouchvibrationandslidingvibrationdohelpmy
to reduce the difficulty of the experiment and save time. judgment on the operation”. But one participant thought the
Users had practice time and prompted with the phrase ”Find current feedback intensity wasn’t sufficient to replace visual
a comfortable strategy to complete this task”. The training information;Regardingwearability,sixparticipantspraisedthe
concludedoncetheuserthoughttheybecamefamiliarwiththe device’s lightness and ease of wear. One participant noted
environment and could successfully complete the task. Upon that the cable arrangement didn’t majorly affect operations.
thestartoftheformalexperiment,userswereinstructed,”Use Conversely, six participants criticized issues like tangled ca-
this strategy to complete the task 8 times.” The experiment bles and concerns about fully equipping the device. SafetyIEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 9
determine the contact between the peg and the hole is still
crucial.
In the interview section, despite omitting many haptic
elements to keep the device lightweight, most participants
foundthehapticfeedbackacceptableandenhancingforvirtual
manipulation. This indicates that with the help of the physics
engine, the haptic feedback from the device provides users
withsensationsthatcorrespondtotheirinteractionswiththese
objects. Our haptic rendering also provided valuable informa-
tion; Another issue we are concerned about is the compar-
ison with real-world operations, especially without applying
Fig.11. Asentimentanalysisoftheinterviewresponses,categorizingthem kinestheticconstraintstothefingers.Someusershaveadapted
as positive, mixed, and negative. The Mixed category includes answers that to this, while others still feel it is not quite consistent with
containbothpositiveandnegativefeedback.
reality.Severalparticipantsfounditdifficulttoperceiveedges
andsurfaces,thissuggeststhatdisplayingedges,surfaces,and
handresistanceisstillimportant.Furthermore,theparticipants
concerns, such as potential burns from inductors, suggested
generally considered the device’s weight acceptable; We are
a need for better heat isolation. Some participants also ex-
focusing on how our solution affects hand movements. Some
perienced a mismatch between visual and tactile sensations,
participants appreciated the device’s lightness and easy to
affecting operations. Neutral feedback included suggestions
wear, noting it doesn’t hinder real-world tasks. Also there’s
for improved fixation methods and concerns about long-term
somenegativefeedbacklikecableinterferenceanduncomfort-
use.
able heat. These problem can be addressed with engineering
Participants also offered specific improvement suggestions,
solutions such as wireless improvements and repositioning
suchasenhancingthefixationmethod,usingarea-basedforce
heatingcomponents.Additionally,someparticipantsfoundthe
feedback, and improving optical gesture recognition accuracy.
device difficult to wear due to reusable adhesive tape and the
One suggested, ”I hope the force feedback generated by the
need to clean nails and match fingers, which also led to cable
strings could be changed to area-based feedback.
entanglement.
C. Discussion
VII. REAL-WORLDTASKEXPERIMENT
To verify the advantages of the proposed devices not oc-
In the peg-in-hole experiment, we identified several key
cupying the fingertips and not hindering real-world opera-
factors. First, some users mentioned that ”the lack of haptic
tions, we designed experiments that allowed users to perform
feedback increases the difficulty of the operation” during the
daily tasks while wearing the device and compared their
experiment. We observed that haptic feedback helps users
performance to bare hands and glove-type haptic devices. We
avoid applying excessive or unbalanced forces when grasping
selected representative tasks: typing and tightening a nut. We
objects, thereby reducing the probability of grasping failure.
recordedthetimeparticipantstooktocompletethesetasksand
Second,duringtheprocess,whenusersattempttogentlyinsert
collected their subjective evaluations.
a misaligned peg into the hole, although there is no vertical
force feedback, the vibration cue indicates that the peg has
collidedwiththeoutsideofthehole,promptinguserstoadjust A. Methods
the position. Furthermore, once the peg enters the hole, force 1) Participants: Same as the fingertip pressure perception
feedback assists users in precisely guiding the cube. We also experiment(section IV).
noticed that users often use one hand to insert the object into 2) System Set-Up and Experimental procedure: In this
the hole while gently pushing the object with the other hand. experiment, we did not randomize the experimental order,
Haptic feedback allows users to accurately apply force to the allowing participants to transition directly between conditions
object with their other hand without needing to shift their and avoiding the inconvenience of repeatedly wearing and
visual focus away from the hole, reducing operation time. removing the device. The device setup is shown in Figure
However, the accuracy of optical hand recognition (Leap 12. The experimental order was ”Proposed device”, ”glove”,
Motion Controller) is insufficient for precise operations, lead- and ”barehand”. Under each wearing condition, typing and
ingtofrequentrecognitionfailuresanderrors,causingobjects nut-tightening experiments were conducted sequentially. To
to accidentally drop and increasing the randomness of the minimize the order effect, each participant was asked to
results. Some users’ gestures are difficult to recognize, result- perform pre-experimental training under all three conditions
ing in significantly longer experiment times. Nevertheless, the before formally recording the experimental results. Moreover,
experimental data indicate that the haptic feedback generated the glove used in the experiment had a fabric thickness of
by our device improves the efficiency of dexterous manipula- 2mm.
tion.However,intheabsenceofkinestheticconstraints,haptic During the typing task, participants sat in front of a desk,
feedback has a limited effect on adjusting the object to align using a 13-inch Macbook Air M2 laptop with English input.
with the hole. Applying tangential forces with the fingers to Theexperimentincludedthreetypingtasks.EachtaskrequiredIEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 10
Fig. 12. The nut-tightening task was performed under three hardware
conditions. The complete experimental process involved picking up a nut Fig. 13. User’s manipulation time of typing and nut tightening tasks under
from the table and then attempting to nut it until it fully tightened. a) threewearingconditions
showsaparticipantwearingtheproposeddevice,andb)showsaparticipant
wearing a 2mm thick cloth glove to simulate other similar haptic devices.
Thisexperimentwasdesignedtoinvestigatetheimpactofhapticdeviceson
manipulatingrealobjects.
the input of three different pangrams (a sentence containing
every letter of the alphabet at least once) with 43 letters per
sentence to reduce learning effects. Timing started with the
entry of the first character and stopped upon completion of
the last character.
The other experiment is tightening a nut. During the exper-
iment, the screw was fixed on a baseboard, and participants
could only use their right hand to turn the nut. Timing began
when the participant’s hand touched the nut and ended when Fig. 14. Users’ ratings of manipulating experience under three wearing
conditions
the nut was fully tightened. The experiment sequence was:
Typing Task 1 and nut-tightening task with the proposed
device; Typing Task 2 and nut-tightening task with a glove; Wallis test showed significant differences among conditions
Typing Task 3 and nut-tightening task with bare hands. (H(2)=12.452, p<0.01). Post-hoc Mann-Whitney U tests with
After the experiment, participants were asked to fill out a Bonferronicorrectionrevealedsignificantdifferencesbetween
questionnaire. The main question was ”Regarding the expe- ”glove” and ”barehand” (p<0.01, Hedges’ g=-1.380) and
rience of operating in the real world while wearing a haptic between ”proposed device” and ”glove” (p<0.05, Hedges’
device,pleasescoreeachexperience.”Participantsweretogive g=1.128), but not between ”proposed device” and ”barehand”
a score for each condition on a scale from 1 (very poor) to 7 (p>0.05, Hedges’ g=-0.632).
(excellent). In the subjective evaluation shown in Figure 14, the
Kruskal-Wallis test indicated significant differences among
conditions (H(2)=24.929, p<0.001). Post-hoc Mann-Whitney
B. Results
U tests with Bonferroni correction revealed significant dif-
Manipulation task results are shown in Figure 13. In the
ferences between ”barehand” and ”glove” (p<0.001) and
typing task, median values for ”proposed device”, ”glove”,
between ”proposed device” and ”glove” (p<0.001), but not
and ”barehand” were 16.99s (SD=9.308), 18.22s (SD=9.215),
between ”barehand” and ”proposed device” (p>0.05).
and14.11s(SD=7.147).TheShapiro-Wilktestshowednormal
distribution for ”barehand” (W=0.875, p>0.05), but not for
C. Discussion
”proposeddevice”(W=0.831,p<0.05)and”glove”(W=0.796,
p<0.01). Levene’s test indicated equal variances (W=0.113, This experiment compared the performance of typing and
p>0.05). The Kruskal-Wallis test showed no significant dif- nut-tightening tasks under three conditions (Proposed device,
ferences among conditions (H(2)=3.622, p=0.164). Glove, and Bare hand) and collected users’ subjective ratings
In the nut-tightening task, median values for ”proposed of their operational experience. In the typing tasks, statistical
device”, ”glove”, and ”barehand” were 17.23s (SD=6.917), tests found no significant differences. This indicates that
32.13s (SD=23.907), and 9.54s (SD=8.787). The Shapiro- wearing gloves-like devices has a limited impact on typing
Wilk test showed normal distribution for ”proposed device” speed, and users were able to maintain similar performance
(W=0.949, p>0.05) and ”glove” (W=0.919, p>0.05), but levels across various conditions.
not for ”barehand” (W=0.821, p<0.05). Levene’s test indi- However, in the nut-tightening task, the completion time
cated unequal variances (W=5.696, p<0.01). The Kruskal- while wearing the glove was significantly longer than theIEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 11
other two conditions, with statistically significant differences [2] W. McMahan, J. Gewirtz, D. Standish, P. Martin, J. A. Kunkel,
betweenthegloveandboththeProposeddeviceandBarehand. M.Lilavois,A.Wedmid,D.I.Lee,andK.J.Kuchenbecker,“Toolcon-
tact acceleration feedback for telerobotic surgery,” IEEE Transactions
This suggests that gloves may reduce finger flexibility and
onHaptics,vol.4,no.3,pp.210–220,2011.
tactilesensitivity,makingpreciseoperationsmorechallenging. [3] H.Nagano,H.Takenouchi,N.Cao,M.Konyo,andS.Tadokoro,“Tactile
The performance of the proposed device was not significantly feedbacksystemofhigh-frequencyvibrationsignalsforsupportingdel-
icateteleoperationofconstructionrobots,”AdvancedRobotics,vol.34,
different from the bare-handed one, indicating that the device
no.11,pp.730–743,2020.
has limited restrictions on hand movements. [4] T. Aoki, H. Mitake, D. Keoki, S. Hasegawa, and M. Sato, “Wearable
In the subjective rating, no significant difference was found hapticdevicetopresentcontactsensationbasedoncutaneoussensation
using thin wire,” in Proceedings of the International Conference on
between the ”barehand” and ”proposed device”. This finding
AdvancesinComputerEntertainmentTechnology,pp.115–122,2009.
suggeststhatparticipantsperceivedtheproposedhapticdevice [5] S. Kim, S. Hasegawa, Y. Koike, and M. Sato, “Tension based 7-dof
as comparable to the barehand condition when performing force feedback device: Spidar-g,” in Proceedings IEEE Virtual Reality
2002,pp.283–284,IEEE,2002.
the two tasks. Meanwhile, the glove condition may have
[6] A.J.Silva,O.A.D.Ramirez,V.P.Vega,andJ.P.O.Oliver,“Phantom
impeded performance or comfort more than the other two omnihapticdevice:Kinematicandmanipulability,”in2009Electronics,
conditions.Theseresultsalsoindicatethat,comparedtoglove- Robotics and Automotive Mechanics Conference (CERMA), pp. 193–
198,IEEE,2009.
type devices, the proposed device allows users to complete
[7] V. Yem and H. Kajimoto, “Wearable tactile device using mechanical
some daily tasks with less hindrance. andelectricalstimulationforfingertipinteractionwithvirtualworld,”in
2017IEEEVirtualReality(VR),pp.99–104,IEEE,2017.
[8] D.Prattichizzo,F.Chinello,C.Pacchierotti,andM.Malvezzi,“Towards
VIII. CONCLUSIONS wearability in fingertip haptics: a 3-dof wearable device for cutaneous
forcefeedback,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,vol.6,no.4,pp.506–
In this study, we developed a lightweight, wearable haptic 516,2013.
device that provides physics-based haptic feedback for dex- [9] A. Withana, D. Groeger, and J. Steimle, “Tacttoo: A thin and feel-
through tattoo for on-skin tactile output,” in Proceedings of the 31st
terousmanipulationinvirtualenvironmentswithouthindering Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
real-worldinteractionsoffingertips.Byemployingthinstrings pp.365–378,2018.
and attaching actuators to the fingernails, the proposed device [10] V.Shen,T.Rae-Grant,J.Mullenbach,C.Harrison,andC.Shultz,“Fluid
reality: High-resolution, untethered haptic gloves using electroosmotic
delivers pressure-based haptic experiences at the fingertips pump arrays,” in Proceedings of the 36th Annual ACM Symposium on
while maintaining the ability to interact with physical objects. UserInterfaceSoftwareandTechnology,pp.1–20,2023.
[11] Y.-L.Feng,C.L.Fernando,J.Rod,andK.Minamizawa,“Submerged
Through a series of experiments, we investigated the ef-
haptics: a 3-dof fingertip haptic display using miniature 3d printed
fectiveness of the proposed device in various scenarios. The airbags,”inACMSIGGRAPH2017Posters,pp.1–2,2017.
fingertip pressure perception experiment demonstrated that [12] Y. Tanaka, A. Shen, A. Kong, and P. Lopes, “Full-hand electro-tactile
feedback without obstructing palmar side of hand,” in Proceedings of
participants could perceive and respond to the pressure feed-
the 2023 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
back,thepinchdistancecanbelargerthannohapticfeedback pp.1–15,2023.
when virtual object in hand. The slip vibrotactile feedback [13] X.DeTinguy,C.Pacchierotti,M.Marchal,andA.Le´cuyer,“Enhancing
the stiffness perception of tangible objects in mixed reality using
experimentshowedthatthe vibrationfeedbackimprovedtheir
wearablehaptics,”in2018IEEEConferenceonVirtualRealityand3D
reaction time to the sliding task. The feedback can also UserInterfaces(VR),pp.81–90,IEEE,2018.
significantly improve the efficiency of dexterous manipulation [14] M. Solazzi, A. Frisoli, and M. Bergamasco, “Design of a novel finger
haptic interface for contact and orientation display,” in 2010 IEEE
in the peg-in-hole experiment.
HapticsSymposium,pp.129–132,IEEE,2010.
Furthermore, the real-world task experiments showed its [15] L. Han and J. C. Trinkle, “Dextrous manipulation by rolling and
ability to preserve natural tactile sensations and small hin- fingergaiting,”inProceedings.1998IEEEInternationalConferenceon
RoboticsandAutomation,vol.1,pp.730–735,IEEE,1998.
drances to real-world operations. By keeping the palmar side
[16] A. Bicchi, “Hands for dexterous manipulation and robust grasping: A
ofthefingersfree,thedeviceallowsuserstoperformcommon difficult road toward simplicity,” IEEE Transactions on robotics and
tasks like typing and nut-tightening with similar performance automation,vol.16,no.6,pp.652–662,2000.
[17] R. S. Johansson and J. R. Flanagan, “Coding and use of tactile
tobarehandedinteractions.Thesubjectiveevaluationprovided
signalsfromthefingertipsinobjectmanipulationtasks,”NatureReviews
insights into participants’ experiences. Most participants ap- Neuroscience,vol.10,no.5,pp.345–359,2009.
preciated the enhanced realism and precision provided by [18] R. S. Johansson and G. Westling, “Signals in tactile afferents from
the fingers eliciting adaptive motor responses during precision grip,”
the haptic feedback, especially in judging the gripping state
Experimentalbrainresearch,vol.66,pp.141–154,1987.
and adjusting the applied force. However, there were mixed [19] J.R.Flanagan,J.Tresilian,andA.M.Wing,“Couplingofgripforceand
opinions on the device’s similarity to real-world interactions loadforceduringarmmovementswithgraspedobjects,”Neuroscience
letters,vol.152,no.1-2,pp.53–56,1993.
and its utility in precise operations. The device’s wearability
[20] M.Wiertlewski,S.Endo,A.M.Wing,andV.Hayward,“Slip-induced
receivedbothpositiveandnegativefeedback,withparticipants vibrationinfluencesthegripreflex:Apilotstudy,”in2013WorldHaptics
appreciating its lightness and ease of use. The proposed Conference,pp.627–632,IEEE,2013.
[21] R.S.JohanssonandA˚.B.Vallbo,“Tactilesensorycodingintheglabrous
fingertip-based haptic devices enhance virtual manipulation
skin of the human hand,” Trends in neurosciences, vol. 6, pp. 27–32,
experiences without compromising real-world interactions. 1983.
[22] K. O. Johnson, “The roles and functions of cutaneous mechanorecep-
tors,” Current opinion in neurobiology, vol. 11, no. 4, pp. 455–461,
REFERENCES 2001.
[23] M. C. Lin and M. Otaduy, Haptic rendering: foundations, algorithms,
[1] M.MacFarlane,J.Rosen,B.Hannaford,C.Pellegrini,andM.Sinanan, andapplications. CRCPress,2008.
“Force-feedback grasper helps restore sense of touch in minimally [24] J.Qi,F.Gao,G.Sun,J.C.Yeo,andC.T.Lim,“Haptglove—untethered
invasive surgery,” Journal of Gastrointestinal Surgery, vol. 3, no. 3, pneumatic glove for multimode haptic feedback in reality–virtuality
pp.278–285,1999. continuum,”AdvancedScience,vol.10,no.25,p.2301044,2023.IEEETRANSACTIONSONHAPTICS,VOL.X,NO.X,AUGUSTX(PREPRINT) 12
[25] I. Choi, E. Ofek, H. Benko, M. Sinclair, and C. Holz, “Claw: A [45] S.-Y. Teng, P. Li, R. Nith, J. Fonseca, and P. Lopes, “Touch&fold: A
multifunctional handheld haptic controller for grasping, touching, and foldable haptic actuator for rendering touch in mixed reality,” in Pro-
triggeringinvirtualreality,”inProceedingsofthe2018CHIconference ceedingsofthe2021CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing
onhumanfactorsincomputingsystems,pp.1–13,2018. Systems,pp.1–14,2021.
[26] H. Benko, C. Holz, M. Sinclair, and E. Ofek, “Normaltouch and [46] R. Kovacs, E. Ofek, M. Gonzalez Franco, A. F. Siu, S. Marwecki,
texturetouch:High-fidelity3dhapticshaperenderingonhandheldvirtual C. Holz, and M. Sinclair, “Haptic pivot: On-demand handhelds in vr,”
reality controllers,” in Proceedings of the 29th annual symposium on inProceedingsofthe33rdAnnualACMSymposiumonUserInterface
userinterfacesoftwareandtechnology,pp.717–728,2016. SoftwareandTechnology,pp.1046–1059,2020.
[27] I. Choi and S. Follmer, “Wolverine: A wearable haptic interface for [47] V. R. Mercado, M. Marchal, and A. Le´cuyer, ““haptics on-demand”:
grasping in vr,” in Adjunct Proceedings of the 29th Annual ACM A survey on encountered-type haptic displays,” IEEE Transactions on
Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology, pp. 117–119, Haptics,vol.14,no.3,pp.449–464,2021.
2016. [48] H.-R.Tsai,C.Tsai,Y.-S.Liao,Y.-T.Chiang,andZ.-Y.Zhang,“Fingerx:
[28] R. Hinchet, V. Vechev, H. Shea, and O. Hilliges, “Dextres: Wearable Rendering haptic shapes of virtual objects augmented by real objects
haptic feedback for grasping in vr via a thin form-factor electrostatic usingextendableandwithdrawablesupportsonfingers,”inProceedings
brake,” in Proceedings of the 31st Annual ACM Symposium on User ofthe2022CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,
InterfaceSoftwareandTechnology,pp.901–912,2018. pp.1–14,2022.
[29] C.Fang,Y.Zhang,M.Dworman,andC.Harrison,“Wireality:Enabling [49] A.Matsubayashi,Y.Makino,andH.Shinoda,“Directfingermanipula-
complex tangible geometries in virtual reality with worn multi-string tionof3dobjectimagewithultrasoundhapticfeedback,”inProceedings
haptics,”inProceedingsofthe2020CHIConferenceonHumanFactors of the 2019 CHI conference on human factors in computing systems,
inComputingSystems,pp.1–10,2020. pp.1–11,2019.
[30] S.B.SchorrandA.M.Okamura,“Fingertiptactiledevicesforvirtual [50] S. Gupta, D. Morris, S. N. Patel, and D. Tan, “Airwave: Non-contact
object manipulation and exploration,” in Proceedings of the 2017 CHI hapticfeedbackusingairvortexrings,”inProceedingsofthe2013ACM
conference on human factors in computing systems, pp. 3115–3119, international joint conference on Pervasive and ubiquitous computing,
2017. pp.419–428,2013.
[31] K. Minamizawa, S. Fukamachi, H. Kajimoto, N. Kawakami, and [51] C.ShultzandC.Harrison,“Lrair:Non-contacthapticsusingsynthetic
S. Tachi, “Gravity grabber: wearable haptic display to present virtual jets,” in 2022 IEEE Haptics Symposium (HAPTICS), pp. 1–6, IEEE,
mass sensation,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2007 emerging technologies, 2022.
pp.8–es,2007. [52] H. Kajimoto, N. Kawakami, T. Maeda, and S. Tachi, “Electro-tactile
[32] D.Tsetserukou,S.Hosokawa,andK.Terashima,“Linktouch:Awear- displaywithtactileprimarycolorapproach,”GraduateSchoolofInfor-
able haptic device with five-bar linkage mechanism for presentation mationandTechnology,TheUniversityofTokyo,2004.
of two-dof force feedback at the fingerpad,” in 2014 IEEE Haptics [53] T.Han,F.Anderson,P.Irani,andT.Grossman,“Hydroring:Supporting
Symposium(HAPTICS),pp.307–312,IEEE,2014. mixed reality haptics using liquid flow,” in Proceedings of the 31st
[33] A. Girard, M. Marchal, F. Gosselin, A. Chabrier, F. Louveau, and Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
A. Le´cuyer, “Haptip: Displaying haptic shear forces at the fingertips pp.913–925,2018.
for multi-finger interaction in virtual environments,” Frontiers in ICT, [54] Y. Xu, S. Wang, and S. Hasegawa, “Realistic dexterous manipulation
vol.3,p.6,2016. of virtual objects with physics-based haptic rendering,” in ACM SIG-
[34] D. Leonardis, M. Solazzi, I. Bortone, and A. Frisoli, “A 3-rsr haptic GRAPH2023EmergingTechnologies,pp.1–2,2023.
wearable device for rendering fingertip contact forces,” IEEE transac- [55] S. J. Lederman and R. L. Klatzky, “Sensing and displaying spatially
tionsonhaptics,vol.10,no.3,pp.305–316,2016. distributed fingertip forces in haptic interfaces for teleoperator and
[35] V.Vechev,J.Zarate,D.Lindlbauer,R.Hinchet,H.Shea,andO.Hilliges, virtualenvironmentsystems,”Presence,vol.8,no.1,pp.86–103,1999.
“Tactiles:Dual-modelow-powerelectromagneticactuatorsforrendering [56] Y.XU,S.Wang,andH.Shoichi,“Optimizinghapticfeedbackinvirtual
continuous contact and spatial haptic patterns in vr,” in 2019 IEEE reality: The role of vibration and tangential forces in enhancing grasp
Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces (VR), pp. 312– responseandweightperception,”
320,IEEE,2019.
[36] H.Ando,T.Miki,M.Inami,andT.Maeda,“Smartfinger:nail-mounted
tactile display,” in ACM SIGGRAPH 2002 conference abstracts and
applications,pp.78–78,2002.
[37] P. Preechayasomboon and E. Rombokas, “Haplets: Finger-worn wire-
less and low-encumbrance vibrotactile haptic feedback for virtual and
augmentedreality,”FrontiersinVirtualReality,vol.2,p.738613,2021.
[38] J. Rekimoto, “Senseablerays: opto-haptic substitution for touch-
enhancedinteractivespaces,”inCHI’09ExtendedAbstractsonHuman
FactorsinComputingSystems,pp.2519–2528,2009.
[39] E. Pezent, A. Israr, M. Samad, S. Robinson, P. Agarwal, H. Benko,
and N. Colonnese, “Tasbi: Multisensorysqueeze and vibrotactile wrist
hapticsforaugmentedandvirtualreality,”in2019IEEEWorldHaptics
Conference(WHC),pp.1–6,IEEE,2019.
[40] M. Sarac, A. M. Okamura, and M. Di Luca, “Effects of haptic
feedback on the wrist during virtual manipulation,” arXiv preprint
arXiv:2204.05830,2022.
[41] T. Moriyama and H. Kajimoto, “Wearable haptic device presenting
sensationsoffingertipstotheforearm,”IEEETransactionsonHaptics,
vol.15,no.1,pp.91–96,2022.
[42] S. Casini, M. Morvidoni, M. Bianchi, M. Catalano, G. Grioli, and
A.Bicchi,“Designandrealizationofthecuff-clenchingupper-limbforce
feedback wearable device for distributed mechano-tactile stimulation
ofnormalandtangentialskinforces,”in2015IEEE/RSJInternational
Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS), pp. 1186–1193,
IEEE,2015.
[43] C. Pacchierotti, G. Salvietti, I. Hussain, L. Meli, and D. Prattichizzo,
“The hring: A wearable haptic device to avoid occlusions in hand
tracking,” in 2016 IEEE haptics symposium (HAPTICS), pp. 134–139,
IEEE,2016.
[44] T. Maeda, S. Yoshida, T. Murakami, K. Matsuda, T. Tanikawa, and
H.Sakai,“Fingeret:awearablefingerpad-freehapticdeviceformixed
reality,” in Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Symposium on Spatial User
Interaction,pp.1–10,2022.