Med-Bot: An AI-Powered Assistant to Provide
Accurate and Reliable Medical Information
Ahan Bhatt Nandan Vaghela
bhattahan@gmail.com nandanvaghela.20.ce@iite.indusuni.ac.in
Indus University, Ahmedabad Indus University, Ahmedabad
Gujarat, India Gujarat, India
Abstract—This paper introduces Med-Bot, an AI-powered enhance the capabilities of medical chatbots. By integrating
chatbot designed to provide users with accurate and reliable state-of-the-arttechnologiesandmethodologies,weaimtoad-
medical information. Utilizing advanced libraries and frame- dress existing limitations and provide a more robust, adaptive,
works such as PyTorch, Chromadb, Langchain and Autogptq, and reliable solution for healthcare assistance.
Med-Bot is built to handle the complexities of natural language
understanding in a healthcare context. The integration of llama-
assisted data processing and AutoGPT-Q provides enhanced II. LITERATUREREVIEW
performance in processing and responding to queries based on
Recent advances in medical chatbots have shown signif-
PDFsofmedicalliterature,ensuringthatusersreceivepreciseand
icant potential in providing reliable healthcare assistance to
trustworthyinformation.Thisresearchdetailsthemethodologies
users. The integration of artificial intelligence (AI) in chatbots
employed in developing Med-Bot and evaluates its effectiveness
in disseminating healthcare information. has enabled more accurate diagnosis and personalized health-
care services, thereby addressing the shortage of healthcare
Keywords—LLM, AI-powered healthcare, Medical chat-
professionals and increasing patient demand.
bot, Context-based interaction, Llama-assisted data processing,
AutoGPT-Q, PyTorch, TensorFlow, Reliable medical information, Medical Chatbot Techniques: A Review by Tjiptomongso-
Machine learning in healthcare, Conversational AI. gunoetal.(2020)providesacomprehensiveanalysisofvarious
methodologiesandalgorithmsemployedinthedevelopmentof
I. INTRODUCTION medical chatbots. The authors review a range of techniques,
including Support Vector Machines (SVM), Natural Language
Theintegrationofartificialintelligence(AI)intohealthcare
Processing (NLP), and Ensemble Learning, which are applied
has catalyzed a transformative shift in how medical services
to improve the chatbot’s accuracy in diagnosing diseases and
are delivered, with medical chatbots emerging as a prominent
providing medical information. They highlight the importance
innovation. These chatbots leverage AI and natural language
of using advanced algorithms like Hierarchical Bi-Directional
processing (NLP) technologies to offer users a range of
Attention and Knowledge Graphs to enhance the chatbot’s
healthcare-related services, from providing medical informa-
understanding and response capabilities. The review also dis-
tion to assisting with diagnostics and treatment suggestions.
cusses the challenges associated with chatbot development,
This evolution addresses the growing demand for accessible
such as the need for extensive training data and the risk of
healthcaresolutionsamidtheshortageofmedicalprofessionals
misinterpretation due to NLP limitations. This paper serves as
and the increasing complexity of patient needs.
a valuable resource for understanding the current landscape
Medical chatbots are designed to enhance patient engage- of medical chatbot technologies and their application in real-
ment by offering timely, accurate, and personalized responses. world healthcare scenarios.
Theirabilitytointeractwithusersinnaturallanguage,coupled
Personal Healthcare Chatbot for Medical Suggestions Us-
with advanced algorithms for understanding and processing
ing Artificial Intelligence and Machine Learning, published in
medical queries, allows them to simulate the experience of
the European Chemical Bulletin in July 2023 by Jegadeesan
consulting with a healthcare provider. This capability not
et al., explores the use of Natural Language Processing (NLP)
only improves patient accessibility to medical information but
andMachineLearning(ML)algorithmstodevelopahealthcare
also supports healthcare professionals by streamlining routine
chatbot that diagnoses diseases and provides basic medical
inquiries and administrative tasks.
information based on user symptoms. The chatbot is capable
As the field continues to advance, various methodologies of classifying diseases as severe or negligible and providing
and technologies are being explored to enhance the effective- corresponding medical suggestions, including Ayurvedic and
ness of these chatbots. Researchers are focusing on improving Homeopathytreatments.Thispapercontributestotheliterature
the accuracy of diagnostics, the relevance of information by demonstrating how AI can be used to enhance healthcare
provided, and the overall user experience. Innovations such delivery and offer personalized treatment suggestions.
as context-aware processing and advanced machine learning
Our research introduces a novel approach to medical
algorithms are playing crucial roles in refining these systems.
chatbots by integrating Llama-assisted data processing and
In this evolving landscape, our research seeks to push the AutoGPT-Q for training, which distinguishes it from the
boundaries further by employing cutting-edge techniques to techniques discussed in the reviewed papers. Unlike the
4202
voN
41
]IA.sc[
1v84690.1142:viXramethodologies in Tjiptomongsoguno et al. (2020), which
focus on traditional machine learning algorithms and NLP
for enhancing chatbot accuracy, our approach leverages ad-
vancedtransformer-basedmodelstoprovidemorenuancedand
context-aware interactions. Additionally, while Jegadeesan et
al. (2023) emphasize symptom-based diagnosis and treatment
suggestions, our technique aims to create a more dynamic
and interactive user experience by employing a context-based
learning mechanism that adapts and refines responses based
on ongoing interactions and user feedback. This allows our
chatbot to offer more personalized and accurate medical guid-
ance, addressing the limitations observed in previous research
regarding adaptability and real-time learning.
III. METHODOLOGY
A. Libraries and Frameworks Figure 1: Splitting data into chunks
Med-Bot is built using the following key libraries and
frameworks: C. Model Training
1. PyTorch: A deep learning framework that provides Med-Bot utilizes AutoGPT-Q for training the chatbot
flexible and efficient tools for building and training neural model. The model is built on the Llama-2 architecture, which
networks. isknownforitsabilitytogeneratehigh-qualitytext.Themodel
is fine-tuned using medical literature, enabling it to generate
2. Chromadb: An open-source vector database designed
responses that are both accurate and contextually relevant.
to store and retrieve vector embeddings. It allows saving
Refer to the code snippet below get a better understanding
embeddings with associated metadata, which can be utilized
of the training process
later by large language models for efficient data retrieval and
analysis.
model_name_or_path = "TheBloke/Llama-2-13B"
3.Langchain:LangChainisaframeworkthatsimplifiesthe model_basename = "model"
developmentofapplicationspoweredbylargelanguagemodels
(LLMs) by enabling seamless integration with external data tokenizer = AutoTokenizer.from_pretrained
sources, tools, and APIs. In this paper, LangChain is used to (model_name_or_path, use_fast=True)
manage the flow of data between the LLM (Llama-2) and the
medical literature, allowing Med-Bot to process and generate model = AutoGPTQForCausalLM.from_quantized(
contextually accurate responses based on the user’s queries. model_name_or_path,
revision="gptq-4bit-128g-actorder_True",
4.Autogptq:AutoGPTQisatoolforefficientlyquantizing
model_basename=model_basename,
large language models (LLMs), reducing their memory foot-
use_safetensors=True,
printwhilemaintainingperformance,enablingfasterinference
trust_remote_code=True,
on resource-limited hardware. Here, we use it to optimize the
inject_fused_attention=False,
Llama-2 model, making Med-Bot more efficient in generating
device=DEVICE,
medical responses without compromising accuracy.
quantize_config=None,
)
B. Data Processing
The initial stage of Med-Bot’s development involves pro-
cessing vast amounts of medical literature stored in PDF The code snippet initializes the necessary components
format. The data used for training Med-Bot consisted of to load and use a quantized version of the Llama-2 model
publiclyavailablemedicalbooks,researchpapers,andverified for generating text. It includes setting up the tokenizer and
healthcare PDFs sourced from reputable medical databases model in a way that balances efficiency (via quantization)
suchasPubMed,Medline,andWHOarchives.Eachdocument with the need for high-quality, accurate language generation.
wascarefullyscreenedforaccuracyandrelevancetoensurethe The loaded model is then ready to be used for tasks like text
chatbotprovidesreliableinformation.Thequalityofthedatais generation or answering questions based on input prompts.
crucial for the model’s performance, particularly in generating
accurate medical responses. A significant focus was placed on
D. Prompt Generation and Response Pipeline
pre-processing the data to remove inconsistencies and ensure
uniformityinmedicalterminologies.Usingllama-assisteddata The ”Prompt Generation and Response Pipeline” is a
processing,thesystemextractsrelevantinformationfromthese critical part of the system that handles the interaction between
documents. The PyPDFDirectoryLoader is employed to load the user and the AI model. The process begins with the
and parse the PDF files, and the RecursiveCharacterTextSplit- generationofastructuredpromptthatdirectstheAIonhowto
ter is used to break down the documents into manageable respondtouserqueries.Adefaultsystempromptisestablished
chunks of size 1024 for efficient processing. to ensure that the AI behaves in a helpful, respectful, andethical manner. This prompt includes guidelines that the AI
must follow, such as avoiding harmful or misleading content
and ensuring responses are socially unbiased and positive.
Here’s what the default system prompt looks like:
DEFAULT_SYSTEM_PROMPT = """
You are a helpful, respectful, and honest Figure 2: Sample Response
assistant. Always answer as helpfully as
possible, while being safe. Your answers
PDFs from a specified directory and converts them into a
should not include any harmful, unethical
format suitable for further processing.
, racist, sexist, toxic, dangerous, or
illegal content. Please ensure that your After loading the documents, the next step is embedding
responses are socially unbiased and the textual content into a numerical form that the AI can
positive process. This embedding is done using a pre-trained model,
in nature. whichtransformsthetextintohigh-dimensionalvectors.These
vectors capture the semantic meaning of the text, enabling the
If a question does not make any sense, AI to understand and compare different pieces of information.
or is not factually coherent, explain
why instead of answering something not The text is then split into manageable chunks, typically
correct. If you don’t know the answer of a specific size, to ensure that the AI can efficiently process
to a question, please don’t share false andretrieveinformation.Thisstepiscrucialforhandlinglarge
information. documents, as it allows the AI to focus on relevant sections
""".strip() rather than processing entire documents at once.
Once the text is embedded and split, the AI model, pre-
trained with a large language model like Llama-2, is loaded
The prompt generation function uses this system prompt
and configured. This model has been quantized, meaning it
to create a specific instruction format that the model will
has been optimized to run efficiently on specific hardware
understand.Whenauserasksaquestion,thesystemcombines
withoutsignificantlossofaccuracy.Themodelispairedwitha
this user input with the predefined system prompt to form a
tokenizer,whichbreaksdowntheinputtextintosmallertokens
complete prompt. This ensures that every response generated
that the AI can understand.
by the AI aligns with the safety and ethical guidelines.
TheAIsystemisthenreadytointeractwiththeuser.When
Oncethepromptisgenerated,itisfedintoatextgeneration
ausersubmitsaquery,thesystemretrievesrelevantdocument
pipeline.Thispipelineisresponsibleforprocessingtheprompt
chunks based on the embeddings and generates a structured
and generating a coherent response. The pipeline uses a pre-
prompt. This prompt is processed by the AI model, which
trained language model, configured with specific parameters
produces a response based on the information in the retrieved
like maximum token length, temperature for randomness, and
documents. The response is then streamed back to the user,
a repetition penalty to avoid redundant responses. The model
providing real-time interaction.
thenprocessesthepromptandproducesatextresponse,which
is streamed back to the user in real-time. Overall, this process enables the AI to efficiently handle
complex queries by leveraging pre-trained models, embedding
Theentireprocess,frompromptgenerationtoresponsede-
techniques, and optimized text processing, ensuring accurate
livery,isdesignedtomaintainaconsistentandsafeinteraction
and relevant responses.
between the user and the AI, ensuring that the responses are
not only accurate but also adhere to ethical standards.
The below figure perfectly illustrates this section:
E. Retrieval and Response Generation
Med-Bot employs a retrieval-based approach to answer
user queries. It uses a combination of embeddings and a
retrieval mechanism to identify the most relevant information
from the processed medical documents. The final response is
generated using a text-generation pipeline.
Upon querying, ”What may cause dyspepsia?” Med-Bot
generates the following response based on the processed data:
F. Working
Theworkingprocessofthesystembeginswithloadingthe
relevant documents, which are stored in PDF format. These Figure 3: Working Diagram
documents are crucial as they form the knowledge base from
which the AI will retrieve information. The system loads allIV. LIMITATIONS A. User Interface Enhancements
Despite the success of Med-Bot, there are several limita- Develop a more user-friendly interface that caters to users
tions that warrant further research. One key limitation is the with varying levels of tech-savviness, integrating a simplified
reliance on the quality and scope of the medical literature layout, clear instructions, and a responsive design adaptable
usedfortraining.Whilethechatbotperformswellonstandard to different devices. Integrating support for multiple lan-
queries, it may struggle with rare medical conditions or newly guageswillmakeMed-Botaccessibletonon-Englishspeakers,
emergingdiseasesduetogapsinitstrainingdata.Additionally, therebyexpandingitsreachtoaglobalaudience.Accessibility
the system’s ability to handle real-time user feedback is features like voice commands, screen readers, and adjustable
limited, and continuous updates are required to improve its text sizes will ensure that individuals with disabilities can
responseaccuracy.Themodelisalsodependentonthequality easily use Med-Bot.
of the initial data sources, which can introduce biases if not
properlycurated.Lastly,thechatbotiscurrentlyavailableonly B. Expansion of Knowledge Base
inEnglish,restrictingitsaccessibilitytonon-Englishspeaking
Implementing machine learning techniques will enable
users.
Med-Bot to learn from interactions and update its medical
knowledge base regularly, helping it stay current with the
latestmedicalresearch,treatments,andguidelines.Developing
V. CONCLUSION
modulesfocusedonspecificareasofhealthcare,suchasmental
This research paper presents the development and im- health, pediatrics, and geriatrics, will provide more tailored
plementation of Med-Bot, an AI-powered assistant designed support to users based on their unique medical needs.
to provide accurate and reliable medical information in re-
sponsetousers’queriesandconcerns.Byleveragingadvanced C. Integration with Healthcare Systems
technologies such as PyTorch, TensorFlow, and Flask, Med-
Integrating Med-Bot with hospital systems to access pa-
Bot integrates state-of-the-art language models, specifically
tients’electronichealthrecords(EHRs)willprovidemoreper-
Llama2,withGPTQquantizationtooptimizeperformanceand
sonalized and accurate advice, streamlining the workflow for
accuracy. The incorporation of llama-assisted data processing
healthcareprovidersandreducingtheburdenofadministrative
and AutoGPT-Q in training the chatbot marks a significant
tasks.Includingfeaturesthatallowuserstobookappointments,
step forward in the realm of AI-driven healthcare information
set medication reminders, and receive follow-up care advice
dissemination.
basedontheirconsultationswillenhanceuserengagementand
healthcare outcomes.
The outcomes of this research demonstrate the potential of
Med-Bot to offer nuanced and precise answers to complex
medical questions, thereby enhancing the accessibility and ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
quality of healthcare information. The chatbot’s ability to We would like to express my sincere gratitude to Indus
process large volumes of data from PDFs of medical books University for providing an enriching academic environment
allows it to provide responses that are not only accurate but and the resources that made this research possible. We are
also comprehensive and contextually relevant. deeply indebted to Dr. Seema Mahajan, Head of the Com-
puter Engineering Department at Indus University, whose
Looking forward, the development of Med-Bot paves the
insightfulguidanceandencouragementhavebeeninstrumental
way for the integration of more sophisticated natural language
in shaping this research. Her expertise and leadership have
processingandmachinelearningtechniquestoimproveitsca-
significantly contributed to the successful completion of this
pabilities further. Potential applications include expanding the
project.
chatbot’s knowledge base, enhancing its ability to understand
and interpret user intent, and integrating multilingual support Wearealsoimmenselygratefultoourmentor,Ms.Divyani
toserveabroaderaudience.Additionally,futuredevelopments Jigyasu, Faculty at Indus University, for her unwavering
mayexploretheintegrationofauser-friendlyinterfacetomake support, constructive feedback, and invaluable mentorship
the tool more accessible to non-technical users. throughout the research process. Her dedication and commit-
ment to nurturing our skills have been a source of inspiration
In summary, Med-Bot exemplifies the transformative po-
and motivation.
tentialofAIinhealthcare,offeringascalablesolutionthatcan
bridgegapsinmedicalknowledgeaccessibility.Bycontinuing This acknowledgment extends to all faculty members and
torefineandexpanduponthegroundworklaidbythisresearch, peersatIndusUniversitywhohavecontributedtothedevelop-
Med-Bothasthepotentialtosignificantlycontributetothefield ment of this research through their feedback and discussions.
of digital health and beyond. Their support has been vital in helping me achieve my aca-
demic and research goals.
VI. FUTURESCOPE REFERENCES
The potential applications and future development of the [1] Sreeram a, Adith & Sai, Jithendra. (2023). An Effective Query System
UsingLLMsandLangChain.InternationalJournalofEngineeringand
Med-Bot project are expansive, encompassing both technical
TechnicalResearch.12.
enhancements and practical implementations that can signif-
[2] Reyner, Andrew & Tjiptomongsoguno, Wibowo & Chen, Audrey &
icantly advance AI-driven healthcare support. Here are some
Sanyoto,Hubert&Irwansyah,Edy&Kanigoro,Bayu.(2020).Medical
prospective directions for Med-Bot: ChatbotTechniques:AReview.10.1007/978-3-030-63322-6 28.[3] Ramalingam, Jegadeesan & Srinivas, Dava & Nagappan, Umapathi
& Ganesan, Karthick & Venkateswaran, Natesan. (2023). Section A-
Research paper Personal Healthcare Chatbot for Medical Suggestions
UsingArtificialIntelligenceandMachineLearningEur.12.6004-6012.
10.31838/ecb/2023.12.s3.670.