Strategic Sacrifice: Self-Organized Robot Swarm
Localization for Inspection Productivity
Sneha Ramshanker, Hungtang Ko, and Radhika Nagpal
Princeton University, Princeton NJ 08544, USA,
s.ramshanker@princeton.edu, hk1581@princeton.edu, rn1627@princeton.edu
Abstract. Robot swarms offer significant potential for inspecting di-
verse infrastructure, ranging from bridges to space stations. However,
effective inspection requires accurate robot localization, which demands
substantialcomputationalresourcesandlimitsproductivity.Inspiredby
biological systems, we introduce a novel cooperative localization mech-
anism that minimizes collective computation expenditure through self-
organizedsacrifice.Here,afewagentsbearthecomputationalburdenof
localization;throughlocalinteractions,theyimprovetheinspectionpro-
ductivity of the swarm. Our approach adaptively maximizes inspection
productivity for unconstrained trajectories in dynamic interaction and
environmental settings. We demonstrate the optimality and robustness
using mean-field analytical models, multi-agent simulations, and hard-
ware experiments with metal climbing robots inspecting a 3D cylinder.
Keywords: Collaborativelocalization,mean-fieldmodels,task-allocation
1 Introduction
Imagine a future where small robotic teams roam our infrastructure—bridges,
pipelines, buildings, and satellites—detecting problems promptly, such as leaks
and cracks (Figure 1(b)) [1,2,3,4]. Teams of robots offer many advantages for
inspection,includinghighparallelization,resiliencetofailure,andpotentiallylow
unitcost.However,foreffectiveinspection,robotsneedtoknowwheretheyare,
a problem known as localization. In most indoor and remote locations, external
localization mechanisms like GPS are unavailable or unreliable [5]. Robots must
autonomously perform localization, overcoming difficulties such as sensor noise,
limited landmarks, and slippage. While the literature primarily addresses the
localization problem from a single-robot perspective, with approaches such as
SLAMachievinggoodaccuracy[6],thesemethodsarecomputationallyintensive.
Computationisafiniteandvaluableresource;ifmostofanagent’scomputation
isusedforlocalization,littleremainsforproductiveinspectiontaskslikefinding
cracks, measuring vibration, and monitoring rust accumulation.
Weexploreifcollaborationamongrobotscansimplifythislocalizationprob-
lem, allocating more computation for inspection. We draw inspiration from na-
ture, where individuals sacrifice for the group’s benefit. In anti-predator vigi-
lance, some members watch for predators, allowing others to eat safely [7,8].
4202
voN
41
]OR.sc[
1v39490.1142:viXra2 Ramshanker et al.
Fig.1. Rovables [14] (a) on a 3D metal cylinder, (b) on a piping system, and (c) in
the palm of a human hand. (d) Rovables with markers for Vicon Motion Capture.
Army ants form bridges out of their bodies, facilitating cargo transport across
gaps and cracks [9,10]. The vigilant animals forego eating, and the bridge ants
do not carry cargo; instead, by sacrificing individual productivity, they enhance
group success. What is especially interesting about these biological cases is that
thefractionofsacrificersisself-organizedandadaptstoenvironmentaldemands.
We introduce a novel cooperative localization mechanism for robot swarms
that leverages this idea of self-organized sacrifice for the group’s benefit. While
previous studies have used cooperation to enhance localization accuracy and
enablelocalizationinunknownenvironments[11,12,13],thesemethodsoftenin-
creasecomputationalrequirements,constrainrobottrajectories,andlackadapt-
abilitytochangingenvironments.Inourapproach,individualsbecomededicated
localizers or inspectors, with this distribution self-organized based on local in-
teractions. We demonstrate that this decentralized mechanism optimizes collec-
tive productivity in dynamic conditions, validated through theoretical models,
numerical simulations, and hardware experiments. By deriving mean-field mod-
els (Sec 4), we prove that sacrificing agents as dedicated localizers improves
swarm productivity. We also show that the swarm can reconfigure based on lo-
cal interactions to always maximize productivity. Using agent-based numerical
simulations (Sec 5), we demonstrate that group productivity increases further
through smarter collaboration. Hardware experiments (Sec 6) conducted with a
swarm of 10 metal climbing robots inspecting a 3D metal cylinder (Figure 1)
demonstrate the effectiveness of this approach in navigating complex physical
environments. Moreover, these experiments show that the emergent behavior
optimizes productivity amidst dynamically changing interactions.Strategic Sacrifice 3
2 Related Work
Single-robot localization is extensively studied in robotics literature [6,15]. The
simplest approach is dead reckoning, where the robot uses internal sensor data
like wheel encoders and IMU to estimate its position. While computationally
inexpensive, dead reckoning suffers from error accumulation and requires regu-
lar external feedback for accuracy [6]. Probabilistic methods like particle filters
and SLAM offer higher accuracy by incorporating external landmark and fea-
ture detection but demand heavy computational resources [15]. In this paper,
we will not explore single-agent localization methods in detail. Instead, we will
assume robots can achieve accurate localization at a high computational cost.
An analysis of this accuracy-computation trade-off can be found in [16].
Inmulti-robotsettings,variousapproachesimprovelocalizationusingcollab-
oration[17].Acommonstrategytoboostaccuracyissharing personal estimates
andrelativemeasurements[11,18,19,20].Forinstance,in[11],eachagentemploys
a particle filter (PF) combining personal dead reckoning with relative position
estimates from neighboring agents. While these methods improve localization
accuracy, they also come with an increase in computational costs, as all robots
must process not only their individual measurements but also the estimates of
theirneighbors.Othercollaborativelocalization(CL)approachesenhanceaccu-
racy by constraining swarm motion [12,13,21,22,23]. For example, in [4], robots
dispersetoformalandmarktreefornavigationandin[12],robotsmoveincoor-
dinatedsteps,withsubgroupsactingasstationarylandmarks.However,thecon-
strained motion can conflict with the motion required for inspection, increasing
thecomplexityofinspectionalgorithms.Bycontrast,ourapproachiscompatible
with any unconstrained trajectory, offering the flexibility to execute any inspec-
tionalgorithm.HeterogeneousCLmethodsinvolvesomerobotsperformingmore
computation and sensing to localize others in the group [13,24,25,26]. For ex-
ample, in [13], observer robots with cameras localize beacon robots, sacrificing
theircomputationforthegroup.However,insuchheterogeneousapproaches,the
fractionoflocalizingagentsisfixedapriori.Thus,therobotswarmcannotrecon-
figureitselfiftheenvironmentortheneedsofthegroupchange.Inourmethod,
the fraction of sacrificing agents constantly adapts to maximize efficiency.
Our approach is also related to self-organized task allocation in biological
and robot swarms [27,28,29], building upon mean-field techniques commonly
used in this area [30]. It maps to a task allocation problem where one task is
computationally intensive localization, and the other is inspection. Unlike most
studies, these tasks are tightly coupled in our approach, allowing the swarm to
collectively achieve more than the sum of individual efforts via optimal task
distribution.
3 Problem Formulation
Inourcollective localizationmechanism,agentsoperateinoneoftwomodes:4 Ramshanker et al.
Fig.2. Top: Summary of state properties. Bottom: Transitions between
DR ,DR ,PL†,PL for (a) fixed mode, (b) individual mode-switching,
NotLost Lost
(c) collaborative mode-switching. Dashed arrows indicate instantaneous transitions
while solid arrows indicate transitions at a finite rate.
– Dead Reckoner (DR) Mode: Dead reckoners integrate IMU data to de-
termine position and orientation. While computationally inexpensive, this
approachsuffersfromerroraccumulationovertime.Deadreckonersarepro-
ductive when not lost but are increasingly prone to getting lost.
– Perfect Localizer (PL) Mode: Perfect localizers allocate all computa-
tional power to achieve perfect localization, sacrificing all inspection pro-
ductivity. This assumption aligns with previous SLAM implementations on
resource-constrained systems [16]. We introduce the PL† state as a transi-
tionalphase,representingthestartupcostforachievingperfectlocalization.
In this state, localization is incomplete, and the agents cannot assist others.
Whileundesirable,thisisanecessarystateforachievingperfectlocalization.
We represent the four states using the notation: DR , DR , PL†, PL.
NotLost Lost
A dead reckoner’s lost status is characterized using a disorientation function,
(cid:16) (cid:17)
γ =1−exp −|δp| .Here,δpquantifiesthelocalizationerrorandδp represents
δp0 0
the characteristic localization error. Disorientation asymptotically approaches 1
as |δp| increases. We set a disorientation threshold, γ , to determine if an
thresh
agentislost:ifγ >γ ,theagentisconsideredlost.Designerscanadjustthe
thresh
system’s sensitivity to localization errors by changing (δp ,γ ). We assume
0 thresh
agents can accurately estimate their disorientation, a strong assumption we aim
to relax in the future. We use a step function to map dead reckoner disorienta-
tion to productivity, Π. If γ < γ , Π = 1; otherwise, Π = 0. For perfect
thresh
localizers, Π =0 and γ =0. The table in Figure 2 summarizes these states.
While perfect localizers are not directly productive, they play a crucial role
in enhancing overall productivity by correcting the localization errors of dead
reckoners through pairwise interactions. During such an interaction, the agents
measuretherelativepositionp betweenthem.Theperfectlocalizerthenshares
rel
its position, p , enabling the dead reckoner to calculate its true position as
PLStrategic Sacrifice 5
p = p +p . For now, we assume no uncertainty in p or p , causing
DR PL rel rel PL
the dead reckoner’s localization error to collapse to zero after the interaction.
In the next section, we analyze these dynamics using analytical models,
demonstrating the benefits of strategic sacrifice.
4 Analytical Model using Mean Field
Tomodelswarmdynamicsandtheeffectofcollaborationonproductivity,weuse
mean-field ordinary differential equations (ODEs). Mean-field models simplify
system dynamics by focusing on the evolution of mean values. This approach
has been applied to various physical, social, and robotic systems [30,31].
Theswarm’soccupancyconfigurationndenotesthenumberofagentsineach
state:n={nNotLost,nLost,n ,n },wherenNotLost+nLost+n +n =N
DR DR PL† PL DR DR PL† PL
(totalagents).Weexpressthechangeinmeanoccupancyovertimeas d⟨n⟩ using
dt
ODEs.Bysolvingforthesteady-stateconfiguration⟨n⟩ where d⟨n⟩ t→∞ =0,
t→∞ dt
we estimate mean productivity per agent using eq 1. The form of eq 1 reflects
that only non-lost dead reckoners are productive. We omit the t→∞ notation
forclarity. Π isnormalizedbyexperimentduration;e.g.,ifanagentisproductive
N
for half the experiment, Π =0.5.
N
⟨Π⟩
(cid:10) nNotLost(cid:11)
= DR (1)
N N
We next find the steady-state dynamics for (1) Fixed Modes (2) Individual
Mode-Switching, and (3) Collaborative Mode-Switching (Figure 2 a-c).
4.1 Fixed Modes, with Collaboration
We first assume a designer fixes the number of perfect localizers apriori (N ).
PL
The remaining agents are dead reckoners (N ). As shown in Figure 2(a), dead
DR
reckoners transition to the lost state at a fixed rate r , which accounts for fac-
L
tors such as environmental slippage, observable landmarks, and sensor noise.
Lost dead reckoners can return to the not-lost state via interactions with per-
fect localizers. At this stage, we assume a well-mixed system where every agent
has an equal probability of interacting with any other agent in the swarm; the
interaction rate between any two arbitrary agents is denoted as r . We want
int
to determine the optimal number of perfect localizers that maximize produc-
tivity. The system’s occupancy configuration is expressed by eq 2. The right-
hand side (RHS) terms are the rates of dead reckoners becoming lost and re-
localizing via interactions, respectively. n = N , nNotLost +nLost = N ,
PL PL DR DR DR
andN +N =N.Solvingeq2forthesteady-stategiveseq3.Bycomputing
DR PL
the jacobian of eq 2, we can show that the steady-state is a stable equilibrium.6 Ramshanker et al.
Fig.3.Mean-fieldpredictionsfor(a)FixedMode(eq3),and(b)Mode-Switching.Solid
black line is the fixed-mode productivity if initialized with optimal fraction of perfect
localizers(eq.4).Dottedlineisthemode-switchingproductivitywithoutcollaboration
(eq 6). Red curve is the adaptive mode-switching strategy, where r = 0.01 (eq 8).
MS rint
d(cid:10) nN DRotLost(cid:11) =−r (cid:10) nNotLost(cid:11) + 2r int ⟨n ⟩(cid:10) nLost(cid:11) (2)
dt L DR N(N −1) PL DR
⟨Π⟩
1−(cid:0)NPL(cid:1)
= N (3)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
N 1+ rL(N−1) N
2rint NPL
Differentiating eq 3 by the fraction of perfect localizers, NPL, we find the
N
NPL that maximizes the mean productivity per agent is eq 4.
N
(cid:18)
N
(cid:19)∗
r (N
−1)(cid:32) (cid:115)
2r
(cid:33)
PL = L −1+ 1+ int (4)
N 2r (N −1)r
int L
Figure 3(a) shows ⟨Π⟩ against the interaction rate, r , for different N ,
N int PL
where N = 30 agents and r = 0.04. Increasing r enhances productivity per
L int
agent across all NPL. Moreover, the optimal fraction of perfect localizers shifts
N
with r : more perfect localizers are needed for maximum productivity at lower
int
r and fewer are required at higher r .
int int
4.2 Individual Mode-Switching, with No Collaboration
With fixed modes, average productivity per agent hinges on the initial mode
configuration,i.e.theratiobetweenperfectlocalizersanddeadreckoners(Figure
3(a)). Sub-optimal initial configurations can significantly reduce productivity. If
the mode configurations are flexible, can swarms reconfigure to more optimal
configurations by switching their modes?
We assume agents have the flexibility to switch modes independently but
cannot interact with each other. Each agent optimizes productivity through pe-
riodic mode-switching: starting as a dead reckoner and transitioning to perfectStrategic Sacrifice 7
localizer mode upon becoming lost. However, this transition incurs a cost as
the agent must spend computation re-localizing in the PL† state. This cost is
captured by a fixed time-penalty τ , which varies based on factors such as envi-
p
ronmentalstabilityandthenumberofobservablefeaturesandlandmarks.Once
localized, the agent reverts to dead reckoning and resumes productivity until it
gets lost again. Based on Figure 2(b), the mean field is expressed by eq 5.
d(cid:10) nNotLost(cid:11)
DR =r ⟨n ⟩−r (cid:10) nNotLost(cid:11) (5)
dt p PL† L DR
The RHS terms are the rates of mode-switching of perfect localizers to dead
reckonersandviceversa,assuminginstantaneoustransitions.Weapproximater
p
as 1 .Usingtheconservationofagentnumber,eq6givesthemeanproductivity
τp
per agent at stable equilibrium.
(cid:28) (cid:29)
Π r
= p (6)
N r +r
p L
Mode-switching allows lost agents to re-localize, regaining productivity for
the collective. However, in this individualistic setup, productivity remains con-
stant and independent of the interaction rate (Eq. 6 and Figure 3(b)). The
system thus overlooks potential productivity gains from interactions, especially
in scenarios where re-localization costs are high.
4.3 Collaborative Mode-Switching
We combine mode-switching (Sec 4.2) with collaboration from our fixed modes
scenario(Sec4.1).Thisallowsself-organization:inlowinteractionregimes,indi-
vidualsmode-switchtobemostproductive,whereas,inhighinteractionregimes,
fixed roles emerge. We examine whether this leads to optimal behavior.
Agents operate according to Figure 2(c), a superposition of Figure 2(a) and
2(b). We represent mode-switching using a rate, r . The mean-field ODEs are
MS
d(cid:10) nL Do Rst(cid:11) =r (cid:10) nNotLost(cid:11) −r (cid:10) nLost(cid:11) − 2r int ⟨n ⟩(cid:10) nLost(cid:11) (7a)
dt L DR MS DR N(N −1) PL DR
d⟨n PL†⟩
=r
(cid:10) nLost(cid:11)
−r ⟨n ⟩ (7b)
dt MS DR p PL†
d⟨n ⟩
PL =r ⟨n ⟩−r ⟨n ⟩ (7c)
dt p PL† MS PL
In eq 7(a), the first and last RHS terms mirror eq 2. The middle term in eq
7(a)andthefirsttermineq7(b)denotetherateofmode-switchingoflostdead
reckonerstoPL†.Thefinaltermineq7(b)andthefirsttermineq7(c)represent
the rate at which PL† transition to PL. In eq 7(c), the last term is the rate at
which perfect localizers mode-switch to dead reckoners. Using conservation of
the number of agents and solving for the steady state we get8 Ramshanker et al.
(cid:18) (cid:19)
⟨Π⟩ r ⟨n ⟩
=1− 2+ MS PL t→∞ (8)
N r N
p
⟨n ⟩ isthesteady-statenumberofperfectlocalizers.Jacobianstability
PL t→∞
analysisandtheRouth-HurwitzCriteriaconfirmthatthissteadystateisstable.
If r >> r ,r ,r , the system self-organizes to individual mode-switching,
MS p L int
as seen by eq 8 approaching eq 6. Conversely, if r <<r ,r ,r , the system
MS p L int
maintainsfixedmodeswithanoptimalnumberofperfectlocalizers,asevidenced
by eq 8 approaching eq 3 with N =N∗ (eq 4).
PL PL
What is the optimal r ? In low r scenarios, where perfect localizers
MS int
provide minimal support, maintaining a high r prevents unnecessary loss in
MS
productivity that occurs by retaining dedicated perfect localizers. In high r
int
scenarios, where interactions alone can maintain the productivity of dead reck-
oners,alowr ispreferabletoavoidunnecessarymode-switchingcosts.Thus,
MS
if r is inversely correlated with r , the system can maximize productivity
MS int
by adapting its mode-switching rate based on the agents’ interaction rate.
Wecallthisformofcollaborationadaptivemode-switching.Wesetr =
MS
α , where the proportionality constant, α, determines the sensitivity of this
rint
dependence.Figure3(b)illustratestheperformanceofadaptivemode-switching
with α = 0.01, τ = 100, and r = 0.04. It achieves near-optimal productivity
p L
for all interaction rates by converging to the optimal fixed mode configuration
(Sec 4.1) when interaction rates are high and clipping to the individual mode-
switching strategy (Sec 4.2) when interaction rates are low.
5 Simulation: Multi-Agent Well-Mixed Scenarios
In this section, we conduct agent-based simulations to validate the accuracy
of the mean-field analytical model (Sec 4) and explore the impact of initial
conditions and non-steady state transients. Additionally, we introduce a smart
collaboration strategy to enhance productivity further.
We initialize N = 30 agents, each transitioning to the lost state (DR )
Lost
after an interval of τ =3.46 s in dead reckoning mode. Every τ seconds, two
L int
agents in the swarm randomly interact in a well-mixed manner. If a lost dead
reckoner (DR ) interacts with a perfect localizer (PL), the dead reckoner
Lost
corrects its localization error to 0. For each simulation run, we collect γ and
Π for every agent at each timestep. The normalized average productivity per
agent,
(cid:10)Π(cid:11)
, is calculated as the cumulative productivity achieved by all agents,
N
divided by N and the total run duration, τ =200 s.
total
We first consider the fixed modes scenario (Sec 4.1). Across 900 simulation
runs, we vary the interaction rate r = 1 and fraction of perfect localizers
int τint
NPL. The results are shown in Figure 4(a), where each data point represents
N
a single simulation run. We see close alignment between simulations and the
analytical model, with minor variations due to transient behavior.
Furthermore, smarter collaboration strategies significantly improve produc-
tivity. In Sec 4, only lost dead reckoners correct their localization estimatesStrategic Sacrifice 9
Fig.4.Agent-basedSimulationResults.(a)FixedModeandBasicCollaboration,(b)
Fixed Mode and Smart Collaboration, (c) Collaborative Mode-Switching
through interactions with perfect localizers. However, not-lost dead reckoners
can also benefit from these interactions, correcting errors and maintaining pro-
ductivitylonger.Althoughchallengingtomodelanalyticallyduetonon-linearity,
numerical simulations confirm this effect. Figure 4(b) shows higher productivity
in fixed mode configurations with this smart collaboration strategy, which we
incorporate into subsequent simulations and experiments.
Aseconddifferencebetweentheanalyticalmodelandmulti-agentsimulations
occurs for collaborative mode-switching. In the analytical model (Sec 4.3), we
demonstrate that the ideal mode-switching rate is inversely related to the inter-
action rate r . However, in the multi-agent simulations, agents lack knowledge
int
ofr andmustestimateitthemselves.Eachagentmeasuresitslocalinteraction
int
rate,rˆ ,usingasimplecounterandadjustsitsmode-switchingrateaccordingly:
int
r = 1 . If a dead reckoner mode-switches, it remains in the PL† state for
MS rˆint
τ =10 s before transitioning to a perfect localizer. Interactions between agents
p
in the PL† and dead reckoner states have no impact on the swarm. Like before,
we conduct 900 simulation runs, exploring the interaction rate parameter space
and initial mode configuration space. Unlike the fixed mode case, agents can
change their modes if the initial configuration is sub-optimal. This setup allows
us to observe the effect of initial conditions on performance variability.
Figure 4(c) presents the simulation results for collaborative mode-switching,
which mostly outperforms the analytical adaptive mode-switching scheme with
α=1 across various r values. The orange-shaded region represents the range
int
ofproductivityacrossallinitialmodeconfigurations.Mode-switchingreducesthe
sensitivity of average productivity to the initial mode configuration compared
to fixed modes. However, at higher interaction rates, average productivity still
exhibits some dependence on the initial configuration, although this effect is
weaker. This is because swarms that start in optimal configurations for high
interaction rates achieve high productivity from the outset. In contrast, swarms10 Ramshanker et al.
Fig.5.(a)10Rovablesona3DcylinderandzoominofasingleRovable,(b)Ground
truth trajectories of the 10 Rovables, (c) Dead reckoning estimate of Robot 6.
beginninginsub-optimalconfigurationsmustundergotransientmode-switching,
temporarily reducing total productivity.
Thewell-mixedsimulationsaboveshowcasetheflexibilityandeffectivenessof
collaborative mode-switching. However, real-world swarms have spatial depen-
dencies and non-uniform localization errors not captured by these simulations.
We address these complexities in the next section by testing with real robots.
6 Hardware Experiments: 3D Inspection Swarm
Our group focuses on future applications of robot swarms for space structure
inspection, aiming to reduce space debris and astronaut risks [2,32]. We use a
laboratory testbed of metal climbing Rovable robots [14] inspecting a 3D cylin-
der structure (Figure 5(a)). These robots are equipped with magnetized wheels
for movement on metal surfaces and various onboard sensors, including radio
communication and IMU for dead reckoning [14]. Future Rovables will include
camerasfordetectingrelative6Dposeusingfiducialtags[33].Currently,weem-
ploy Vicon Motion Capture for line-of-sight vision over the curved 3D cylinder
surface and to obtain ground-truth localization data.
We placed ten Rovables on a 3D metallic cylinder to simulate an inspection
mission(depictedinFigure5(a)).Thissetupallowsustoexploretwosignificant
factors. (1) We investigate the transition from well-mixed to spatial settings,
where robots are more likely to interact with nearby neighbors, leading to dy-
namic interaction rates and interaction networks that are influenced by inspec-
tion trajectories. (2) We consider the variable rate at which robots become lost,
influenced by physical factors like slippage, robot maneuvers, and sensor noise.
To assess the impact of our collective localization method on swarm pro-
ductivity, we the let robots perform random walks on the cylinder. IMU mea-
surements were recorded, and ground truth positions were tracked using Vicon
(owing to Vicon limitations, trajectories were collected asynchronously). The
trajectories of the ten robots are illustrated in Figure 5(b). We tested variousStrategic Sacrifice 11
scenariosofflineusingthistrajectorydataset,allowingustocomparetheperfor-
manceofdifferentalgorithmicstrategiesgiventhesameexperimentalconditions.
Robots are initially classified as perfect localizers or dead reckoners, with
perfect localizers utilizing ground truth position data from the Vicon system,
and dead reckoners relying solely on onboard IMU data for localization. The
disorientationobservedinourexperimentsisinfluencedbyphysicalfactorssuch
asslippage,sensornoise,andgravitationaleffects.Additionally,therateatwhich
robots become lost varies, with certain maneuvers and orientations leading to
increased localization errors. Dead reckoning alone proves highly unreliable in
the3Dcurvedsetting,asevidencedbyFigure5(c).Wemaintainγ =0.4as
thresh
beforeandsetthelocalizationpenaltyasτ =20s;thisparameterwilleventually
p
be time-varied and dependent on the perfect localizers’ localization mechanism
(e.g. particle filtering or SLAM). For now, we do not consider the productivity
effects of different τ . We also allow robots to know their localization error, so
p
dead reckoners can detect when they are lost.
Interactions occur when robots establish line-of-sight vision of one another.
During an interaction between a dead reckoner and a perfect localizer, the dead
reckoner corrects its position using absolute position p and relative position
PL
p fromtheperfectlocalizer,reducingitslocalizationerrortozero(seeSection
rel
3).Currently,wedonotaccountforerrorsinthisprocess.Wedefinetheeffective
interaction rate as the frequency at which DR and DR interact with
NotLost Lost
PLandPL†robots.Robotsdeterminethiseffectiveinteractionratebyaveraging
their effective interaction count over a time window τ . Averaging over
window
τ allows for memory retention, enabling robots to make decisions based
window
on recent observations while gradually forgetting older ones. The window size
τ determines the sensitivity to interaction fluctuations. We set τ =
window window
2τ . Mode-switching rate is inversely related to the average effective interaction
p
rate.Unlikethewell-mixedscenariowherewecouldusetheabsoluteinteraction
rateformode-switching,inthiscontext,werelyontheeffectiveinteractionrate
to prevent the swarm from being trapped in local minima.
6.1 Collective Localization of Three Robots in Formation
We analyze N =3 robots moving in formation to explore collective localization
in a high interaction rate regime. However, formation control may not be the
optimal strategy for inspection, as all robots cover the same subspace of the
cylinder, limiting inspection coverage. Achieving formation control without vi-
sion is challenging, so we simulate it by shifting the Vicon data collected for a
singlerobot(Robot0)alongthez-axisby5mmand10mm.ThesameIMUdata
is utilized for all three robots. To break symmetry, we vary the δp parameter:
0
[1.0, 1.3, 1.5]. In the spatial setting, the choice of formation also influences pro-
ductivity. For the formation used in this case study, the middle robot interacts
withtwoedgerobots,buttheedgerobotsdonotseeeachotherduetoocclusion.
Figure 6(a) and (b) display the trajectories and provide a visual representation
of formation control on a physical cylinder. We examine three distinct cases:12 Ramshanker et al.
Fig.6. Collective localization of three Rovables in formation. (a) Ground truth tra-
jectories of robots in formation, (b) 3 Rovables in formation on the physical cylinder.
Robot mode time series for (c) individual mode-switching, (d) collaborative mode-
switching, and (e) communication failure.
– Individual Mode-Switching This scenario models individual robot lo-
calization without any collaboration. As depicted in Figure 6(c), the blue-
yellow-greensnake-likepatterndemonstratestherobotsalternatingbetween
productive phases and incurring time penalties in the PL† state. This be-
havior aligns with the periodic mode-switching pattern discussed in section
4.2, resulting in an average productivity per agent of 0.22.
– CollaborativeMode-Switching:Robotscollaborateandareinitializedas
[DR, PL, DR]. Robot 1 interacts with Robot 0 and Robot 2 throughout the
simulation. As illustrated in Figure 6(d), the swarm organizes to designate
Robot1astheperfectlocalizer,whileRobots0and2remaindedicateddead
reckoners. Robots 0 and 2 use Robot 1 like a GPS, continuously obtaining
position information through interactions. The total productivity per agent
reaches 0.63, nearly three times higher than without collaboration.
– Communication Breaks We show the system’s robustness to interaction
rate changes by implementing a scenario where robots can interact for the
first 50 seconds, after which communication is disabled. As shown in Fig-
ure 6(e), initially, the swarm designates Robot 1 as the dedicated perfect
localizer. However, after communication is disrupted, it dynamically self-
organizes into a mode-switching behavior. Note, this behavior occurs purely
via local interactions. Between 50 and 80 seconds, despite being unproduc-
tive, the robots persist in dead reckoning and perfect localizer mode. This
hysteresis behavior is influenced by the memory window τ . The ef-
window
fect of the hysteresis is more profound for larger τ , but the swarm is
windowStrategic Sacrifice 13
also more resistant to fluctuation in interaction rate. Adjusting the memory
window size allows system designers to modify swarm behavior.
This simple case study highlights several intriguing properties. First, in sce-
narioswhererobotsdonotcollaborate,weillustratehowmode-switchingenables
robots to sustain productivity. Second, within the high interaction rate regime,
the swarm realizes a substantial productivity increase by allocating one robot
to support the maximum productivity of the remaining two robots. Lastly, the
swarm demonstrates resilience to failures, such as signal jamming, reconfiguring
to mode-switching when the interaction rate declines.
6.2 Coverage by Ten Random-Walking Robots
Weexploreacomplexscenariowhereall10robotsfollowunconstrainedtrajecto-
ries, randomly traversing the cylinder for coverage. We generate 30 runs by ran-
domly rotating and translating the 10 original trajectories (Figure 5(b)) around
the cylinder’s axis of symmetry. This approach produces complex interaction
profiles, leading to dynamic interaction networks and varying interaction rates
within and across experimental runs. We then analyze the productivity under
Fixed Modes, Individual Mode-Switching, and Collaborative Mode-Switching.
All robots are initialized as dead reckoners, with δp = 1 and τ = 20 s.
0 p
ForFixedModeandIndividualMode-Switching,resultsareconsistentacrossall
runs as these modes are unaffected by interaction profiles. Under Fixed Mode,
the productivity per agent is low at 0.02, as robots quickly become lost. Indi-
vidualMode-Switchingyieldsslightlyimprovedproductivity,reaching0.138per
agent. However, Collaborative Mode-Switching, which is sensitive to interaction
profiles, performs the best for all 30 runs, achieving an average productivity per
agent of 0.278±0.046.
To gain insight into the underlying dynamics and understand how interac-
tions improve productivity, we examine the Robot Mode Time Series and Inter-
action Networks (Figure 7) of a single run. The productivity per agent for this
run under collaborative mode-switching is 0.304.
– Robot 8 is isolated from the rest of the swarm throughout the run,
as seen in Figure 7(b). Operating on the opposite side of the cylinder, it
lacks line-of-sight connectivity with other robots. Consequently, as depicted
in Figure 7(a), Robot 8 exhibits mode-switching behavior similar to that
showninFigure6(c).Robot0encounterssimilarisolationaroundt=150s,
asillustratedinFigure7(c).InFigure7(a),weobserveRobot0transitioning
to pure mode-switching following a period of hysteresis.
– Robot 6 interacts with Robots 7, 5, 3, and 1. From Figure 7(a), the
swarm self-organizes to sacrifice Robot 6 as the perfect localizer, allowing
Robots3,5,and7toreaptheproductivitybenefits(similartoFigure6(d)).
ThebehaviorofRobot1iscomplexasitinteractswithseveralotherrobots.
– Robot 4 exhibits an interesting individual behavior, consistently re-
mainingadeadreckonerwhilebenefitingfromotherperfectlocalizers(Figure14 Ramshanker et al.
Fig.7. 10 Random-Walkers Results. (a) Robot mode time series. Interaction network
(b) from 0-200 s (full experiment duration) and (c) 150-195s. Edges represent interac-
tions between robots within the specified time frames, with edge weight proportional
to the number of interactions. (d) Ground truth trajectory of Robots 1, 3, 5, 6, 7.
7(a)). This strategy, while reasonable on the individual level, is sub-optimal
for the group. Given Robot 4’s central location (Figure 5(b) and 7(b)), it
could assist more robots as a perfect localizer. If we rerun the trial with
Robot 4 starting as a perfect localizer, productivity per agent increases to
0.38, with Robot 4 maintaining this role throughout the experiment. This
highlights that the swarm can settle into sub-optimal mode configurations
in spatial settings but still achieve high productivity.
Wedemonstratethatourcollectivelocalizationapproachoperatesincomplex
physical settings involving sensor noise, slippage, dynamic interaction profiles,
and unconstrained trajectories. We showcase an array of interesting emergent
sub-behavior that depends on local interactions: isolated robots individually
mode-switch; robots with many interactions designate perfect localizers; robots
adapttochanginginteractionrates.Theseemergentbehaviorscollectivelyboost
the productivity of the swarm. As collective localization is compatible with un-
constrained trajectories, it can be applied to numerous inspection scenarios.
7 Conclusion and Future Work
Inspiredbynature,weintroduceaself-organizedapproachtocollaborativelocal-
izationthatenhancesinspectionproductivityofarobotswarm.Thisisachieved
bystrategicallysacrificingsomeindividualstooptimizecomputationalefficiency.
We showcase the advantages of this approach using theoretical models, numeri-
calsimulations,andhardwareexperimentsconductedwithaswarmof10metal-Strategic Sacrifice 15
climbing robots. Our analytical mean-field model demonstrates that sacrificing
agents as perfect localizers can improve the productivity of the swarm and that
the swarm can dynamically reconfigure itself to maximize productivity for any
interactionregime.Thiscollaborativestrategydependsonlyonlocalinteractions
and scales for any number of agents. We can further boost productivity using
smart collaboration, as validated using numerical simulations. Our hardware
experiments demonstrate the applicability and robustness of this collective lo-
calization mechanism in complex inspection-like scenarios. Future work involves
running hardware experiments using more sophisticated metal climbing robots
with vision and SLAM capabilities. We also plan to generalize this approach to
scenarios beyond localization, such as vigilance and obstacle avoidance.
References
1. Halder, S., Afsari, K.: Robots in inspection and monitoring of buildings and in-
frastructure: A systematic review. Applied Sciences 13(4), 2304 (2023)
2. Haghighat, B., Boghaert, J., Minsky-Primus, Z., Ebert, J., Liu, F., Nisser, M.,
Ekblaw, A., Nagpal, R.: An approach based on particle swarm optimization for
inspectionofspacecrafthullsbyaswarmofminiaturizedrobots. In:International
Conference on Swarm Intelligence, pp. 14–27. Springer (2022)
3. Correll,N.,Martinoli,A.:Collectiveinspectionofregularstructuresusingaswarm
of miniature robots. In: Experimental robotics IX: The 9th international sympo-
sium on experimental robotics, pp. 375–386. Springer (2006)
4. McLurkin,J.,Smith,J.,Frankel,J.,Sotkowitz,D.,Blau,D.,Schmidt,B.:Speaking
swarmish: Human-robot interface design for large swarms of autonomous mobile
robots. In:AAAIspringsymposium:toboldlygowherenohuman-robotteamhas
gone before, pp. 72–75. Palo Alto, CA (2006)
5. Mautz, R.: Overview of current indoor positioning systems. Geodezija ir kar-
tografija 35(1), 18–22 (2009)
6. Cadena,C.,Carlone,L.,Carrillo,H.,Latif,Y.,Scaramuzza,D.,Neira,J.,Reid,I.,
Leonard,J.J.:Past,present,andfutureofsimultaneouslocalizationandmapping:
Toward the robust-perception age. IEEE Transactions on robotics 32(6), 1309–
1332 (2016)
7. Bru¨gger, R., Willems, E., Burkart, J.: Looking out for each other: Coordination
and turn taking in common marmoset vigilance. Animal Behaviour 196, 183–199
(2023)
8. Beauchamp, G.: Animal vigilance: monitoring predators and competitors. Aca-
demic Press (2015)
9. Malley, M., Haghighat, B., Houel, L., Nagpal, R.: Eciton robotica: Design and
algorithms for an adaptive self-assembling soft robot collective. In: 2020 IEEE
International Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4565–4571.
IEEE (2020)
10. McCreery,H.F.,Gemayel,G.,Pais,A.I.,Garnier,S.,Nagpal,R.:Hysteresisstabi-
lizes dynamic control of self-assembled army ant constructions. Nature communi-
cations 13(1), 1160 (2022)
11. Prorok, A., Bahr, A., Martinoli, A.: Low-cost collaborative localization for large-
scale multi-robot systems. In: 2012 IEEE International Conference on Robotics
and Automation, pp. 4236–4241. Ieee (2012)16 Ramshanker et al.
12. Kurazume,R.,Nagata,S.,Hirose,S.:Cooperativepositioningwithmultiplerobots.
In: Proceedings of the 1994 IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Au-
tomation, pp. 1250–1257. IEEE (1994)
13. Nemsick, B.E., Buchan, A.D., Nagabandi, A., Fearing, R.S., Zakhor, A.: Cooper-
ative inchworm localization with a low cost team. In: 2017 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 6323–6330. IEEE (2017)
14. Dementyev,A.,Kao,H.L.,Choi,I.,Ajilo,D.,Xu,M.,Paradiso,J.A.,Schmandt,C.,
Follmer,S.:Rovables:Miniatureon-bodyrobotsasmobilewearables. In:Proceed-
ings of the 29th Annual Symposium on User Interface Software and Technology,
pp. 111–120 (2016)
15. Thrun,S.:Probabilisticrobotics.CommunicationsoftheACM45(3),52–57(2002)
16. Eyvazpour, R., Shoaran, M., Karimian, G.: Hardware implementation of slam al-
gorithms: a survey on implementation approaches and platforms. Artificial Intel-
ligence Review 56(7), 6187–6239 (2023)
17. Sullivan, N., Grainger, S., Cazzolato, B.: Analysis of cooperative localisation per-
formance under varying sensor qualities and communication rates. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 110, 73–84 (2018)
18. Lajoie, P.Y., Ramtoula, B., Wu, F., Beltrame, G.: Towards collaborative simulta-
neouslocalizationandmapping:asurveyofthecurrentresearchlandscape. arXiv
preprint arXiv:2108.08325 (2021)
19. Luft, L., Schubert, T., Roumeliotis, S.I., Burgard, W.: Recursive decentralized
localization for multi-robot systems with asynchronous pairwise communication.
The International Journal of Robotics Research 37(10), 1152–1167 (2018)
20. Klingner, J., Ahmed, N., Correll, N.: Fault-tolerant covariance intersection for
localizing robot swarms. Robotics and Autonomous Systems 122, 103,306 (2019)
21. Pires, A.G., Rezeck, P.A., Chaves, R.A., Macharet, D.G., Chaimowicz, L.: Coop-
erative localization and mapping with robotic swarms. Journal of Intelligent &
Robotic Systems 102(2), 47 (2021)
22. Li,Q.,DeRosa,M.,Rus,D.:Distributedalgorithmsforguidingnavigationacross
a sensor network. In: Proceedings of the 9th annual international conference on
Mobile computing and networking, pp. 313–325 (2003)
23. Tully, S., Kantor, G., Choset, H.: Leap-frog path design for multi-robot coopera-
tive localization. In: Field and Service Robotics: Results of the 7th International
Conference, pp. 307–317. Springer (2010)
24. Wanasinghe, T.R., Mann, G.K., Gosine, R.G.: Distributed leader-assistive local-
ization method for a heterogeneous multirobotic system. IEEE Transactions on
Automation Science and Engineering 12(3), 795–809 (2015)
25. Allotta, B., Costanzi, R., Meli, E., Pugi, L., Ridolfi, A., Vettori, G.: Coopera-
tive localization of a team of auvs by a tetrahedral configuration. Robotics and
Autonomous Systems 62(8), 1228–1237 (2014)
26. Haldane, D.W., Fankhauser, P., Siegwart, R., Fearing, R.S.: Detection of slippery
terrain with a heterogeneous team of legged robots. In: 2014 IEEE International
Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA), pp. 4576–4581. IEEE (2014)
27. Pagliara, R., Gordon, D.M., Leonard, N.E.: Regulation of harvester ant foraging
as a closed-loop excitable system. PLoS computational biology 14(12), e1006,200
(2018)
28. Albani, D., Manoni, T., Nardi, D., Trianni, V.: Dynamic uav swarm deployment
for non-uniform coverage. In: Proceedings of the 17th international conference on
autonomous agents and multiagent systems, pp. 523–531 (2018)
29. Mayya,S.,Wilson,S.,Egerstedt,M.:Closed-looptaskallocationinrobotswarms
using inter-robot encounters. Swarm Intelligence 13, 115–143 (2019)Strategic Sacrifice 17
30. Elamvazhuthi, K., Berman, S.: Mean-field models in swarm robotics: A survey.
Bioinspiration & Biomimetics 15(1), 015,001 (2019)
31. Helbing,D.:Quantitativesociodynamics:stochasticmethodsandmodelsofsocial
interaction processes. Springer Science & Business Media (2010)
32. Chiu, D., Nagpal, R., Haghighat, B.: Optimization and evaluation of multi robot
surface inspection through particle swarm optimization. In: 2017 IEEE Interna-
tional Conference on Robotics and Automation (ICRA). IEEE (2024)
33. Kalaitzakis, M., Cain, B., Carroll, S., Ambrosi, A., Whitehead, C., Vitzilaios, N.:
Fiducial markers for pose estimation: Overview, applications and experimental
comparison of the artag, apriltag, aruco and stag markers. Journal of Intelligent
& Robotic Systems 101, 1–26 (2021)
34. Zurn,P.,Bassett,D.S.,Rust,N.C.:Thecitationdiversitystatement:apracticeof
transparency, a way of life. Trends in Cognitive Sciences 24(9), 669–672 (2020)
8 Acknowledgments
This work is supported by NSF CMMI-2036359 and Amazon Robotics Re-
search Award. Hungtang Ko is supported by the James S. McDonnell Founda-
tion’s Postdoctoral Fellowship. We thank Dr. Merihan Alhafnawi, Darren Chiu,
Thiemen Siemensma, and Prof. Bahar Haghighat for assistance with the hard-
ware testbed.
Inspiredbyarecentinitiativetoincreaseawarenessandmitigatecitationbias
[34], we include a gender citation diversity statement using manually compiled
data. Our references contain 12.1% woman (first author)/woman (last author),
18.2% man/woman, 6.1% woman/man, and 63.6 % man/man. The statistics
we report fail to include intersex, non-binary, and transgender people. We look
forward to future work that could help us better understand how to support
equitable practices in science.