Image-basedDeepLearningforthetime-dependentpredictionoffreshconcreteproperties
MaxMeyer1,AmadeusLanger1,MaxMehltretter1,DriesBeyer2,MaxCoenen2,TobiasSchack2,MichaelHaist2,ChristianHeipke1
1InstituteofPhotogrammetryandGeoInformation,LeibnizUniversityHannover,Germany
(meyer,langer,mehltretter,heipke)@ipi.uni-hannover.de
2InstituteofBuildingMaterialsScience,LeibnizUniversityHannover,Germany
(d.beyer,m.coenen,t.schack,haist)@baustoff.uni-hannover.de
Keywords:Freshconcreteproperties,Buildingmaterials,Stereoscopy,Deeplearning,Timedependency.
Abstract
IncreasingthedegreeofdigitisationandautomationintheconcreteproductionprocesscanplayacrucialroleinreducingtheCO
2
emissionsthatareassociatedwiththeproductionofconcrete. Inthispaper,amethodispresentedthatmakesitpossibletopredict
thepropertiesoffreshconcreteduringthemixingprocessbasedonstereoscopicimagesequencesoftheconcretesflowbehaviour.
AConvolutionalNeuralNetwork(CNN)isusedfortheprediction,whichreceivestheimagessupportedbyinformationonthemix
designasinput.Inaddition,thenetworkreceivestemporalinformationintheformofthetimedifferencebetweenthetimeatwhich
theimagesaretakenandthetimeatwhichthereferencevaluesoftheconcretesarecarriedout.Withthistemporalinformation,the
networkimplicitlylearnsthetime-dependentbehaviouroftheconcretesproperties.Thenetworkpredictstheslumpflowdiameter,
theyieldstressandtheplasticviscosity.Thetime-dependentpredictionpotentiallyopensupthepathwaytodeterminethetemporal
developmentofthefreshconcretepropertiesalreadyduringmixing. Thisprovidesahugeadvantagefortheconcreteindustry. As
aresult,countermeasurescanbetakeninatimelymanner. Itisshownthatanapproachbasedondepthandopticalflowimages,
supportedbyinformationofthemixdesign,achievesthebestresults.
1. Introduction potentialforimprovement,howeverrequiringsensorbasedin-
sightintothematerialproperties.
ReducingCO emissionsposesamajorchallengeforthecon-
2
struction industry. Concrete production in particular plays a TheReCyCONtrol1 researchprojectaddressesthislackofdi-
decisive role here. Concrete is one of the most widely used gitizationandautomationintheconcretesector.Onepartofthe
buildingmaterialsintheworld, andtheproductionofitscon- projectfocussesonthepredictionofthefreshconcreteproper-
stituent cement is in itself responsible for approx. 6.7 % of ties. Since the moment of production, i.e. during the mixing
global anthropogenic CO emissions (IEA, 2022). Many ap- process,offersthemostopportunitiesofadjustingtheconcrete
2
proachesarethereforefocusingonreducingthecementcontent propertiesincaseofqualitydeviations,thepredictionofthese
byusingsubstitutematerials. Asaconsequencethereisanin- propertiesshouldbedoneduringthemixingprocess. Also,as
creasing trend for concrete to no longer consist of just three thepropertiesoftheconcretemayfurtherchangebetweenthe
materials(cement,aggregateandwater),aswasoriginallythe mixingprocessanditsplacement,duetothecementschemical
case, butofseveraladditionalmaterialsinordertoreducethe hydrationprocess,thebehaviourofthepropertiesaftermixing
amount of cement needed. In turn, this also leads to increas- mustbemodeledovertime.Wethereforeformulatethegoalof
inglycomplexmixdesigns,whichcausesapotentiallylessro- predictingthefuturepropertiesoftheconcrete,e.g.forthetime
bust concrete (Gonza´lez-Taboada et al., 2018). Consequently, ofplacement,alreadyduringtheproductionstep. Ifdeviations
thecontrolofconcretepropertiesbecomesmoredifficult,espe- tothetargetpropertiesatthetimeofplacementareestimated
ciallythefreshconcreteproperties. inthisway,countermeasuresintheformofchemicaladditives
canbeusedtochangethepropertiestoreachthedesiredvalues.
Existingqualityassurancemeasurementsarenotwellsuitedto
overcomethisnewchallenge. Thesemeasurementsareusually To reach this goal of predicting the fresh concrete properties
carriedoutmanuallyandonlyforbatchsamples,bothofwhich at the time of placement during the mixing process, we use
increasestheuncertaintyassociatedtothemeasuredproperties. opticalsensorscoupledwithacorrespondingphotogrammetric
Sincethepropertiesduringconcreteplacementaredecisivefor processingchain:Weuseastereocamerasystemtoobservethe
the quality of the resulting building component, the measure- concretesflowbehaviourduringthemixingprocess.Thestereo
mentsarecarriedoutdirectlybeforeplacementontheconstruc- imagesthenserveasinputforadeeplearningmethod, which
tionsite,wherethereisnolongeranypossibilityofsignificantly predictsthepropertiesoftheconcreteasafunctionoftime. To
adjustingthefreshconcreteproperties.Deviationsoftheactual describe the properties, we use one parameter for the consist-
concretequalityfromthetargetpropertiesmayleadtoarejec- encyandtwofortheflowbehaviour. Theslumpflowdiameter
tion of the batch, resulting in an inefficient production which δ, which is measured by the slump test (EN 12350-5, 2019),
wastesalotofresources. Intheopinionoftheauthors, akey representstheconsistencyoftheconcrete. Theflowbehaviour
changetoincreasethesustainabilityofconcreteproductionisto of the concrete, e.g. during the mixing process, is defined by
digitizeandautomatetheproductionprocessincludingquality itsrheologicalparameters. Inmoredetail, concrete, asanon-
control(Haistetal.,2022).Sinceincomparisontootherindus- Newtonian fluid, can be described by the Bingham fluid with
tries,theconstructionindustryisoneoftheleastdigitizedand
automatedindustriesintheworld(Green,2016), weseehuge 1 https://www.recycontrol.uni-hannover.de/en/
4202
beF
9
]VC.sc[
1v11660.2042:viXratherheologicalparametersyieldstressτ andplasticviscosity spread flow diameter of the concrete but also information on
0
µ(Yahiaetal.,2016). Thevaluesoftheseparameterscanbe the concrete composition. Therefore the surface roughness
derived from the flow curve, which can be measured in batch of the spread flow cake is analysed in order to derive e.g. the
experiments by a rheometer. The yield stress is a measure of content of the coarse particle contained in the concrete. In
how much stress has to be applied to set a liquid in motion. Coenenetal.(2024),amethodispresented,inwhichacamera
Theplasticviscositydescribestheviscosityofaliquidathigh observes the channel flow of the fresh concrete at the outlet
shearrate.Theslumpflowdiameterdependsontherheological of a mixing truck. Spatio-temporal flow fields are generated
parameters. In particular the yield stress and the slump flow from the recorded images, which contain information about
diameterareassumedtobecorrelated(Wallevik,2006). theflowbehaviouroftheconcrete. ACNNpredictsthefresh
concrete properties on the basis of the spatio-temporal flow
Inthispaperanovelmethodforthepredictionoftheslumpflow fields. The disadvantage of these methods is, that they are
diameter,theyieldstressandtheplasticviscosityisproposed. applied post-production, meaning that the concrete still has
Thepredictioniscarriedoutbyaconvolutionalneuralnetwork to be discharged and new concrete has to be produced, if
(CNN),whichreceivesstereocameraobservationsofthecon- significantdeviationstothetargetpropertiesaredetected.
cretesflowatacertainsampleageasinput. Furthermore, we
addtemporalinformationandinformationfromthemixdesign To overcome this drawback, the properties of the fresh
totheinput. Forthepredictionofthetemporalevolvementof concrete have to be predicted before or during the mixing
thefreshconcreteproperties, thetemporalinformationiscru- process. There are two main procedures to achieve this goal.
cial.Usingthisinformation,theCNNlearnsimplicitlytomodel One approach is to perform the prediction on the basis of
the time-dependent behaviour of the properties. This enables the mix design information of the concrete. The concrete
thepossibilityofpredictingthefreshconcretepropertiesforar- mix design contains the exact content (in kilograms) of the
bitrarypointsintime,e.g.thetimeofplacement. individual materials used to produce the concrete. The type
andconcentrationofthematerialshaveamajorimpactonthe
The paper is structured as follows: We first give an overview propertiesoftheconcrete. ChidiacandMahmoodzadeh(2009)
ofthecurrentresearchinthefieldofdigitizingandautomating summarize the most common models to determine the plastic
theconcretesector. Ourmethodologyisthendescribedinsec- viscositybasedonthemixdesign. Itisshownthattheresults
tion 3. The data set and how it is generated are presented in varybetweendifferentmodels.Themostrecentmethodsbased
section4. Section5showstheexperimentsandcontainsadis- onthemixdesignusemachinelearning,andinparticulardeep
cussionoftheresults. Section6concludesthepaperandgives learningalgorithms. Methodslikeleastsquaressupportvector
anoutlookforpossiblefuturework. machines (LSSVM) and particle swarm optimization (PSO)
(Nguyen et al., 2020), extreme learning machines (Kina et
al., 2021), random forests and XGBoost (Zhang et al., 2022;
2. Relatedwork Hosseinzadeh et al., 2023) as well as multi layer perceptrons
(MLP) (Navarrete et al., 2023) are used for this purpose. In
In recent years, the automation of concrete quality assurance Nguyen et al. (2020) and Navarrete et al. (2023) the input
hasreceivedincreasingattention. InSongetal.(2020),image information from the mix design is extended with temporal
segmentation is used to determine properties of the hardened information, representing the time difference between the
concrete. Coenen et al. (2021) used image segmentation to mixing process and the time at which the properties are to
determine the particle size of the aggregates in the hardened be determined, to take into account the change of properties
concrete. Although these methods have the potential to over time. The mix design contains valuable information for
automate the current quality assurance measurements, at this the time-dependent change of the properties (e.g. the additive
stage no countermeasures can be applied if deviations to the content). Although these methods achieve promising results,
targetpropertiesaredetected. they omit essential information as e.g. possible variations in
thepropertiesoftheemployedconstituents,eventhoughthere
To ensure the quality of the fresh concrete, traditional hasbeenprogressinthisfieldinrecentyears,e.g.Coenenetal.
qualityassurancemeasurementsliketheslumptest(EN12350- (2023);Luxetal.(2023).
5,2019)andrheometermeasurementsaretypicallyemployed.
However,thesemethodsarelaborintensiveandareassociated The second main procedure is to predict the fresh con-
with relatively high uncertainties. In Tuan et al. (2021) a cretepropertiesbasedonimagesofthefreshconcreteacquired
method is proposed to automate the slump test: Instead of during the mixing process. Li and An (2014) showed that it
measuring the diameter of the spread concrete manually, a is possible to estimate the slump flow and the V-funnel flow
stereocamerasystemrecordsimagesofthespreadingconcrete timefromimagesrecordedduringthemixingprocessbyusing
and the diameter is determined using image processing. The classical image analysis methods, namely frame difference
authors argue that replacing the manual measurement with and watershed segmentation. Ding and An (2018) show that
an imaging system improves the accuracy of the result and also deep learning methods, here a combination of a CNN
reduces the workload. Yoon et al. (2023) propose a method and a long short-term memory network (LSTM) based on
foranalysingcementpastewithasimilarsetup. Insteadofa image sequences, are applicable. Yang et al. (2021) and Guo
stereocamera,adepthcameraisusedtorecordapointcloudof etal.(2022)employanothercombinationofCNNandLSTM
thecementpasteaftertheslumptest. Thepointcloudisused with image sequences to predict the slump value and slump
to extract the diameter, spread height and curvature. These flow value respectively the plastic viscosity, while (Gao and
parameters are used as input for a deep learning algorithm Yan, 2023) use semantic segmentation in combination with a
to predict yield stress, plastic viscosity, adsorption ratio of residual neural network for single images for the prediction
superplasticizer and bleeding. Schack et al. (2023a,b,c) take of the slump class. In Ponick et al. (2022), a stereo camera
this work one step further and use images taken from the setupisusedtoobservethemixingprocessofultrasonicgel,
spreadflowoftheconcreteandarenotonlyabletoderivethe a often employed surrogate for concrete. The stereo cameraobservationsareusedasinputforaCNN.Theresultsshowthat 3.2 Networkarchitecture
the3Dinformationderivedfromthestereoimagesisvaluable
forthepredictionoftheflowcurves. Although,thesemethods We make use of a CNN for the prediction of the state vector
showpromisingresultsandarenotpronetouncertaintiesinthe C,consistingofsevenconvolutionallayerswhicharefollowed
mixdesign,theydonottakeintoaccountthetimedependency bythreefullyconnectedlayers(FCL).Thearchitectureofthe
ofthefreshconcreteproperties. CNN is based on the CNN presented in Ponick et al. (2022).
TheCNNconsistsofrelativelyfewlayers,asdeepernetworks
To the best of the authors’ knowledge, there is no method to tend to overfit. A high-level overview of the architecture
datethatusesbothimagesandinformationfromthemixdesign is shown in Fig. 1. The convolutional layers have a kernel
to perform a time-dependent prediction of fresh concrete size of 5x5 and a stride of 2 each, and are followed by batch
properties. normalisation and a Rectified Linear Unit (ReLU) activation
function.ThenumberofneuronsintheFCLdecreaseslinearly
from660downtothethreeoutputneuronsintheoutputlayer.
3. DeepLearningforfreshconcretepropertiesprediction
EachlayerinFCLhasaleakyReLUactivationfunctionusing
a slope of 0.2. No batch normalization is used between the
3.1 Overview layersinFCL.
We aim to predict fresh concrete properties based on image The input set [O i,D i,OF i,i+1] is fed to the convolutional
observations. Stereo cameras record synchronized RGB layers. The layers extract features to produce the flattened
image pairs of the concretes flow during the mixing process. feature embedding z with a length of 640 elements. ∆ t and
Each image pair is used to generate an orthophoto O and a m are added in a late-fusion manner to z. By concatenating
depth map in the form of a digital elevation model (DEM) z, ∆ t and m, we obtain the feature vector F which is passed
D, which contains 3D information about the surface of the totheFCLasinput. TheFCLmapsF tothetime-dependent
fresh concrete. The photogrammetric process to generate O outputparametersδ ∆t,τ 0,∆t,andµ ∆t ofthetargetstatevector
and D is carried out using a commercial software, namely C. This approach was chosen because FCL is similar to a
AgisoftMetashape2. Toreducethecomputationaltimeduring MLP and MLPs are suitable for a time-dependent prediction
training, O is transformed into a panchromatic image. O and of the static yield stress of cement paste based on the mix
D areextendedbyanopticalflowimageOF,whichcontains design information, temporal information and information on
the displacement of each pixel between the current and the propertiesoftherawmaterials(Navarreteetal.,2023).
subsequent orthophoto. This allows to additionally include
explicit motion information representing the flow behaviour
oftheconcreteintothenetwork. Togeneratetheopticalflow
images OF, for each O , where i represents the time step,
i
the optical flow OF between O and O is computed.
i,i+1 i i+1
For this purpose the method presented in (Farneba¨ck, 2003)
is used. The input images are stacked to obtain the input
set [O ,D ,OF ]. The input set is treated as an image
i i i,i+1
withfourchannels, onechanneleachforO andD , andtwo
i i
channelsfortheopticalflowimageOF (onechanneleach
i,i+1
for the displacements of the pixels in the x and y direction, Figure1.CNNarchitectureofdevelopedmethod.
respectively).
For the purpose of modeling the time-dependent beha- 3.3 Training
viourofthefreshconcreteproperties,temporalinformation∆
t
isintroduced.Inthiscontext,∆ representsthetimedifference
t For the optimisation of the network weights ω the Mean
between the age of the sample at which the image pair for
SquaredError(MSE)isusedaslossfunctionduringtraining.
generating O and D is acquired and the age for which the
i i Theweightsω areiterativelyadjustedduringtraininginorder
fresh concrete properties are to be predicted. Besides the
tominimizetheresultingloss.Thelossiscomputedforamini-
temporalinformation∆ , informationfromthemixdesignm
t batch consisting of N samples, each associated with the state
isaddedasadditionalinput. mcontainsinformationaboutthe vectorCcontainingthek=1...Ktargetparametersyk,where
water-cement (mass) ratio, the grading curve of the aggregate
K = 3inthispaper. Tocalculatetheloss,thesquareddiffer-
particles, the paste content, the admixture content and the ences between the reference values yk and the predicted val-
time difference between starting the mixing process and the ues yˆk are determined and averaged over all parameters and
imageacquisition. Totakeintoconsiderationtheinfluenceof
samplesinabatch,suchthat
differentmixingvelocities(i.e. thespeedofthemixingtools)
and frame rates of the imaging sensors, these parameters are
K N
both added to m. For numerical reasons, the inputs and the L (ω)= 1 (cid:88)(cid:88) (yk−yˆk)2. (1)
MSE N ·K n n
referencevaluesarenormalized. Consequently,theoutputsof
k=1n=1
the CNN are the predicted normalized values for the slump
flow diameter δ and the rheological parameters yield stress Weightdecayisusedduringtrainingtoreduceover-fittingand
∆t
τ aswellasplasticviscosityµ attheageofthesample toencouragebetterregularisation. Thismethodaddsapenalty
0,∆t ∆t
definedby∆ . Theseparametersaresummarisedinthetarget for large weights, multiplied by a factor λ. This leads to an
t
statevectorC =[δ ,τ ,µ ]. additionalterminthefinallossfunction
∆t 0,∆t ∆t
2 https://www.agisoft.com/ L(ω)=L MSE(ω)+λ·(cid:88) ω2. (2)Sincethereferencevaluesoftheslumpflowdiameter,theyield andtheyieldstressτ andplasticviscosityµaremeasuredwith
0
stressandtheplasticviscosityarenormalizedtothesamerange a rheometer. For this measurement a eBT-V rheometer from
thelossofeachoutputdoesnothavetobeweightedtoensure Schleibinger3 isused. Therheologicalparameterscanthenbe
anequalinfluenceonthetraining. derived from the resulting flow curves. The rheological para-
meters are determined according to the method presented in
(Feys et al., 2013). To consider the change of the fresh con-
4. Datageneration
cretepropertiesovertimeinducedbythechemicalhydrationof
the cement contained in the concretes, the slump test and the
4.1 Imageacquisition
rheometer measurement are repeated in intervals of about 30
minutes.Thefirstslumptestisalwayscarriedoutdirectlyafter
In order to train and test the proposed method we generate
theendofthemixingprocessofapprox. 9minutesafterwater
an extensive data set: Similar to Ponick et al. (2022) we first
addition. Sincetheslumptestandtherheometermeasurement
designasurrogate-mixingsystem,whichconsistsofachannel,
are independent from each other, the two measurements have
in which fresh concrete is filled, and a paddle shaped mixing
different time stamps. Consequently, ∆ consists of two time
tool,whichmovesthroughthefreshconcreteindirectionofthe t
differences: Thefirstisthetimedifferencebetweenimageac-
channel. The paddle moves on a linear trajectory to simulate
quisitionandthetimeatwhichtheslumptestiscarriedout,the
the mixing process in an industrial mixer. The fresh concrete
secondisthetimedifferencebetweenimageacquisitionandthe
is mixed shortly before filling it into the channel. While the
time at which the rheometer measurementis carried out. The
paddle is moving, the camera set up (2 grasshopper 3 USB
widerangeofthereferencevaluesandtimedifferencesofthe
RGBcameraswithafocallengthof8mm)recordsimagesof
datasetisshowninTab.1. Assomereferencemeasurements
thepaddlemovingthroughtheconcrete. Theacquiredimages
arecarriedoutbeforeimagesaretaken,therearealsonegative
haveasizeof1920x1200px. InFig.2,theschematicsetup
valuesfortimedifferences.
and the set up during one experiment are shown. In total, 45
different concretes are prepared during the experiments, 5 of Table1.Rangeofreferencevaluesandtimedifferences.
which contained recycled aggregates. The mix designs of the
concretesalldifferduetovariationsofthewater-cementratio,
paste content, grading curve, cement type, sand-lime powder Max Min Mean St.deviation
and additive content. Per experiment, we acquire images in
δ[cm] 63.50 30.00 43.97 7.47
14 so called runs. In each run the paddle moves six times
back and forth in the channel, while the cameras record 1300
τ [Pa] 585.40 65.84 223.97 109.25
0
images. Before each run, the fresh concrete is first briefly
mixedmanuallyandthenthesurfaceissmoothed. Inruns1-7, µ[Pa·s] 121.91 19.76 49.10 17.74
the frame rate of the cameras is set to 30 frames per second
(fps),andthepaddlemoveswithavelocityof200 mm.Inruns ∆ t[min] 87.16 -49.88 15.18 27.82
s
8-14 the frame rate is increased to 60 fps and the velocity of
thepaddleissetto450 mm.
s
5. Experiments
In order to maximize the information about the flow be-
haviour,weonlyuseimageswhichshowtheconcretedirectly
Intheexperiments,theinfluenceofdifferentinputsontheper-
after the paddle has moved through the material. As a con-
formanceoftheCNNisinvestigated. Differentinputcombin-
sequence, the paddle is visible in the images. To eliminate
ations are assembled to train the CNN and the resulting per-
effects stemming from the paddle itself we correct D after
formancemetricsarecompared. Inparticular,theinfluenceof
matching and only use heights below a certain threshold to
O,D,OF andmareinvestigated. Moreover,itisshown,how
generateO. ForgeneratingO andD itisnecessarythatboth
theaccuracyofthepredictionschangesifthepredictionsfrom
images are taken at exactly the same time. To ensure this
differentinputsetsforthesamereferencevaluesareaveraged
requirement,apanelwith20LEDsisinstalledontheedgeof
beforehand. At the end, examples of the time-dependent pre-
thechannel. TheLEDpanelisvisibleinbothimagesandthe
dictionofthebehaviouroftheslumpflowdiameterareshown.
LEDs are systematically switched on and off in millisecond
intervals. Through the changing constellations over time, a 5.1 Trainingconfiguration
timestampisgeneratedforeachimage,whichisusedtoverify
thatbothimagesofanimagepairaresynchronized. The CNN predicts the three parameters δ , τ , and µ
∆t 0,∆t ∆t
inamulti-tasklearningmanner. Sincetwoindependentmeas-
Regarding the fresh concrete properties it is assumed that urements(slumptestandrheometermeasurement)areusedto
these remain constant during the short time (approx. 44 and generatethereferencevalues,theinputsO,DandOF haveto
22 sec) of one run. Therefore, every image pair of a run is be assigned to one reference combination of δ respectively
∆t
associatedwiththesametimestamp,namelythatofthecentral τ and µ . For each concrete, all possible reference
0,∆t ∆t
image pair of that run. Consequently, ∆ t represents the time combinations are generated, and each input set (O i, D i and
differencebetweentheassociatedtimestampoftheimagepair OF )isassignedtoonereferencecombination. malways
i,i+1
andthepointintimeatwhichthefreshconcretepropertiesare remainsthesamefortheinputsetsofaconcrete,exceptforthe
tobepredicted. information about paddle velocity and recording frequency of
thecameras. Subsequently,thetwotimedifferencesof∆ are
t
4.2 Referencevalues
calculated for each input set based on the assigned reference
combination. Sometimes O is missing because the paddle
Thereferencevaluesforthetrainingandtestingaremeasured i+1
is not visible for several time steps, the end of the run is
in parallel to the acquisition of the images. The slump flow
diameterδismeasuredwiththeslumptest(EN12350-5,2019) 3 http://www.schleibinger.com/(a)Schematicoverviewoftheexperimentalsetup. (b)Setupduringtheexperiment.
Figure2.Experimentalsetupforgeneratingthedataset.
reachedoraframedropoccurs. Aninputsetisonlygenerated theresults,themeanabsoluteerror
ifforO alsoO ispresent,otherwiseOF couldnotbe
i i+1 i,i+1
calculated. Thefirst20inputsetsofeachrunarenotused,as
ϵ =
1 (cid:88)A 1 (cid:88)J
|ya−yˆa| (3)
thepaddlehadnotyetdrivenfarenoughthroughtheconcrete abs A J j j
tosignificantlychangeitssurface.Intotal,thedatasetconsists a=1 j=1
of313,615inputsets.
andthemeanrelativeerror
Training is performed with a five-fold cross-validation. The
45 concretes are divided into 5 sets with 9 concretes (i.e.
concrete compositions) each. For this purpose, the concretes ϵ =
1 (cid:88)A 1 (cid:88)J |y ja−yˆ ja|
·100 (4)
rel A J ya
arefirstsortedbythelengthofthefirstslumpflowdiameterδ 1, a=1 j=1 j
whichisdeterminedforeachconcretedirectlyafterthemixing
process.Then,thesortedconcretesaredividedinthreegroups, for a set of A concretes, each with J input sets for each
one of each containing the data of the 15 concretes with the output, arecomputed. Thismeansthateveryconcretehasthe
largest, the intermediate, and the smallest δ , respectively. same weight in the evaluation, even if it may have less input
1
From each group three concretes are randomly assigned to sets. After each training epoch, the network is evaluated on
one of the 5 sets to guarantee a balanced distribution. As the validation set. To determine the best weights, the three
there are a total of 5 concretes with recycled aggregate, we ϵ rel-values (one for each output) of the validation set are
make sure that each set has to contain exactly one of these averaged. The weights with the lowest averaged ϵ rel-value
concretes. Ineachcross-validationsteponesetisusedasthe are chosen for testing. Since no significant improvements of
testset.Thevalidationset,containing5concretes,israndomly the loss are observed after only a few epochs, the number of
formedbytheconcretesoftheremainingsets,againbytaking trainingepochsisrestrictedto5.
δ into account and with the condition that it must contain
1
exactly one concrete with recycled aggregate. The remaining Finally for each input and reference value the data in the
31concretesformthetrainingset. Fortwoconcretestheyield training, validationandtestsetarenormalizedtoameanof0
stress and the plastic viscosity are not taken into account, as andastandarddeviationof1.Thisisdescribedby
thecorrespondingmeasuredreferencevaluesarenotplausible.
Fortraining,onlythelossfortheslumpflowdiameterforthese nd = d c−m t,c, (5)
concretes is used. For the evaluation, which is explained in c std t,c
thefollowing,thepredictionsoftheyieldstressandtheplastic
whered representsthedataandnd thenormalizeddata,each
viscosityoftheseconcretesarenotconsidered. c c
ofthedatacategoryc(e.g.theinputOorthereferencevalueδ).
m andstd representthemeanandstandarddeviationofthe
To train the network, Stochastic Gradient Descent (SGD) t,c t,c
correspondingtrainingsetforthedatacategoryc. Thevalues
withaNesterovmomentumofβ =0.99basedon(Sutskeveret
al.,2013)isused.Thelearningrateissettoavalueof5·10−3, inmfromthemixdesignarenotnormalized,asthevaluesare
alwaysbetween0and2.Note,thatforthedeterminationofthe
whichshowedthebestresultsinpreliminaryexperiments. The
weight decay parameter is set to λ = 1·10−3. For training, evaluation metrics the reference values and the corresponding
outputsareconvertedtotheoriginalrangeofreferencevalues.
dataaugumentationisused. ThebrightnessandcontrastofO
are each changed with a factor that is randomly determined
5.2 Resultsanddiscussion
for each O in each iteration with a uniform distribution in an
interval of 0.85 to 1.15 for the brightness and in an interval
5.2.1 Influence of different input combinations: To
of 0.75 to 1.25 for the contrast. For the data augumentation
determine the influence of different input combinations the
of D, an offset is determined randomly. For this purpose, a
mean relative error ϵ and the mean absolute error ϵ of
factor is randomly determined with a uniform distribution in rel abs
the test sets are used. For each input combination the above
an interval from -0.07 to 0.07. The offset is then determined
describedcrossvalidationiscarriedoutandisrepeatedfortwo
bymultiplyingthefactorbythestandarddeviationofDinthe
times. Afterwardstheoverallmeanrelativeandabsoluteerrors
trainingdataset. Theprocedurefordeterminingtheoffsetsfor
are computed, by taking the mean of the mean relative and
thetwochannelsinOF isanalogoustothatofD. Toevaluate
absoluteerrorsofalltestsets, includingthetestsetsfromtheTable2.Meanrelativeandabsoluteerrorfordifferentinputcombinations(thevaluesinboldshowthebestperformanceinthe
respectivecategory).
O+D+m O+D+m+OF O+D O+m D+m D+m+OF
ϵ [%] 6.87 6.94 7.07 6.97 7.00 6.86
δ rel
∆t ϵ abs[cm] 3.00 3.03 3.07 3.05 3.04 2.99
ϵ [%] 26.49 26.08 28.29 26.68 26.07 25.30
τ rel
0,∆t ϵ abs[Pa] 53.90 52.96 55.78 53.65 54.31 52.05
ϵ [%] 26.45 26.58 29.42 27.84 23.99 24.23
µ rel
∆t ϵ abs[Pa·s] 12.12 12.40 13.28 12.70 11.33 11.52
repeatedcrossvalidations. TheresultsareshowninTab.2. In howtheaccuracyofthepredictionschangeswhentheyareav-
total,sixdifferentcombinationsareinvestigated. eragedbeforehand. Thesecondcolumnofthetableshowsthe
results where the predictions of the same reference combina-
It can be seen that the variations of the inputs have only tionswithinarunareaveragedbeforehand. Onaverage,these
a very limited influence on the accuracy of the predictions are approx. 40 predictions. The third column shows the res-
of δ . The major differences occur in the accuracy of the ults in which all predictions with the same reference combin-
∆t
predictionsofτ andµ . Inparticulartheinputmseems ationareaveragedoverall14runs(approx. 540predictions).
0,∆t ∆t
to be beneficial for the prediction of these parameters. This Thefourthcolumnshowstheresultswherethepredictionsare
can be seen if one compares the results of the combinations averagedforthesameslumpflowdiametervaluerespectively
O+D+mandO+D(notethatintheinputcombinationwithout thesameyieldstressandplasticviscosity,whichisonaverage
monlytheinformationabouttheusedmaterialsareomitted). about 1900 averaged predictions in each case. It can be seen
BycomparingtheresultsofcombinationO+D+mandO+mit thattheaccuracyincreasesthemorepredictionsareaveraged.
canbeseenthatusingtheinputD alsoincreasestheaccuracy Thisindicatesthatapartofthedeviationsareindeedrandom.
of the predictions. The input OF has a positive influence on
Table3.Influenceofaveragingmultiplepredictionsofthemean
thepredictionsofτ ascanbeseenbycomparingtheresults
0,∆t relativeandabsoluteerrorfortheexampleoftheresultsofthe
of O+D+m and O+D+m+OF or D+m and D+m+OF.
inputcombinationD+m+OF (thevaluesinboldshowthebest
However,theresultswithandwithoutO arecounter-intuitive.
performanceintherespectivecategory;notethatthefirst
The predictions from input combinations with O have a
columnisidenticaltotheresultsofD+m+OF inTab.2).
worse accuracy than the predictions from input combinations
without O. By comparing the results from O+D+m and
D+morO+D+m+OF andD+m+OF itcanbeseenthatthe
Approx.averaged
predictions for τ 0,∆t and especially the predictions for µ ∆t predictions 1 40 540 1900
are becoming worse by adding O as input. It is noticeable,
that the training runs with O as input have a significantly ϵ [%] 6.86 6.50 6.29 6.27
δ rel
smaller training loss than training runs without O as input. ∆t ϵ abs[cm] 2.99 2.84 2.75 2.74
This indicates that the network is overfitting in training when
ϵ [%] 25.30 23.68 22.53 22.47
O is used as input. Consequently, the best overall results are τ rel
achievedifD,mandOF areusedasinput. Togainadeeper
0,∆t ϵ abs[Pa] 52.05 48.28 45.76 45.62
understanding of this behaviour, further investigations will be ϵ [%] 24.23 23.53 22.87 22.84
µ rel
carriedoutinthefuturework. ∆t ϵ abs[Pa·s] 11.52 11.17 10.82 10.81
When evaluating the results, it should be noted that the
5.2.3 Time-dependentpredictionmodelforfreshconcrete
referencemeasurementsareonlycarriedoutforbatchsamples
properties: Since the network receives the time difference
(a small part of the concrete) and the slump flow diameter is
betweenthemomentintimeatwhichtheimagesarerecorded
determinedmanually.Thesecircumstancesarealsoreflectedin
andthetimeatwhichthepropertiesofthefreshconcreteareto
theaverageprecisionoftheslumptest,whichis2.46cm(EN
be predicted, thenetwork implicitlylearns how theproperties
12350-5, 2019). Furthermore, as all concretes have different
oftheconcretechangeovertime. Thiscanbeusedtonotonly
mix designs, there is no concrete in the test set that has the
predict the properties at a certain point in time, but also con-
samemixdesignasaconcreteinthetrainingorvalidationset.
tinuouslyovertheentirefreshconcreteage.InFig.3examples
The results are therefore already within an acceptable range.
areshownhowsuchacontinuouspredictionoftheslumpflow
In general, the prediction of δ has a much higher accuracy
∆t diameteroveratimeintervallookslike. Togeneratethesepre-
thanthepredictionsforτ andµ .Onereasonforthatcan
0,∆t ∆t dictions,oneoftherespectiverunswithalltheinputsetsitcon-
bethemuchwiderrangeofvaluesandthesignificantlyhigher
tains is used for each concrete to predict the slump flow dia-
ratioofstandarddeviationtomeanvalueofτ andµ (see
0,∆t ∆t meterateachminuteinthetimeinterval. Inthisexample,the
Tab.1).
runsofconcrete1, 2and3consistof549, 466and525input
sets,whichmeansthateachestimateistheresultofaveraging
5.2.2 Influence of averaging predictions: In order to in- 549,466and525predictions,respectively,D+m+OF isused
vestigatewhetherthedeviationsinthepredictionsarerandom asinput. Thepointatwhich∆ iszeroisthetimeatwhichthe
t
ratherthansystematic,predictionsfromdifferentinputsetsfor imagesoftherunsarerecorded(notethatasmentionedbefore,
thesamereferencevalueareaveragedbeforehand. InTab.3it allimagesfromarunareassignedthetimestampofthecentral
isshownfortheexampleoftheinputcombinationD+m+OF imagepair). Besidethecontinuouspredictions, therespectivereferencevaluesareshownforeachconcrete. Theprecisionof with transformer-based models). Also, experiments will be
theslumptestisshownasanerrorbar. conducted with an industrial mixer to test the methodology
Consideringthecontinuouspredictionoftheparameters,itcan underrealisticconditions. Inaddition,foranindustrialapplic-
beseenthatthenetworkhaslearntthattheslumpflowdiameter ation it is necessary to include the environmental parameters
decreasesparticularlysharplyinthefirstminutesaftermixing (temperature, humidity, etc.) during the transportation of the
andthendecreasesmoreslowly.Fortheyieldstressandplastic concrete to the construction site in the prediction in order to
viscosity, it has generally learnt that both parameters increase be able to reliably predict the properties up to the time of
overtime,butthenatureoftheincreasecanvaryfromconcrete placement.
toconcrete,andthepredictionisnotasrobustasfortheslump
flow diameter. The time-dependent behavior that the network
Acknowledgments
haslearnedfortheslumpflowdiameterisplausibleandshows
thatthenetworkisabletopredictthisparameteroveralonger This work is supported by the Federal Ministry of Education
periodoftime,eventhoughthepredictionisnotyetasrobust and Research of Germany (BMBF) as part of the research
foreveryconcreteasintheexamplesshown. project ReCyControl [Project number 0336260A], https://
www.recycontrol.uni-hannover.de/en/ and by the LUIS
computingclusterfundedbytheGermanResearchFoundation
(DFG)-INST187/742-1FUGG.
References
Chidiac,S.,Mahmoodzadeh,F.,2009.Plasticviscosityoffresh
concrete–Acriticalreviewofpredictionsmethods.Cementand
ConcreteComposites,31(8),535–544.
Coenen,M.,Beyer,D.,Haist,M.,2023.GranulometryTrans-
former: Image-basedGranulometryofConcreteAggregatefor
an Automated Concrete Production Control. Proceedings of
the2023EuropeanConferenceonComputinginConstruction
(EC3), 4.
Coenen,M.,Schack,T.,Beyer,D.,Heipke,C.,Haist,M.,2021.
Semi-Supervised Segmentation of Concrete Aggregate Using
ConsensusRegularisationandPriorGuidance.ISPRSAnnalsof
thePhotogrammetry,RemoteSensingandSpatialInformation
Figure3.Threeexamplesforthepredictionofthe Sciences,V-2-2021,83–91.
time-dependentbehaviouroftheslumpflowdiameter.
Coenen,M.,Vogel,C.,Schack,T.,Haist,M.,2024.DeepCon-
creteFlow: Deeplearningbasedcharacterisationoffreshcon-
cretepropertiesfromopen-channelflowusingspatio-temporal
6. Conclusionandoutlook
flowfields.ConstructionandBuildingMaterials,411,134809.
Theresultsinthispapershowthatitispossibletopredictthe Ding, Z., An, X., 2018. Deep learning approach for estimat-
freshconcretepropertieswithanacceptableaccuracybasedon ing workability of self-compacting concrete from mixing im-
imagesofthefreshconcreteflowbehaviour, supportedbythe age sequences. Advances in Materials Science and Engineer-
mixdesigninformation. Inparticular,theslumpflowdiameter ing,2018,1–16.
canbepredictedwitharelativelyhighaccuracy. Furthermore,
EN12350-5,2019.TestingFreshConcrete-Part5:FlowTable
it could be shown that the time-dependent behaviour of the
Test.EuropeanCommitteeforStandardization.
freshconcretepropertiescanbelearnedbythenetwork. This
makesitpossibletopredictthepropertiesofthefreshconcrete Farneba¨ck, G., 2003. Two-frame motion estimation based on
at specific points in time (e.g. at the time of placement) or polynomial expansion. Image Analysis: 13th Scandinavian
continuously over time already during the mixing process. Conference, SCIA 2003 Halmstad, Sweden, June 29–July 2,
Furthermore, it has been shown that the use of images and 2003Proceedings13,Springer,363–370.
informationfromthemixdesignimprovestheresultscompared
to the use of images alone. However, the information from Feys, D., Wallevik, J. E., Yahia, A., Khayat, K. H., Wallevik,
themixdesigninourdatasetprobablycontainsonlyrelatively O. H., 2013. Extension of the Reiner–Riwlin equation to de-
small uncertainties, which is why it has a relatively high terminemodifiedBinghamparametersmeasuredincoaxialcyl-
positiveinfluenceontheresult.Suchalowlevelofuncertainty indersrheometers.Materialsandstructures,46,289–311.
cannotalwaysbeassumed. Theresultshavealsoshownthata
Gao,X.,Yan,H.,2023.Numericaldetectionofconcreteslump
significant improvement is possible if predictions of the same
by fusion of target segmentation and image classification net-
valuesareaveragedbeforehand.
work. Journal of Physics: Conference Series, 2562number 1,
IOPPublishing,012023.
In future work, the counter-intuitive effect of orthophotos
on the results will be further investigated. As the results Gonza´lez-Taboada, I., Gonza´lez-Fonteboa, B., Mart´ınez-
have shown that optical flow images can have a positive Abella, F., Roussel, N., 2018. Robustness of self-compacting
impact on the outcome, future work will focus on utilising recycledConcrete: AnalysisofSensitivityParameters.Materi-
more of the information contained in image sequences (e.g. alsandStructures,51(8).Green, B., 2016. Productivity in Construction: Creating a Sutskever, I., Martens, J., Dahl, G., Hinton, G., 2013. On the
Framework for the Industry to Thrive. Chartered Institute of importance of initialization and momentum in deep learning.
Building(CIOB). International conference on machine learning, PMLR, 1139–
1147.
Guo, P., Du, J., Bao, Y., Meng, W., 2022. Real-time
video recognition for assessingplastic viscosity of ultra-high- Tuan,N.M.,VanHau,Q.,Chin,S.,Park,S.,2021.In-situcon-
performanceconcrete(UHPC).Measurement,191,110809. creteslumptestincorporatingdeeplearningandstereovision.
AutomationinConstruction,121,103432.
Haist, M., Heipke, C., Beyer, D., Coenen, M., Vogel, C.,
Schack, T., Ponick, A., Langer, A., 2022. Digitization of the Wallevik,J.E.,2006.RelationshipbetweentheBinghampara-
ConcreteProductionChainusingComputerVisionandArtifi- metersandslump.Cementandconcreteresearch,36(7),1214–
cialIntelligence.Proceedingsofthe6thfibCongress,434–443. 1221.
Hosseinzadeh,M.,Dehestani,M.,Hosseinzadeh,A.,2023.Pre- Yahia,A.,Mantellato,S.,Flatt,R.J.,2016.Concreterheology:
dictionofmechanicalpropertiesofrecycledaggregateflyash A basis for understanding chemical admixtures. Science and
concrete employing machine learning algorithms. Journal of TechnologyofConcreteAdmixtures,Elsevier,97–127.
BuildingEngineering,107006.
Yang,L.,An,X.,Du,S.,2021.Estimatingworkabilityofcon-
IEA, 2022. Cement, IEA, Paris https://www.iea.org/ crete with different strength grades based on deep learning.
reports/cement,License:CCBY4.0. Measurement,186.
Kina, C., Turk, K., Atalay, E., Donmez, I., Tanyildizi, H., Yoon,J.,Kim,H.,Ju,S.,Li,Z.,Pyo,S.,2023.Frameworkfor
2021.Comparisonofextremelearningmachineanddeeplearn- rapidcharacterizationoffreshpropertiesofcementitiousmater-
ing model in the estimation of the fresh properties of hybrid ialsusingpointcloudandmachinelearning.Constructionand
fiber-reinforcedSCC.NeuralComputingandApplications,33, BuildingMaterials,400,132647.
11641–11659.
Zhang,X.,Akber,M.Z.,Zheng,W.,2022.Predictingtheslump
Li,S.,An,X.,2014.Methodforestimatingworkabilityofself- of industrially produced concrete using machine learning: A
compactingconcreteusingmixingprocessimages.Computers multiclass classification approach. Journal of Building Engin-
andConcrete,13(6),781–798. eering,58,104997.
Lux, J., Hoong, J. D. L. H., Mahieux, P.-Y., Turcry, P., 2023.
Classification and estimation of the mass composition of re-
cycled aggregates by deep neural networks. Computers in In-
dustry,148,103889.
Navarrete,I.,LaFe´-Perdomo,I.,Ramos-Grez,J.A.,Lopez,M.,
2023. Predicting the evolution of static yield stress with time
ofblendedcementpastethroughamachinelearningapproach.
ConstructionandBuildingMaterials,371.
Nguyen,T.-D.,Tran,T.-H.,Hoang,N.-D.,2020.Predictionof
interfaceyieldstressandplasticviscosityoffreshconcreteus-
ingahybridmachinelearningapproach.AdvancedEngineering
Informatics,44.
Ponick, A., Langer, A., Beyer, D., Coenen, M., Haist, M.,
Heipke, C., 2022. Image-Based Deep Learning for Rheology
Determination of Bingham Fluids. The International Archives
ofthePhotogrammetry, RemoteSensingandSpatialInforma-
tionSciences,43,711–720.
Schack, T., Coenen, M., Haist, M., 2023a. Bildbasierte
Frischbetonpru¨fung – Teil 1: Konsistenz und Leimgehalt des
Frischbetons.Beton-undStahlbetonbau,118(4),220-228.
Schack, T., Coenen, M., Haist, M., 2023b. Bildbasierte
Frischbetonpru¨fung–Teil2: GranulometrischeEigenschaften
derGesteinsko¨rnung.Beton-undStahlbetonbau, 118(8), 556-
564.
Schack, T., Coenen, M., Haist, M., 2023c. Bildbasierte
Frischbetonpru¨fung: Teil 3: Homogenita¨t des Frischbetons.
Beton-undStahlbetonbau,118(10),716-724.
Song, Y., Huang, Z., Shen, C., Shi, H., Lange, D. A., 2020.
Deep learning-based automated image segmentation for con-
crete petrographic analysis. Cement and Concrete Research,
135,106118.