Towards participatory multi-modeling for policy support across domains and
scales: a systematic procedure for integral multi-model design.
VittorioNespecaa,b,c,RickQuaxa,b,MarcelG.M.OldeRikkertd,HubertP.L.M.Korziliuse,VincentA.W.J.
Marchaue,SophieHadijsotirioud,TomOreeld,JannieCoenene,HeimanWertheimf,AlexeyVoinovg,Etie¨nneA.J.A.
Rouwettee,V´ıtorV.Vasconcelosa,b,h
aComputationalScienceLab,UniversityofAmsterdam,SciencePark900,Amsterdam,1098XH,TheNetherlands
bPOLDER,InstituteforAdvancedStudy,UniversityofAmsterdam,OudeTurfmarkt147,Amsterdam,1012GC,TheNetherlands
cFacultyofTechnologyPolicyandManagement,DelftUniversityofTechnology,OudeTurfmarkt147,Delft,2628BX,TheNetherlands
dDepartmentGeriatrics,RadboudUniversityMedicalCenter,GeertGrootepleinZuid10,Nijmegen,6525GA,TheNetherlands
eInstituteforManagementResearch,RadboudUniversity,Heyendaalseweg141,Nijmegen,6525AJ,TheNetherlands
fDepartmentMedicalMicrobiology,RadboudUniversityMedicalCenter,GeertGrootepleinZuid10,Nijmegen,6525GA,TheNetherlands
gFacultyofEngineeringTechnology,TwenteUniversity,Enschede,7522NB,TheNetherlands
hCentreforUrbanMentalHealth,UniversityofAmsterdam,Amsterdam,TheNetherlands
Abstract
Policymakingforcomplexchallengessuchaspandemicsnecessitatestheconsiderationofintricateimplicationsacross
multipledomainsandscales.Computationalmodelscansupportpolicymaking,butasinglemodelisofteninsufficient
for such multidomain and scale challenges. Multi-models comprising several interacting computational models at
different scales or relying on different modeling paradigms offer a potential solution. Such multi-models can be
assembled from existing computational models (i.e., integrated modeling) or be designed conceptually as a whole
before their computational implementation (i.e., integral modeling). Integral modeling is particularly valuable for
novelpolicyproblems,suchasthosefacedintheearlystagesofapandemic,whererelevantmodelsmaybeunavailable
orlackstandarddocumentation. Designingsuchmulti-modelsthroughanintegralapproachis, however, acomplex
taskrequiringthecollaborationofmodelersandexpertsfromvariousdomains. Inthiscollaborativeeffort,modelers
mustpreciselydefinethedomainknowledgeneededfromexpertsandestablishasystematicprocedurefortranslating
such knowledge into a multi-model. Yet, these requirements and systematic procedures are currently lacking for
multi-modelsthatarebothmultiscaleandmulti-paradigm. Weaddressthischallengebyintroducingaprocedurefor
developingmulti-modelswithanintegralapproachbasedonclearlydefineddomainknowledgerequirementsderived
from literature. We illustrate this procedure using the case of school closure policies in the Netherlands during the
COVID-19pandemic,revealingtheirpotentialimplicationsintheshortandlongtermandacrossthehealthcareand
educational domains. The requirements and procedure provided in this article advance the application of integral
multi-modelingforpolicysupportinmultiscaleandmultidomaincontexts.
Keywords: Hybridmodeling,multiscalemodeling,policyformulation,participatorymodeling
1. Introduction Forexample,thereisstrongevidencethattheschoolclo-
surepoliciesintroducedtocurbthespreadofCOVID-19
(healthcaredomain)hadprolongedadverseeffectsonthe
Designingpoliciesincomplexsystemsrequiresconsid-
education of Dutch children (educational domain), espe-
erationthatagivenpolicy,designedforasingledomain,
mayalsohaveunintendedeffectsinotherdomains[1,2]. ciallyforthosebelongingtothemosteconomicallydisad-
Preprintsubmittedto February12,2024
4202
beF
9
]EM.tats[
1v82260.2042:viXravantagedfamilies(socialinequalitydomain)[3,4]. Inad- hybrid [18, 19], or integrated modeling [30]. In multi-
ditiontomultidomaineffects,policyimplicationscanalso scale(ormultiresolution)modeling,thesub-modelscap-
span multiple time (e.g., in the short vs long term) and ture smaller portions of the original scales at which the
governancescales(e.g., centralvsde-central[5]). These dynamics of interest occur [32]. For example, differ-
are referred to as multiscale. For example, school clo- ent models could be developed for the short- and long-
sure policies (short term) led to prolonged learning loss termimplicationsofparticularpolicies(i.e.,theimplica-
formultipleyears(mediumterm),andtheymayproduce tions at different time scales) or at the national and re-
anegativeeffectoneconomicopportunitiestoday’schil- gional levels (i.e., implications at different governance
drenwillhaveinthecomingdecades(longterm)[6,7]. levels). Such an approach inevitably entails approxima-
Computational models can effectively map complex tions (e.g., a coarser level of detail captured only at the
multidomainandmultiscaleimplicationsandprovidepol- nationallevel),butitcanalsoleadtoincreasedcomputa-
icy support [8, 9, 10, 11, 12, 13]. For example, compu- tional feasibility [20]. Multi-paradigm (or hybrid) mod-
tational models have the potential to aid in the formu- eling focuses on capturing the subcomponents of a sys-
lation of policies by exploring their implications across temthroughadequatemodelingtechniquesorparadigms.
multipledomainsandscalesbeforetheirimplementation ExamplesofsuchparadigmsincludeAgent-BasedMod-
[8]. However,asexemplifiedbythecaseoftheCOVID- eling (ABM) and System Dynamics Modelling (SDM).
19 pandemic, the models developed for policy support Thechoiceofanadequatemodelingparadigmcanbein-
typically focused on one domain: the epidemiology of formed by several criteria, including the purpose of the
SARS-CoV-2 [14, 13, 15]. Moreover, these models of- modelingendeavor,thescaleatwhichkeydynamicstake
ten investigated the short-term implications of policy in- place(e.g.,attheaggregatelevel,orresultingfrommicro-
terventions without considering their potential long-term level interactions), and the level of detail at which data
impacts[14,15,16]oroverlookedcentral/de-centraldy- and knowledge are available [18, 33, 34, 35, 36]. When
namics even whenthese were relevant [5, 17]. One pos- combined, multiscale and multi-paradigm modeling pro-
sible reason for such design choices may be that captur- vide greater flexibility than individual models in allocat-
ingmultiscaleandmultidomaindynamicswithonemodel ing model complexity where required and feasible, en-
canbedifficult,ifnotimpossible. Forexample,itwould abling researchers to seek a balance among model com-
becomputationallyunfeasibletorunsimulationswithone plexity,theavailabilityofknowledgeanddata,andcom-
model capturing both the impacts of school closures on putationalcosts[33,32].
the epidemiology of SARS-CoV-2 (with a time step of Thedesignofsuchmulti-modelscanrelyontwostrate-
days and run for a few years of a pandemic) and the gies:integralandintegratedmodeling[37].Integralmod-
long-term implications that such closures could have on eling entails designing the whole structure of a multi-
theeconomicopportunitiesofchildreninthefuture(e.g., model starting at the conceptual level [38], followed by
with a time step of years over a period of decades). Us- sub-modeldevelopment. Thisapproachensurestheonto-
ing a combination of models (or multi-models) instead logicalcompatibilityofthesub-modelswithintheoverall
ofonemodelshowspromiseinaddressingthischallenge multi-model (e.g., the World 3 model [39]). Conversely,
[18,19,20,21,22,23,24]. integrated modeling focuses on enabling the reuse of
Multimodels are models composed of two or more modelsdevelopedbyexternalparties. Integrationoccurs
interacting sub-models capturing a phenomenon of in- atthecomputationallevel, combininglegacymodelsde-
terest from different perspectives including different do- velopedandimplementedassoftwareforotherpurposes
mains (e.g., ecology and economics), scales, and mod- [30,38,40].Whileenablingmodelreuse,integratedmod-
eling paradigms. Multimodels have been developed in eling entails the risk of combining ontologically incom-
several fields of research, including fluids and material patible models (e.g., when they consider different cate-
science [25, 26], biomedicine [27, 28, 29], and environ- gories of meaning or scales for the same variable) [37].
mentalscienceandengineering[30]. Inadditiontomul- Allmodelsarebuiltforparticularpurposes;ensuringthat
timodels,thesemodelsareoftentermedmulti-simulation, reused models can effectively match the purposes driv-
multi-resolution [31], multi-scale [25], multi-paradigm, ing the integrated model building is challenging. These
2risks are elevated in poorly documented models that do proach requires domain knowledge that spans several
not follow joint standards [41]. Adopting an integral fields of expertise. As such, this knowledge may not
modeling approach is better suited than integrated mod- be readily available to one modeler or even a team of
elingwhendecision-makersarepresentedwithnovel/un- modelers. Therefore, it seems paramount to co-create
precedented policy problems (e.g., the COVID-19 pan- MMSwithexperts(e.g.,decision-makers,theiradvisors,
demic, the Syrian conflict and refugee crisis, or Brexit). and stakeholders [44]) from different domains of inter-
In such cases, integrated modeling may limit the explo- est [37, 45, 46, 47]. In such a participatory process, a
rationofpolicyimplicationstothefactorsanddynamics systematic and transparent approach is key at every step
captured in existing models, which, given the novelty of so that experts can understand the model, contribute to
thepolicyproblemconsidered, maystillbelackingrele- its development, trust the results to support policymak-
vant domains and scales. Although models representing ing, reach a consensus with respect to the policy inter-
relevant domains and scales might exist, acknowledging ventions, understand and accept the uncertainties asso-
their presence and establishing meaningful relationships ciated with the model, and accept and commit to im-
amongthemdemandsatransdisciplinaryperspectivethat plementing the decisions made through using the model
may not be available to modelers (especially for novel [48, 45, 49, 46, 50, 51]. Ensuring such transparency
policy problems). Conversely, an integral modeling ap- requires clarity for modelers concerning (a) the domain
proach enables one to explore the potential implications knowledge needed from experts and (b) model devel-
of policy across a broader range of domains and scales opment procedures that provide the means to translate
beforeimplementingamulti-model. Thisisachievedfirst this knowledge into a computational model. Participa-
byconstructingaconceptualandtransdisciplinaryunder- tory modeling techniques such as Group Model Build-
standingofthepolicyissueasawhole(possiblyincollab- ing (GMB) clarify the co-development of single models
oration with experts from multiple domains). Only then (SDMs in the case of GMB) [52, 53, 54]. For exam-
is the resulting conceptual model divided into interact- ple,Crielaardetal. [54]provideaseriesofrequirements
ing sub-models. This integral modeling design process (or‘annotations’)thatcapturethedomainknowledgere-
results in a Multi-Modelling Structure (MMS) prescrib- quiredfromexpertsandasystematicandtransparentpro-
ing the sub-models in which the conceptual model is di- ceduretotranslatethisknowledgeintoanSDM.
vided and how such sub-models interact. An MMS rep- InthecaseofthedesignofMMSswithanintegralap-
resents the ‘skeleton’ of a multi-model in that it defines proach, several requirements and procedures have been
thesub-modelsas‘blackboxes’(i.e., withoutspecifying proposed for multiscale [32] or multi-paradigm model-
theirinternalstructureandsoftwareimplementation)and ing[55,56,57,58,59]withouthowevercombiningthese
representsthesub-models’scale,paradigms,andinterac- two perspectives. Kelly et al. [33] guide the choice
tions(i.e.,whenandhowthesub-modelsexchangeinfor- amongdifferentmodelingparadigms,includingconsider-
mation). The concept of an MMS is analogous to that ationsabouttherequiredlevelofspatialdetail(orscale).
of‘architecture’introducedby[32]formultiscalemodel- Such guidelines provide the domain knowledge required
ing. OnekeydifferenceisthatanMMSspecifiesnotonly tochooseamongdifferentmodelingparadigms,however,
the scales associated with the sub-models but also their theydonotcapturetheadditionaldomainknowledgere-
modelingparadigms. Tocompletethedesignofamulti- quired to functionally decompose the system of interest
modelgivenanMMS,modelersneedtodevelopeachof in subcomponents at different scales, which is essential
thesub-models,forexample,throughexistingmethodolo- for developing an MMS. Clearly defined domain knowl-
gies[42,43]oremploy(andadapt)existingmodelswhere edgerequirementsandaproceduretosystematicallyand
these are available. Given that the sub-models’ interac- transparently develop MMSs with experts in multiscale
tionsarealreadypre-definedintheMMS,thesub-models andmultidomaincontextsaremissing.
can be developed rather independently (e.g., by different This article proposes a systematic procedure to de-
teams). velop MMSs with an integral approach based on clearly
Developing such an MMS representing multidomain defined domain knowledge requirements derived from
and multiscale policy problems through an integral ap- multi-paradigm and multiscale modeling literature. We
3illustratethisprocedureusingthecaseofschoolclosures policy problem and project constraints also inform the
intheNetherlandsbylookingattheirmultiscaleandmul- choice of modeling paradigms. As such, these two re-
tidomainimplications,whichcannotbeunderstoodwhen quirements must first be elicited to inform the choice of
consideringasingledomainandscaleinisolation. a modeling objective. Given the modeling objective, the
developmentofaconceptualmodelbegins. Casualmap-
pingtechniques,suchasCognitiveMapsandCausalLoop
DesignoftheProcedure
Diagrams (CLDs), are effective for conceptual modeling
[60]. Here,wefocusontheCLDastheconceptualmod-
Inthissection,theprocedurefordevelopingMMSsde-
elingframework. CLDsareagraphicaltooltodevelopa
signed based on requirements derived from literature as
qualitativeunderstandingofthe‘structure’ofasystemin
showninthefollowingsections.
termsofitsrelevantfactors(concepts)andthecausalre-
lationshipsamongthem. Thisstructurecanprovidequal-
1.1. Requirementsfordesigningmulti-modelingarchitec-
itative insights regarding the functioning of the system,
tures
e.g., by providing a preliminary understanding of mech-
We identify domain knowledge requirements for
anisms (e.g., feedback loops, reinforcing and balancing)
MMSs by analyzing literature from multiscale modeling
that drive and explain system behavior [61]. The factors
and multi-paradigm modeling. That is, for each of these
and relationships in a CLD provide a conceptual frame-
two fields, we derive a list of key design choices to be
work that facilitates the elicitation and graphical repre-
made by modelers when developing multimodels. Then,
sentation of the additional expert knowledge required to
weinferthedomainknowledgerequiredfromexpertsto
translateCLDsintocomputationalmodels[52,54](inthis
make these modeling design choices informedly, which
casethoseshowninTable1),makingitanaturalstarting
we refer to as the domain knowledge requirements. The
pointforthisprocedure. Thisfirststep,definingthepol-
details of this process are in the Appendix, while the re-
icy problem, constraints, modeling objective, and causal
sultsareshowninTable1. Precisedefinitionsforthede-
model,istermedConceptualModeling.
signchoicesandrequirementsshowninTable1arepro-
The second most fundamental requirements are the
videdinthefollowingsections.
scale dimensions and intervals. This is the case as such
requirements are necessary for all of the remaining de-
Procedurefordevelopingmultimodelingstructuresbased
signchoicesnamely,thescaledecomposition(orsepara-
ontherequirements
tion),selectionofthemodelingparadigms,anddesignof
WedrawtheprocedurefordevelopingMMSsfromthe the interactions among the sub-models. These three de-
previoussection’sdesignchoicesanddomainknowledge sign choices also present interdependencies as the scale
requirements (cf. Table 1). Specifically, we organize decomposition is required to inform the paradigm selec-
the steps of the procedure in terms of the dependencies tion, andboththescaleandparadigmdecompositionare
among requirements and design choices, from the most requiredtodefinetheinteractions. Then,scaleseparation
fundamental—i.e.,therequirementsanddesignchoices constitutesthemostfundamentalamongthethreedesign
thatdirectlyorindirectlyaffectmostofthefollowingde- choices, given it needs to be carried out before the other
signchoices—tothosethatareleastfundamentaland,as twoareexecuted. Assuch,thesecondstepoftheproce-
such, depend on other design choices and requirements. durefocuseson(a)definingthescaledimensionsandin-
Additionally, themodeldevelopmentprocessiscentered tervals,and(b)carryingoutthescaleseparationbasedon
onandbeginswiththedesignofaconceptualmodelac- such intervals and dimensions. This step is called scale
cordingtotheintegralmodelingapproachselectedinthis decomposition, and its results are a preliminary division
articlefornovelpolicyproblems. insub-modelsatdifferentscalesandtheidentificationof
First, the most fundamental requirements are the pol- (causal) relationships among factors belonging to differ-
icy problem and project constraints. These enable mod- entsub-models.
elers to define the modeling objective (crucial through- Next, the next most fundamental requirements are
out the multi-model development process). Further, the those necessary to inform the selection of the modeling
4Table1:KeychoicesinthedesignofMulti-ModelStructures(MMSs),andthedomainknowledgerequirementsforeachofthechoiceswithsome
clarifyingexamples. Somerequirements,suchas‘Policyproblem,’arerepeatedintherightcolumnastheycanberequiredformorethanoneof
thedesignchoices.Repeatedrequirementsdonotincludeclarifyingexamples.
Keydesignchoices Domainknowledgerequirements
Identification of policy problem Policyproblem(e.g.,theformulationofschoolclosurepoliciestotacklea
andmodelingobjective pandemic),Constraints(e.g.,budgetortime)
Functional decomposition in sub- Scale dimensions (e.g., time, space, or governance level), Scale intervals
models 1: Scale separation (or de- withinthescaledimensions(e.g.,ascaleintervalofyearstodecadesinthe
composition) timescaledimension)
Policyproblem, Constraints, Scaleintervals, Heterogeneity(e.g., diversity
in immune response in the considered population), Mixing (e.g., patterns
of interactions among individuals and their environment), Complexity of
Functional decomposition in sub-
individualbehavior(e.g.,learningoradaptation),Discretenessofsystem’s
models 2: Modeling paradigm se-
behavior (e.g., a disease is eradicated when there are less than one person
lection
infectedorsusceptible),Uncertaintyinandavailabilityofdataandknowl-
edge(e.g.,thelevelofdetailandprecisionatwhichdataandknowledgeare
availableintheconsideredsystem).
Functional decomposition in sub-models 1 & 2, Time scale intervals: in-
forms coupling temples (when models exchange information, e.g., during
orbefore/afterthesimulation,howoften,whatisthetime-stepping),Scale
intervalsindimensionsotherthantime(e.g.,structural,say,governanceor
Definitionofinformationexchange
spatial): informsthenecessityforscalebridgingoperationssuchasaggre-
interactionsamongsub-models
gation or disaggregation, Topology of interactions (which sub-model pro-
vides info. to which sub-model), Operations (e.g., equations, if-then-else
statements, aggregation/disaggregation techniques to process information
exchangedacrossinteractingmodels).
paradigms(e.g.,heterogeneity,discretenessinsystembe- missing. This is because, while aggregation/disaggrega-
havior, and availability of data and knowledge cf. Table tion operations can be inferred from the scale intervals
1).Here,notonlyaremodelingparadigmsassignedtothe (e.g.,inspaceorgovernancelevel),otheroperations,such
sub-modelsobtainedthroughthescaledecompositionbut asmathematicalexpressionsrepresentingcausalrelation-
alsosuchdecompositioncanberevisited,e.g.,byfurther ships or logical statements, are yet to be defined. As
disaggregatingthesub-modelsorbyaggregatingthemde- such, the last step of the procedure focuses on defining
pending on the modeling paradigm adopted. This step, the operations carried out on information when the sub-
termed paradigm decomposition, results in the final sub- models exchange information. Once these requirements
divisioninsub-modelswiththeassociatedscaleintervals arefulfilled,themodelercanmakethelastdesignchoice,
andmodelingparadigms. which is to fully define the interactions among the sub-
Finally, the last requirements to be elicited are those models (composed of the topology of interactions, oper-
necessary to inform the definition of the interactions ations, and coupling templates). Given the sub-models
among the sub-models. Most of these requirements are (including their scales and paradigms) and their interac-
already available from the previous steps (e.g., scale in- tions,themodelercanassembleaMulti-Modelingstruc-
tervals). However, the operations carried out on infor- ture (MMS). As such, the last step of the procedure is
mationwhensub-modelsexchangeinformationarepartly termed Multi-Modeling Structure design. The procedure
5withallofitsstepsisshowninFigure1.
OncetheMMSisdeveloped,themodelerscanrelyon
other existing methodologies to develop each sub-model
(orre-useexistingmodels). Thislaststepisnotincluded
intheprocedureaspreviouslyexistingmethodologiescan
beappliedtodevelopthesub-models[42,43]. Inthefol-
lowingsections,wedescribeeachofthestepsofthepro-
cedureintheoryandillustratetheirapplicationinpractice
through the case of School Closures in the Netherlands
(introducedhereinafter).
1.2. CaseStudy: SchoolClosuresintheNetherlands
The closure of schools in the Netherlands is an op-
portune casefor illustrating theprocedure, giventhat, as
discussed in the introduction, it presents policy implica-
tionsanddynamicsthatarebothmultidomainandmulti-
scale. First,multipledomainsareaffectedbyschoolclo-
sures. For illustration, we focus on healthcare and ed-
ucation [11]. In the healthcare domain, school closures
were introduced to curb the spread of COVID-19, pro-
ducingresultsthatarestilldebated[62,63,64].Intheed-
ucation domain, school closures caused learning loss for
children,especiallyforthosefromthemosteconomically
disadvantagedfamilies[3,4]. Second,theimplicationsof
schoolclosuresspanmultipletimescalesasthelearning
lossaccumulatedbychildrenintheshorttermisexpected
tohavelong-termeffectsontheireconomicopportunities
inthefuture[7].Weillustratethestepsoftheprocedureto
developanMMS(cf.Figure1)basedonthiscasestudyas
follows. Weconsider1000individuals(agents)torepre-
senttheNetherlandsand,assuch,consideraveragechar-
acteristics(e.g.,percentageofhighlyskilledpupils)equal
to those at the national level. The goal of this applica-
tionisnottodevelopanMMScapturingtheimplications
ofschoolclosuresaccurately. Rather, theaimistoshow
that,giventherequireddomainknowledge(Cf. Table1),
Figure1: ProcedurefordevelopingMulti-ModelStructures(MMSs).
the proposed procedure enables modelers to develop an
First,developaCausalLoopDiagram(CLD)thatcapturestherelevant
MMSthatcapturespolicyimplicationsspanningmultiple
factorsandrelationshipsfortheconsideredsystemandpolicyproblem.
scalesanddomains. Then,giventhescaleintervalsassociatedwiththefactors,functionally
decomposetheCLDinsub-modelsatdifferentscales(e.g.,intimeand
governancelevel).Next,functionallydecomposethesub-modelsbyas-
1.2.1. Step1: ConceptualModeling signingadequatemodelingparadigmsinformedbyadditionaldomain
knowledgeon,e.g.,heterogeneityanddiscretenessinthesystem’sbe-
Theory: Much research has focused on developing
havior.Finally,giventheCLDandthefunctionaldecompositioninscale
CLDs based on literature, participatory processes, quan- andparadigms,designanMMSconsistingofthesubmodelsandtheirin-
titative data, and combinations of these approaches. As teractions(topologyofinteractions,operations,andcouplingtemplates).
6such,wereferthereadertopreviousworkinCLDdevel- suggests that a particular factor is determined at the city
opmentsuchas[48,65,66,67]tolearnmoreabouthow level and has implications for decision-making at the re-
tocarryoutthisstep. gionallevel. Dependingonthefocusofthepolicyprob-
Application: In this case, the development of a CLD lemconsidered,theremaybedifferentlevelsofdecision-
capturing the implications of school closures for health- makingrelevanttotheconsideredsystem,e.g.,atthemu-
care and education was based on literature, as shown in nicipality,regional,andnationallevels.Assuch,thesame
Figure2. factor may have varying governance intervals depending
onstakeholders’perspectivesatdifferentgovernancelev-
1.2.2. Step2: ScaleDecomposition els. When this occurs, the factor should be subdivided
Theory: Atthisstage,theCLDfromthepreviousstep intodifferentfactors,eachwithauniquegovernancescale
is divided into sub-models at smaller scale intervals for interval. Thisisespeciallyrelevantwhenthesamefactor
eachoftheconsidereddimensions(e.g.,time,space,and hasdifferentimplicationsfordecision-makingatdifferent
governancelevel). Giventhatthepurposehereistosub- governancelevels.
divide the considered system into sub-systems to be de- Secondly, oncethescaleintervalshavebeenassigned,
scribed by different models, this CLD is intended as a thefactorsaredividedintogroupswithhomogenousscale
‘bird’seye’viewofthefactorsandrelationshipsrelevant intervals in the considered dimensions. Each group con-
to the considered system and policy problem. The scale stitutes a sub-model resulting from the scale decompo-
decomposition proceeds in two steps. Firstly, scale in- sition. Further, the relationships that connect factors
tervals are assigned to each factor in the CLD for each belonging to different groups represent the interactions
dimensionconsidered.Thisstepincludesdefiningtherel- amongthesub-models.Inthefollowing,wediscussthese
evantdimensionsalongwhichscaledecompositioniscar- twostepsindetailthroughthecaseofschoolclosures.
riedout. Then,scaleintervalsareassignedtothefactors Application: The dimensions considered relevant for
alongtheconsidereddimensions. the case of school closures are governance and time. As
Ascaleintervaliscomposedoftwovalues.Bothvalues such,scaleintervalswereassignedtoeachfactorforboth
arenotprecisenumbersbut,rather,theyrepresentorders thegovernanceandtimedimensions. Withregardstothe
of magnitude. The first value represents the granularity governancescaleintervalsforthemodelpresentedinFig-
withwhichitisrelevanttoappreciateagivenfactorina ure2,mostfactorswerefoundtohaveagovernancescale
given dimension. The second value represents the total intervalof(“Local”,”National”). Forexample,thefactor
size that a given factor has for the considered dimension ”new infections” is determined through contacts among
[71]. susceptible and infected at the local level. As such, the
Forexample,inthecaseoftimescaleintervals,thefirst first value corresponds to the local level. Regarding the
value is the frequency with which it is relevant to assess second value, ”new infections” is observed here at the
changes in the considered factor (e.g., “days”); it corre- national scale, given that decision-making for this illus-
spondstothemodeltimestepneededtocapturethefac- trative application occurs at the national level. Different
tor’sdynamics. Thesecondvalueisthetimehorizonover decision-makinglevelsmayberelevantintheconsidered
which it is relevant to study changes in the factor (e.g., case, e.g., when modeling central / de-central dynamics
”months”). This value corresponds to the necessary du- between the regional and national governance levels [5].
ration of the simulations (accumulation of time steps) to However, forsimplicity, weonlyconsideredthenational
studythefactor. Assuch,atimescaleintervalof”(days, decision-makinglevel. The“schoolclosure”factorhada
months)” means that the considered factor can be simu- different scale interval as it is determined at the national
lated with a time step of days over a period of months. levelandhasimplicationsatthenationallevel. Assuch,
In the case of governance scale intervals, the first value forthisfactor,thescaleintervalisdefinedas(“National”,
representsthegovernancelevelatwhichafactorisdeter- ”National”). Other factors were assigned the same gov-
mined. Thesecondvaluerepresentsthegovernancelevel ernancescaleintervalastheyrepresentcharacteristicsof
at which the factor is relevant for decision-making. As the system at the National level. This was the case for
such, a governance scale interval of (“city”, “regional”) “Populationinschoolingage”and“Highincomejobop-
7Figure2:ConceptualModeling:theCausalLoopDiagram(CLD)capturestheimplicationsofschoolclosuresforhealthcareandeducationthrough
aseriesoffactorsandrelationshipsamongthem.Eachrelationshipisassignedanumberfrom1to21tofacilitatetheirdiscussion.Forhealthcare,
thecoreofthisCLDisaSusceptibleInfectedandRecovered(SIR)model(1-10)[68]withtheadditionofimmunityloss(11)[69].Schoolclosures
reducecontactsatschool(12)amongtheschool-agepopulation(13),whichcontributestothegeneralnumberofcontacts(14).Foreducation,the
CLDincludesthenegativeeffectofschoolclosuresonthecumulatedlearningoftheschool-agepopulation(15)[4]. Suchaneffectisreducedby
thepercentageofthechildren’sfamilieswithahighincome(16)[4].Further,highercumulatedlearningincreasesthepercentageofhighlyskilled
pupils(17)whohavehigherchancesofobtaininghigh-incomejobs(19&21),resultinginahigherpercentageofhigh-incomefamilies[70].The
percentageofhigh-incomefamiliesimprovestheeducationopportunitiesofchildrenfromsuchfamilies,thusincreasingthepercentageofhighly
skilledpupils(20).
portunities.”Finally,someofthefactorswereunrelatedto byhomogeneousintervalsintimeandgovernancescales.
anygovernancelevel,soagovernancescaleintervalwas In terms of time or temporal scales, the factors are or-
not assigned. This was the case for the epidemiological ganizedintotwomacrogroups:theshort-term,withscale
factors“infectivity”and“averagedurationofinfectivity” intervalsofdaystoyears,andthelong-term,withscalein-
whichrepresentexogenouscharacteristicsoftheCOVID- tervalsfromyearstodecades. Regardingthegovernance-
19virusforwhichthegovernancedimensionisirrelevant. scale intervals, no functional decomposition is required
Next, the time scale intervals were assigned. In terms asallfactorsinthemodelpresentthesameinterval,rang-
of the first value of the scale, several values were found ingfromlocaltonationallevel. Thetimeandgovernance
fordifferentfactors, rangingfrom thedaily tothe yearly scales assigned to the factors and their scale decomposi-
frequency. Regarding the second value, or time horizon tioninsubmodelsareshowninFigure3.Additionally,the
over which it is relevant to study a given factor, the fac- scaledecompositionenabledtheidentificationofrelation-
torsintheCLDrangedfromyearstodecades. Forexam- ships among factors that belong to different sub-models,
ple, the factor ‘cumulated learning’ was found to have a representingthetopologyofinteractionsamongthesub-
scaleintervalof(“days”,”decades”). Thefirstvaluewas models. Specifically, the interactions found are two (cf.
set to “days” as kids learn at school daily, so this is the Figures 3). First, the relationship between “Cumulated
frequencychosentoassesslearning. Further,thelearning Learning” and “% highly-skilled pupils” shows that the
processforpupilswhoarepreparingforuniversityorthe short-termmodelinfluencesthelong-termmodelthrough
jobmarket takesseveralyears, assuch, thetimehorizon the effect that cumulated learning has on the fraction
considered for this factor is that of years. “Infectivity” of the pupils (approaching university or the job market)
and “average duration of infectivity” do not change over that are highly skilled. Further, the relationship between
time. Assuch,thescaleintervalforthesefactorsissetto the“%high-incomefamilies”and“CumulatedLearning”
(“Constant”). shows how the long-term model affects the short-term
Then,thefactorsaredividedintogroupscharacterized model.Atthisstage,anadditionalfactorwasaddedtothe
8CLDthatreplicates“%high-incomefamilies”butwitha pothesis [68]. We extend this assumption to all schools
constantvalue(Co)insteadofatimescaleintervalrang- in the considered system, thus assuming that all pupils
ingfromyearstodecades(Years,Decades)(Cf.Figures2 attendthesameclassroominthesameschool. Itisimper-
and3). Thisadditionalvalueisaddedtoillustrateavalue ativetoacknowledgethatthisrepresentsanotablesimpli-
transfer from the factor “% high-income families (Na- fication, as the actual system typically comprises multi-
tional,National)(Years,Decades)”whichisdynamically pledistinctclassroomsandschools,thusdemonstratinga
changing every year in the long-term model, to the fac- lesserdegreeofperfectmixing.Consequently,suchasys-
tors“%high-incomefamilies(National, National)(Con- teminherentlypresentsaheightenedpotentialforschool-
stant)”whichissetasaconstantintheshorttermmodel basedinfectionscomparedtoreal-worldscenarios. Then,
basedonthefinalresultobtainedbythelong-termmodel. anyconclusionsderivedfromthisassumptionareinclined
to overstate the impact of school closures once contact
1.2.3. Step3: ParadigmDecomposition amongallpupilsatschoolisstopped. Shouldschoolclo-
Theory: In this section, modeling paradigms are cho- sures prove ineffective in such an idealized system, they
senforthesub-modelsidentifiedduringthescaledecom- are likely to be ineffective in a more realistic system,
position. A substantial body of literature exists that fo- which accounts for less perfect mixing and, thus, fewer
cuses on the selection of a model paradigm aligned with chancesforinfectionsamongpupilsatschool.
specific criteria or domain knowledge, e.g., [72, 55, 56, In the case of contacts outside schools, a more accu-
33]. Itisnotourintentioninthisarticletoprovideacom- rateapproximationentailsthatsuchcontactsarenotper-
prehensivelistofdomainknowledgerequirementsbased fectly mixed and, rather, depend on networked interac-
onanexhaustivereviewoftheexistingliterature. Instead, tions among individuals (e.g., based on their social net-
we aim to offer select illustrations of different require- works)[73].
mentsthatcanbeusedtochooseamodelingparadigmfor Further,thebehaviorofasystemassociatedwitherad-
thesub-modelsobtainedthroughscaleseparation. These icatinganinfectiousdiseaseisdiscrete. Continuousmod-
requirements are the policy problem considered, project els, such as SDMs, do not capture eradication or extinc-
constraints(e.g.,timeandbudgetavailability),character- tion dynamicsnaturally, requiring arbitrarythresholds to
istics of the considered system (e.g., heterogeneity and stop the dynamics. For example, in the case of a closed
mixing), the availability of data and knowledge, and the system, since continuous models allow for less than one
uncertainties associated with such data and knowledge infected person (e.g., if the number of infected is 0.1),
(Cf. Table1). Atthisstage,thescaleseparationcanalso a disease can regrow as the number of susceptible indi-
be revisited. For example, this can occur when an ABM viduals increases. A similar phenomenon occurs for the
isselectedtocapturetwoormoresub-modelsatdifferent extinction of biological species [74]. Conversely, in the
governancescaleintervalsinonesinglemodel. case of a discrete model of a closed system, when the
Application: In the following, the choice of a mod- number of infected (or susceptible) is less than one, the
elingparadigmisdiscussedforeachsub-modelobtained disease is eradicated. These systems’ characteristics in-
throughscaledecomposition,namely,theshortandlong- dicated that an ABM was a reasonable choice given this
termimplicationsofschoolclosures. modeling paradigm’s ability to capture non-perfect mix-
In the case of the short-term implications of school inganddiscretenessofthesystembehavior[35,75]. Fur-
closures, the choice of a modeling paradigm was guided ther, theABMmodelingapproachwas knowntotheau-
by the properties of the system associated with the con- thors,anddatacouldberetrievedforthisexampleappli-
tacts among susceptible and infected at school and else- cation from information gathered during the COVID-19
where. Withregardtocontactsatschool,andinthecase pandemicandotherbaselinesources.
of an airborne virus (especially if aerosols play a signif- With regards to the long-term implications of school
icant role), it can be assumed that every student has an closures, the choice of a modeling paradigm was mainly
equal chance of coming into contact with any other stu- influencedbytheunavailabilityofdataondynamics(e.g.,
dentinthesameclassroom. Suchanopportunityforcon- ‘percentage of highly skilled pupils’ cf. Figure 3) that
tactamongallpupilscorrespondstoaperfectmixinghy- did not occur yet and are, as such, highly uncertain. In
9Figure 3: Scale and Paradigm Decomposition: The Causal Loop Diagram (CLD) obtained through Conceptual Modeling (factors and causal
relationshipsamongthem)isdecomposedintosub-modelsatdifferenttemporalscales(short-andlong-term)andrelyingondifferentmodeling
paradigms(AgentBasedModeling(ABM)andSystemDynamicsModeling(SDM)).
thiscase,usinganABMwouldhaverequiredintroducing Second, theoperationstobecarriedouttoprocessin-
additional details at the micro level for which data was formation when it is exchanged among different mod-
unavailable, resulting in more uncertainty in the results els are defined. The operations can include value trans-
[73]. In this case, using an SDM focusing on the aggre- fer (without any additional operation), (dis)aggregation,
gate(macro)levelwasthepreferredchoice. Additionally, mathematicaloperations,logicaloperations(if,then,else
choosinganSDMmodelpresentstheadvantageofreduc- statements),orcombinationsofthem.
ingthecomputationalcostsassociatedwiththelong-term Finally, the coupling templates establishing when the
sub-model. As such, an SDM modeling paradigm was sub-modelsinteractmustbedefinedbasedoncomparing
chosen for this sub-model. The resulting functional de- the time scale intervals associated with the sub-models
composition in scales and modeling paradigms is shown [71]. Scaleintervalsofdifferentmodelscanbeseparated,
inFigure3. contiguous, or overlap. When the sub-model scale in-
tervals overlap, the models run in parallel and exchange
1.2.4. Step4: Multi-modellingstructuredesign information during each simulation step. When the time
Theory: Designing an MMS entails defining the sub- scalesofthesub-modelsdonotoverlaporarecontiguous,
models and their interactions. Such interactions repre- thenthemodelsruninseries[32].
sent information flows among models and comprise the Thetopologyofinteractions,operations,couplingtem-
topologyofinteractions,theoperationscarriedoutonthe plates, and the submodels obtained through scale and
information exchanged among sub-models, and the cou- paradigm separation constitute an MMS. Such an MMS
plingtemplates.First,thetopologyofinteractionsdefines can then be captured through the Multiscale Modelling
the structure and flow of information among submodels, Language(MML)proposedin[76,71,32].
anditisdeterminedbytherelationshipsthatconnectfac- Application: First, weidentifythetopology ofthein-
tors belonging to different sub-models obtained through teractions. This topology was obtained in the scale de-
thescaleandparadigmdecompositionsteps. composition (cf. ”Sub-models’ interactions” in Figure
103). In our MMS, the short-term sub-model provides the elsrunningbothinseriesand/orinparallel.
long-term sub-model with ”cumulated learning”, affect-
ing the ”% highly skilled pupils”. Conversely, the long-
term sub-model provides the short-term sub-model with
1.2.5. Use of the Multi-Modeling Structure for Policy
the”%high-incomefamilies”.
Formulation
Second,theoperationstobecarriedoutontheinforma-
Here,amulti-modelwasdevelopedbasedontheMMS
tion exchanged among submodels were identified. This
(cf. Figure4)tosimulatetheimplicationsofschoolclo-
requiresclarityontheinteractionfromtheshort-termsub-
sures across healthcare and education in the short- and
model to the long-term sub-model (and back), requiring
long-term. This process entailed the development of the
anoperationasthevalueof”cumulatedlearning”needsto
two sub-models (ABM and SDM) based on the identi-
betranslatedintothe”%highlyskilledpupils”(cf.Figure
fied factors and relationships included in the sub-models
3).Particularly,the”%highlyskilledpupils”iscalculated
(cf. Figure 3). Then, the sub-models and their interac-
bymultiplyingthepercentageofhighlyskilledpupilsbe-
tions were implemented as software. Finally, simulation
forethepandemicbythe“cumulatedlearning”duringthe
experimentswereruntoexplorepolicyimplications. The
pandemic, divided by the cumulated learning that pupils
experimentalresultsareshowninFigure5.
wouldhaveobtainedintheabsenceofthepandemic(as-
sumingnochangesinthehistoricaltrends). Inthecaseof The results in Figure 5 (left) show that school closure
theinteractionfromthelong-termsub-modeltotheshort- policies effectively reduce the attack rate (i.e., the num-
termsub-model,noadditionaloperationisrequiredasthe ber of infections that a person was on average subject to
valueof”%highincomefamilies,”isdirectlytransferred throughout the pandemic) in the short term only in the
fromtheSDMtotheABM(cf. Figure3). unlikely case where the closure takes place immediately
Finally, we established the coupling templates. The
afterReffincreasesabove1(policy”Reff>1”).Evenwait-
short-termsub-modelhasatimescaleintervalofdaysto ingfor10percentofthepopulationtobeinfectedbefore
years, whereas the long-term sub-model presents a time
closingschoolsmakestheclosurespracticallyineffective
scale interval of years to decades. Given that the time
(policy”Reff>1&I>10%”).Theinefficacyofschoolclo-
scaleintervalsofthetwosubmodelsarecontiguous,these suresisparticularlysignificantgiventhattheperfectmix-
models run in series. Specifically, the ABM is run with ingassumptioninthemodeloverstatestheopportunityfor
atimestepofonedayfortwoyears(e.g.,corresponding contactsatschool(cf. Section”Step3:ParadigmDecom-
tothedurationofthepandemic). Oncecompleted,there- position”). Assuming calibration happens at the contact
sultingcumulatedlearningcanbeprocessedtoobtainthe level, if school closures are ineffective in such a system,
initialvalueforthepercentageofhighlyskilledpupilsin they are likely to be even less effective in a system that,
theSDMmodel. Next,theSDMmodelisrunforseveral morerealistically,presentsfewerschoolcontactopportu-
decades. The simulation can be stopped here. Or, if an- nities.
otherhypotheticalpandemicisconsideredasafuturesce- The long-term negative effects on the skill level of
nario, the final value of ”% high-income families” from pupils (cf. Figure 5 middle) and their opportunities for
the SDM can be passed onto the ABM to set the initial high income (cf. Figure 5 right) are consistently non-
(and constant) value for ”% high-income families.” The negligible for all school closure policies (”Reff>1” and
topology of interactions, operations, and coupling of the ”Reff>1 & I>10%”) compared to the case in which no
modelsareillustratedthroughtheMML,resultinginthe policyisintroduced(“None”). Acomparisonoftheinef-
MMSshowninFigure4. ficacyofschoolclosuresinreducingtheattackrateinthe
Itmustbestressedthatanotherhypotheticalpandemic short term with their long-term implications on acquired
isnotconsideredasafuturescenarioforthesakeofthisil- skills and incomes suggests that closure policies are not
lustrativestudy. However,itwouldbepossibletoaccount a very effective solution to implement in the context of
forsuchascenario. Further,theMultiscaleModelingand thisillustrativeexample. Assuch,otherpossiblepolicies
Simulation Framework (MMSF) introduced by [32] and couldbeconsideredasanalternativetoandorincombi-
presentedintheAppendixfacilitatesthecouplingofmod- nationwithschoolclosures.
11Figure4: Multi-ModellingStructure(MMS):theMMS(left)capturedthroughtheMultiscaleModelingLanguageorMML(right). TheMMS
showsthewaytheidentifiedshort-andlong-termsub-models(cf.Figure3)exchangeinformationandhowsuchinformationisprocessedthrough
operations(markedbymappers).FortheMML,wereferthereadertoFigureA.8intheAppendix.
Discussion&Conclusions experts. This approach fosters the systematic and trans-
parent co-creation of MMSs, enhancing policy formula-
WeproposedaprocedurefordevelopingMulti-Model tionacrossdiversedomainsandscales.
Structures (MMSs) for policy support in multiscale and The outlined procedure clarifies the initial step in
domaincontexts. Thisprocedurewasdesignedbasedon multi-model development, pinpointing the requisite sub-
clearly defined expert knowledge requirements derived modelsandtheirinterplaystoformanMMS.Thesubse-
fromtheliteratureinmultiscaleandmulti-paradigmmod- quentphaseinvolvestheactualconstructionofthesesub-
eling.Weadoptanintegralmodelingapproach,wherethe models,whereexistingmethodologies,suchasthosepro-
designofanMMSstartsattheconceptuallevel[37]. We posed by Ford and Sterman [52], Mooy et al. [53], and
illustrate this procedure through the case of COVID-19 Crielaard et al. [54] can be effectively integrated. Thus,
school closures in the Netherlands to show how the pro- thisprocessnotonlyaidsincraftingmulti-modelsbutalso
cedure enables the design of MMSs systematically and leveragesestablishedmethodologiesdesignedforindivid-
transparently, clearlyindicatingwhatdomainknowledge ualmodels.
isrequiredateachstepandhowtheresultsoftheprevious Furthermore, this procedure yields Casual Loop Di-
stepsinformthefollowingstepsoftheprocedure. agrams (CLDs) within each sub-model as a beneficial
Implementing the designed MMS enabled exploring by-product. These CLDs, encompassing various fac-
the implications of school closure policies across mul- tors and relationships, can guide the development of the
tiple time scales (the short and long term) and domains sub-models, aligning with the methodology proposed by
(healthcare and education). This result suggests that the [54]).
proposedprocedurecanresultinMMSsthatsupportpol- Inspecificscenarios,existingsub-models,ortheircom-
icyformulationinmultiscaleandmultidomaincontexts. ponents, might be sourced from external parties or ex-
This procedure has significant implications for devel- pertsinvolvedintheMMSdevelopmentprocess(see,e.g.,
opingtransparentmulti-modelssupportingpolicy-making [44]). TheMMSandtheembeddedCLDswithinthesub-
across various scales and domains. It elucidates the models provide a mechanism to evaluate the feasibility
domain knowledge essential for designing Multi-Model of repurposing these existing models. They also facili-
Structures (MMSs), establishing a foundational frame- tatediscussionsaroundnecessarymodificationsformodel
work for creating participatory methods or ’scripts.’ integration,includingconsiderationsofmodelontologies
These scripts (cf. [77]) facilitate the collaborative elic- [37]).
itation of domain-specific knowledge requirements with Future work needs to focus on the uncertainties in-
12Figure5:Short-(left)andLong-term(middleandright)implicationsofschoolclosurepoliciesintheNetherlands.Threepoliciesareconsidered.
”None”meansthattheschoolremainsopenatalltimes.”Reff>1”meansthatschoolsareclosedwhentheeffectivereproductionnumberisabove
one(assumingperfectinformationandnodelays).”Reff>1&I>10%”issimilartotheabove,withtheadditionalconditionthatatleast10percent
ofthepopulationbecomesinfectedbeforeclosingschools.Intheshortterm,policyeffectivenessismeasuredintermsoftheattackrate,expressed
astheaveragenumberoftimesapersonwasinfectedduringthepandemic. Inthelongterm, policyimplicationsareindicatedbythe“%of
highlyskilledpupils”(individualsyoungerthan20yearsoldthathaveahigherchanceoffindinghighlypaidjobs)andbythe“%HighIncome”
(percentageofthepopulationolderthan20andyoungerthan50thathaveahighincome).Forthisillustrativeexample,itisassumedthatnoother
exogenousfactors(e.g.,populationoravailabilityofhighlyskilledjobs)changeovertimethroughoutthesimulation.
troduced through the functional decomposition of a pol- acquired through the MMS development process. When
icy problem in interacting sub-models, e.g., related to thisinformationisavailable,CLDselucidaterelationships
howuncertaintiespropagateamongsub-modelswhenex- and feedback loops among factors within the same gov-
changinginformation[37].Aseriesofscenariosconcern- ernance scales (termed single-level causation) and those
inghowinformationisprocessedwhenexchangedamong extending across governance scales (termed multi-level
sub-models (e.g., via different mathematical expressions causation). This insight proves invaluable for inform-
or if-then-else statements) can help identify the domain ing the development of ABMs, given that this model-
knowledge required to capture such uncertainty. Scenar- ingparadigmisparticularlyadeptatcapturingmulti-level
ios can also include the occurrence of exogenous or en- causationwhilealsoaccommodatinginstancesofsingle-
dogenous events that trigger the need for particular sub- level causation [81, 82, 83]. However, while method-
models(e.g., whenapandemicoccurs, anepidemiologi- ologies have been proposed to develop ABMs based on
calmodelisrequired)[78,31][78]. other causal mapping techniques such as (fuzzy) cogni-
Additionally, when the selected paradigm for a sub- tivemaps[84,85,60]clearlylaidoutmethodologiesare
modelisSystemDynamicsModeling(SDM),theportion missing for developing ABMs based on CLDs. Conse-
oftheCLDcorrespondingtothesub-modelcanbequan- quently,additionalresearchisnecessarytoadaptanden-
tified using existing methodologies such as [52, 53, 54]. hancecurrentmethodologiesforABMdevelopment, ex-
For example, Crielaard et al. [54] show how a CLD en- emplifiedby[86,87,88],tofacilitatetheconstructionof
richedwithadditionaldomainknowledge(e.g.,functional ABMsrootedinCLDs. Forexample,Nespecaetal. [88]
relationshipsdescribingcausallinksmathematically)can introduceamethodologytodevelopABMsthatrelieson
be systematically translated into an SDM. CLDs can a conceptual framework tailored to a policy problem to
alsoprovideusefulinsightstoguidesub-modeldevelop- guide the data analysis and model development process.
ment when the chosen paradigm is Agent-Based Model- Future research should focus on informing the develop-
ing(ABM)[79,80]. ThisisparticularlytruewhenCLDs mentofsuchaconceptualframeworkbasedontheCLDs
containfactors,relationships,andfeedbackloopsandin- corresponding to the sub-models to which an ABM was
clude information concerning governance scale intervals assigned. Suchadevelopmentwouldenablemodelersto
13fullycapitalizeontheresultsofanMMSdesigntoinform Appendix A. Design choices and requirements for
thesub-models’developmentbothinthecaseofSDMand Multi-ModelingStructures
ABMmodelingparadigms.
Inthisappendix,wediscussliteraturefromthefieldsof
With time, even for novel policy problems, several
models studying policy implications in different scales, multiscalemodelingandmultiparadigm(orhybrid)mod-
perspectives, and possibly relying on different modeling eling.Foreachfield,wederivealistofkeydesignchoices
tobemadebymodelerswhendevelopingMulti-Modeling
paradigmsarelikelytobedevelopedinparallelbymany
Structures(MMSs). Wetheninferthedomainknowledge
actors(aswasthecaseduringtheCOVID-19pandemic).
from experts required to inform the modeler in making
Ignoring this richness in perspectives misses the oppor-
suchkeydesignchoices(i.e.,domainknowledgerequire-
tunity to ‘tap’ into such an evolving landscape of mod-
ments).
els,theirdevelopers,andusers(whichtosomeextentalso
Domainknowledgeisdefinedastheexpertiseandun-
representtheevolvinglandscapeofknowledgeregarding
derstanding that particular actors have in a given field
thenovelpolicyproblem)[89,23]. Atthisstage,aninte-
suchasmedicineorpsychologywhichmaybenecessary
gratedmodelingapproachfocusingoncouplingandfos-
to develop computational models that draw from such
tering the co-evolution of existing models developed by
fieldsofexpertise. Suchknowledgeisdistinguishedfrom
external modeling teams becomes relevant [30, 40]. As
computationalmodelingknowledgewhichisthemethod-
analternative,theintegralmodelingapproachoutlinedin
ological expertise required to make key design choices
this study could be adapted to address this challenge by
bringing together different teams of modelers and stake- informed by the expert’s domain knowledge to develop
computational models that are fit for a specific purpose
holderstoreverse-engineeraconceptualunderstandingof
[90].
existing computational models, find relationships among
them,studytheircompatibility,andoutlinethestepsnec-
Appendix A.1. Multi-scalemodeling
essary to adjust the existing models to enable their cou-
pling. To this end, further research is required to adapt Complex multi-domain dynamics can span a wide
the procedure proposed in this study to enable modelers range of temporal, spatial, or governance scales [21, 91,
andexpertstoinferconceptualmodelsfromtheircompu- 7]. Individualmodelstryingtocapturesuchawiderange
tationalcounterpartsandassesswhetherdifferentcompu- of scales can require considerable computational costs,
tationalmodelscanbecoupledandhow. Itmustbenoted which can make their use unfeasible [92]. When multi-
that such an approach is integral and not integrated. In scale modeling is employed, the phenomenon (or com-
fact,despiteutilizingmodelsinitiallydevelopedbyexter- plexdynamic)ofinterestisfunctionallydecomposedinto
nalsources,theintegrationprocesstakesplaceatthecon- (a) sub-phenomena representing only the essential pro-
ceptuallevelratherthanatthecomputationallevel,align- cesses occurring at different sub-scales (e.g. spatial or
ingwiththeprinciplesofintegralmodeling. temporal) and (b) the key interactions among the sub-
phenomena[93,94]. Forexample,[29]decomposeviro-
logicalandepidemiologicalprocessesatdifferentspatial
DeclarationofCompetingInterest scales (the host and the population) and temporal scales
(fast and slow processes) to provide policy support re-
The authors declare that they do not have any recog- garding pharmaceutical interventions. Relying on such
nized conflicting financial interests or personal connec- functionaldivisionsentailsapproximationsthatarelikely
tions that might seem to have affected the research pre- toreduceaccuracy,butatthesametime,makethesimu-
sentedinthisarticle. lationoftheconsideredmulti-scalephenomenonfeasible
[32].
Dataavailability Appendix A.1.1. Designchoicesformultiscalemodeling
A few methodological studies propose domain-
Datawillbeprovideduponrequest. independent conceptual frameworks for multiscale mod-
14eling[93,94,25,32].Inthisstudy,werefertooneofsuch space or governance levels, information aggregation or
frameworks, namelytheMultiscaleModelingandSimu- dis-aggregationoperationsarerequired. Thetopologyof
lationFramework(MMSF)introducedby[71,32,95]and interactionsamongsub-modelsrepresentsthestructureof
showninFigureA.6. informationflowsamongsub-modelscapturingforexam-
AccordingtotheMMSF,therearefourkeystepsinthe plewhethertheinformationisexchangedinaone-to-one,
developmentofamultiscalemodel. First,ascalesepara- one-to-many,many-to-one,ormany-to-manymanner.
tion is carried out and captured through a Scale Separa- Third,thearchitecturecapturedthroughtheMMLcan
tionMap(SSM)(cf. FigureA.7). TheSSMillustratesthe be directly implemented in the Multiscale Coupling Li-
functionaldecompositionofamulti-scalephenomenonin brary and Environment (MUSCLE). MUSCLE enables
sub-phenomenaatsmaller-scaleintervalsandtheircross- combining different sub-models (possibly written with
scaleinteractions. Byscaleinterval,wemeanasetoftwo different programming languages) and running simula-
scalesorvaluesrepresentingrespectivelythesmallestand tionswiththemasiftheywereonesinglemodel. Fourth,
thelargestscalesthatarerelevantfortheconsideredphe- oncethearchitectureisimplementedinMUSCLE,simu-
nomenon[71].Thesescalesareassignedwithinaspecific lationscanbeexecutedbothonasinglemachineandon
dimensionsuchastime, space, orgovernancelevel[32]. clustersorsupercomputers[32].
For example, the scale interval of a sub-phenomenon in
the temporal dimension is constituted of the time step Appendix A.1.2. Domain knowledge requirements for
with which the phenomenon is studied (smallest scale) multiscalemodeling
andoftheconsidereddurationofthephenomenon(largest Inthefollowing,wediscussthedomainknowledgere-
scale). quiredtoinformthekeydesignchoicesintroducedinthe
Second, the architecture of a multiscale model is previoussection.
designed through the Multiscale Modeling Language First, to design the SSM it is necessary to (a) func-
(MML) [76]. The architecture includes the sub-models tionally decompose the multiscale phenomenon in sub-
and their interactions or coupling (an architecture corre- phenomena each to be captured by a sub-model and
sponds to a Multi-Modeling Structure or MMS as dis- (b) identify the cross-scale interactions among such sub-
cussed in the introduction). The sub-models correspond models. In terms of domain knowledge, this requires a
tothesub-phenomenaobtainedthroughscaleseparation. cleardefinitionofthemultiscalephenomenontobemod-
Theinteractionsamongsub-modelsspecifywhenthesub- eled. Thistopiccanbesketchedbyresearchersandmod-
models exchange information and how such information elers, but it is ultimately those who have access to do-
is exchanged and processed during the exchange among mainknowledge(i.e.,theexperts)thatshouldbeinvolved
sub-models. With respect to when information is ex- in clearly defining the system and phenomenon of inter-
changed, one sub-model may provide another with the est. Next,itisnecessarytoidentifythemultimodelspace,
initial conditions required to begin the simulation, or i.e., the key dimensions such as time, space, and gover-
withboundaryconditionsthatthesecondmodelrequires nance levels within which the scale intervals of the phe-
throughoutitssimulation. Theseinteractionscanbecap- nomenon and sub-phenomena are defined [32]. In order
tured through the MML and take the form of different tocarryoutscaleseparation,theconsideredphenomenon
”coupling templates” depending on when in their execu- mustbefunctionallydecomposedinthemostcrucialsub-
tionthemodelsshareandreceiveinformation[32]. Fur- phenomenathataresufficientlyindependentfromonean-
ther, the MML enables to capture how information is othersothatscaleseparationcanbecarriedout.Thissep-
exchanged both in terms of (a) the topology of interac- arationcanbeobtainedbasedondomainknowledgeabout
tionsamongthesub-models(capturinginformationflows thekeyphenomenaandtheirassociatedscale.Finally,the
among the sub-models) and (b) the scale bridging op- scale intervals for each of the sub-phenomena must be
erations way information is processed when transferred definedinthemulti-modelspace. Insum, themultiscale
among different models at different scales (here simply phenomenon, multi-model space, functional decomposi-
referred as operations) [32]. When the information is tion in sub-phenomena, and scale intervals are domain
exchanged among models that have different scales in knowledgerequirementstocarryouttheSSM.
15FigureA.6:OverviewoftheMultiscaleModelingandSimulationFramework(MMSF)[95,p.721].First,developaScaleSeparationMap(SSM)
(e.g.,withamodelµatthemacrolevelandmodelµatthemicrolevel). Second,translatethescaleseparationintoamodelingarchitecture(or
Multi-ModelingStructure-MMS)byusingtheMultiscaleModelingLanguage(MML)thatenablestopreciselydefinethewayinformationis
exchangedamongsub-modelse.g. throughthemappers f1 and f2. Third, implementthearchitecturecapturedthroughtheMMLassoftware
throughtheMultiscaleCouplingLibraryandEnvironment(MUSCLE).Fourth,executeitonasinglemachine,aclusterofmachines,ormultiple
clustersthroughtheMUSCLETransportOverlay(MTO).
FigureA.7:ScaleSeparationMap:Functionaldecompositionofamultiscalephenomenon(orprocess)insinglescalephenomena(representedby
therectanglesAandB)andtheircross-scaleinteractions(representedbythebi-directionalarrow).From[71,p.470].
Second, it is key to design the architecture of the provide the means to establish whether the information
multiscalemodel, whichentailscharacterizingwhenand exchangedamongthesub-modelsneedstobeaggregated
how information is exchanged among sub-models given or disaggregated through scale bridging operations and
their interactions. The temporal scales intervals enable techniques. While the difference in scales among inter-
to fully capture when sub-models exchange information acting sub-models indicates the need for scale bridging
[32]. Given the temporal scales were already captured operations, such operations need to be discussed ad hoc
inthescaleseparationmap,noadditionaldomainknowl- and require domain knowledge. As such, scale bridging
edge is required to inform this design choice. Next, the operationsconstituteadomainknowledgerequirementto
spatial or governance scale intervals of the sub-models bediscussedwithexperts.Next,(a)thetopologyofthein-
16FigureA.8:MultiscaleModellingLanguageorMML(left)anditsapplicationtocapturethearchitectureofamultiscalemodelbasedonthescale
separationfromFigureA.7(right). TheMML(left)capturesthetopologyofinteractionsamongsub-models, thecouplingtemplates, andthe
operations.Thetopologyofinteractionsrepresentingtheinformationflowamongsub-modelsiscapturedthroughthearrowsandtheirorientation.
Thecouplingtemplatesarerepresentedbythesymbolsadoptedforthebeginningandtipofthearrows. Specifically,Ofstandsforfinaloutput,
theoutputofthemodelattheendofitssimulation. OiisanOutputexchangedduringthesimulationatthetimestepi. Finitshowsthattheinput
receivedbyasub-modeldefinestheinitialconditionsofthesub-model.SandBrepresentaninputthesub-modelcanreceiveduringitssimulation
concerningaBoundaryorStatecondition. TheoperationsarerepresentedbytheMappers. Mappersreceiveinformationfromsub-model(s),
combineandprocesssuchinformation,andtransfertheresulttoothersub-model(s). Theexampleofanarchitecture(inthisarticlethisistermed
Multi-ModelingStructureorMMS)capturedthroughtheMML(right)showshowthesub-phenomenaAandBobtainedthroughscaleseparation
(cf.FigureA.7)representthesub-modelsthatcanbecoupledinanarchitecture.Here,ModelAbeginsitsfirstsimulationstep,producestheoutput
Oi,andthentransfersittothemapperMap1. Then,Map1carriesoutascalebridgingoperationonOiandtransferstheresultinginformationto
twoinstancesofModelB.ThisincominginformationisusedbythetwoinstancesofModelBtosettheirinitialconditions(Finit).Theseinstances
thenrununtiltheirsimulationiscompletedandtransfertheirfinaloutputOftothemapperMap2. Map2combinesandprocessestheinformation
receivedthroughanotherscalebridgingoperationandtransferstheresultstoModelA.ModelAusestheinformationreceivedtosetitsstate
conditionSbeforeproceedingwithanothersimulationstep.ThiscyclicsimulationrepeatsuntilthesimulationofmodelAiscompleted.Basedon
[76,71].
teractionsamongsub-modelsand(b)theoperationsthat common denominator for this research field is the inte-
may be required to combine information from different grateduseofmultiplemodelingformalismsorparadigms
models before re-directing it to other models, constitute [18,97,19,36,56,98,99]. Amodelingformalismisan
twoadditionaldomainknowledgerequirementsthatcan- approachthatmodelerscanusetobuildmodelsofasys-
notbeaddressedsimplybasedonscale. tem [18, 97]. Examples of modeling formalisms include
Thelasttwosteps,namely,implementationandexecu- DiscreteEventSimulation(DES),SDM,andABM.Mod-
tionrelyonthecompetenceandabilityofmodelerstoim- eling formalisms typically present different sets of hy-
plementthemultiscalemodelingarchitectureassoftware pothesesconcerningthe”underlyingsourcesofdynamics
(e.g., in MUSCLE) and to execute simulations on a sin- inasystem”[72].Forexample,inthecaseofSDMs,pos-
gleoroncluster(s)ofmachines. However, noadditional itive and negative feedback loops among aggregate vari-
domainknowledgeisrequiredfromexpertsatthisstep. ables and accumulations of flows are considered as the
TableA.2summarizesthedomainknowledgerequire- sourcesofdynamicsinasystem[61,34]. Conversely,in
ments found for each of the four steps of the MMSF ABMstheinteractionsamongindividualagentsandtheir
framework. environment (micro-macro-micro) are considered as the
sourcesofdynamics[100,35].
Appendix A.2. Multi-paradigmmodeling
Similarlytomultiscalemodeling,multi-paradigmmod- Appendix A.2.1. Design choices for multi-paradigm
eling entails the combined use of multiple models to modeling
capture a particular phenomenon or achieve a given ob- Many frameworks have been introduced that propose
jective of interest. While there is no consensus on the approaches for the development of multi-paradigm and
definition of Multi-Paradigm Modeling (MPM) [96], a hybrid models including [101, 55, 102, 56, 103]. Some
17TableA.2:Keydesignchoicesinmultiscalemodeling,andthedomainknowledgerequirementsforeachofthechoices.
Keydesignchoices Domainknowledgerequirements
ScaleSeparation Multiscale phenomenon of interest, multi-model space (i.e. the relevant
dimensions considered for scale separation such as time, space, and gov-
ernancelevel),functionaldecompositioninsub-phenomena,scaleintervals
ofthesub-phenomenainthemulti-modelspace.
Architecture Topology of the interactions or information exchange among sub-models
(1:1,1:M,N:M),Scalebridgingoperationsrequiredtomanageandcombine
informationwhenexchangedamongsub-modelsatdifferentscales.
Implementation N.A.
Execution N.A.
oftheseframeworkssuchas[55]and[56]introduceand SDM[73]. Assuch,inthecaseofurgentsituationssuch
characterizekeydesignchoicesinmultiparadigmmodel- as crises, developing ABMs could be less feasible. An-
ing: problemidentificationanddecomposition,choiceof other factor is the availability of already existing ABMs
modelingparadigms,andidentificationoftheinteractions (e.g., through online libraries) that were previously ver-
amongmodels. ified and validated by the scientific community and that
canbeadaptedandcombinedinamodularmanner. Such
First, problem identification and decomposition entail
availabilitycanplayakeyroleinmakingtheuseofABMs
thedefinitionofthepolicyproblemconsidered,theasso-
morefeasiblewithinshortertimeframes[41].
ciated modeling objective, and the decomposition of the
modelingobjectiveinsub-objectiveseachtobecaptured Next, propertiesofthesystemthatarerelevantforthe
by a single model. At this stage, also project constraints choice of a modeling formalism include the heterogene-
are discussed such as time, budget, and data availability ity in attributes of individual actors/agents [75, 35, 73],
[56]. thecomplexityoftheirindividualbehavior(e.g. learning
and adaptation) [35], their patterns or topology of inter-
Second,thechoiceofamodelingformalismiscarried
actions (e.g. non-perfect mixing or clustering) [35, 73],
out for each of the submodels. Several MPM method-
thecontinuousordiscretebehaviorofthesystem[74,97,
ological studies provide criteria for the choice of an ad-
104,105],andthelevelofdetailanduncertaintyatwhich
equatemodelingformalism. [55]and[72]stressthatthe
dataandknowledgeareavailable[18,52]. TableA.3lists
developmentofvaluableMPMsdependsonthealignment
some of the criteria that are relevant for the choice of a
of the modeling formalism with the modeling subobjec-
modelingparadigmorformalismandexamplesinwhich
tive(orproblem)andthecontext(orsystem)considered.
each criterion is relevant in isolation or in combination
Thepropertiesofasub-objectivethatarerelevantforthe
with the other criteria. This table is not meant to be a
choiceofamodelingformalismcanbee.g., whetherthe
complete overview of all criteria required to inform the
focus is placed on tracking individual or aggregate be-
choiceofamodelingparadigm. Rather, weaimtoshow
havior [61, 33], the strategic or operational nature of the
someexamplesofcriteriarelatedtotheproblemandsys-
considered problem, and the modeling purpose such as
temofinterestthatarerelevantwhenchoosingamodeling
predictingorexplainingaparticularsystem’sbehaviorof
paradigm.
interest [72, 90]. Another criterion related to the prob-
lem or modeling objective is feasibility given the avail- Third, the identification of the interactions among the
able time. ABMs tend to entail much higher computa- sub-objectives (and the respective sub-models) is carried
tional costs and require longer development times given out. Tomapandcharacterizesuchinteractions,[55]sug-
their ability to capture more details compared with e.g., gest (a) identifying the interaction points (ie. possible
18TableA.3:Summaryofthecriteriaforthechoiceofamodelingparadigm,examplesinwhichsuchcriteriawererelevant,andsuggestionsonhow
eachofthecriteriacaninformthechoiceofanABMorSDMmodelingparadigm.
Criteria for formal- Examples Formalism: SDM Formalism: ABM Source
ismselection
Heterogeneity in at- Superspreading events Yes,butlimitedtoa Yes [75,35,73]
tributes [106] few Heterogeneous
sub-groups
Mixing (patterns in Contact networks in Yes, if clusters of Yes [35,73]
space or topology of epidemiology[107] interactions can
interactions) be subdivided into
groups that are
stableovertime
Complexity of behav- Fear acquisition and Yes, if heterogene- Yes [35,109]
ior (Adaptation and extinction in combined ity and mixing do
Learning) virus and fear dynam- not play a major
ics[108] role
Discrete system’s be- Extinction of biologi- Yes, if knowledge Yes [104, 105,
havior calspecies[74] on when to ”im- 97]
pose”it
Aggregation level, Knowledgeisavailable Yes, if available at Yes, if available at [72,35,73]
availability, and uncer- at individual or aggre- macrolevel micro(andpossibly
tainty of Knowledge gatelevel macro)level
andData
pointsforinformationexchangeamongthesub-models), relationships can be the direct replacement of values of
(b)findingrelationshipsamongtheinteractionpoints(i.e. variablesthatarepresentinbothoftheinteractingmodels
informationflowsamongthesub-models),and(c)identi- whenthevariableshavethesamemeaningandthesame
fyingthemodeofinteractions(i.e.thewayinformationis level of aggregation. In other cases, value replacement
processedwhenthesub-modelschangeinformation).The requires the dis-aggregation or aggregation of variables
interaction points are identified by considering variables when the variables have the same meaning but different
thatareplacedintwodifferentsub-modelsbutpresentthe levelsofaggregation(thiscanbeaddressedthroughscale
samemeaning(thoughmayhavedifferentlevelsofaggre- bridgingtechniquesfrommultiscalemodeling). Another
gation)andthemodels’inputandoutputs[55]. [56]adds form of value replacement relationship is that of causal
thatinputsandoutputsofthemodelcanbefurtherclassi- relationshipsexpressedthroughpredefinedmathematical
fieddependingonwhetherthemodelsexchangeinforma- expressionslinkingonevariabletotheother.Impactstate-
tionbefore,during,orafteramodelisrun. Thisinforma- mentsarerelatedtorelationshipsdescribingtheinfluence
tionisthesameasthatcapturedbythecouplingtemplates that a model has on another model which cannot be ex-
in the MML introduced by [76, 32] and presented in the pressedasavalueassignment. Forexample,whenapar-
section”Designchoicesformultiscalemodeling”. ticularthresholdhasbeenreachedsayinanSDMmodel,
thennewagentsneedtobeintroducedinanABMmodel.
Next, the relationships among interaction points are
Thesestatementsalsodependonthemodelingparadigms
studied. Suchrelationshipscanbeofthetype”valueas-
adoptedforeachofthesub-modelsthatpresentaninter-
signment”or”impactstatement”[56]. Valueassignment
19action[56]. Appendix A.3. Multi-modeling: Multiscale and Multi-
Finally, the modes of interactions capturing the com- paradigmmodeling
putational nature of the interactions among sub-models Both MSM and MPM belong to the wider field of
are identified. The modes of interactions can be cyclic multi-modeling, which entails the combined use of dif-
(themodelsarerunoneaftertheother)orinparallel(the ferentmodelstocaptureaphenomenonofinterest. While
modelsexchangeinformationduringruntime)[55]. De- MSM focuses on approximating a phenomenon of inter-
signingthemodesofinteractionsrequiresinformationre- est through the use of multiple submodels at different
gardingthelevelofaggregationordetailrequiredforthe scales [32], MPM is centered on the adoption of mul-
sub-models[72,33]. tiple modeling formalisms that are adequate for differ-
ent sub-components of the problem and system consid-
Appendix A.2.2. Domain knowledge requirements for ered [55]. The two approaches are not mutually exclu-
multi-paradigmmodeling siveasamulti-modelcanincludesub-modelsatdifferent
Thedomainknowledgerequiredtoinformeachofthe scales,capturedthroughmultiplemodelingparadigms.In
designchoicesforMPMisdiscussedinthefollowing. the following, the design choices and the associated do-
First,withrespecttoproblemidentificationanddecom- mainknowledgerequirementsformulti-modelingaredis-
position, it is key to define an objective for the model- cussed based on the design choices and domain knowl-
ing exercise. Domain knowledge is required to identify edge requirements identified respectively for MPM and
thepolicyproblemtobeaddressedincludingtheconsid- MSM(cf. TablesA.2andA.4).
ered case and the objective of the model e.g. to support
policy formulation or evaluation [8]. Additionally, func- Appendix A.3.1. DesignchoicesforMulti-modeling
tionallydecomposingthemodelingobjectivereliesondo- First, it is key to establish the purpose of the model-
main knowledge to identify what are the key and poten- ingendeavor. InthecaseofMSM,thefocusisplacedon
tiallyinterrelatedsub-objectivestobeconsidered. capturingandunderstandingthephenomenontobestud-
Second, choosing a modeling paradigm also requires ied [32]. Conversely, MPM stresses more generally the
domainknowledge. First,informationregardingthetype needtoidentifytheproblemandtheassociatedobjective
of problem to be addressed, and project constraints (e.g. ofthemodelingexercise[55,56]. Giventhatthisarticle
time availability) are key in informing the choice of a aims at developing multi-models for policy support, the
modeling paradigm. Second, properties of the consid- focusishereplacedonidentifyingthepolicyproblemto
ered system in which the problem needs to be addressed becapturedandtheassociatedmodelingobjectivee.g.,to
alsoplayakeyroleinthechoiceofamodelingparadigm. explore future policy implications during policy formu-
Suchpropertiesincludeheterogeneityinthefactorstobe lation, or to explain the impact of policies in the past to
considered (in attributes among the different actors con- informpolicyevaluation[8].
sidered in the model), mixing as in the patterns of in- Second,bothinMSMandMPMitisessentialtostudy
teractions among actors, and with their environment, the if and how to functionally decompose the objective or
complexityofbehaviorconsidered(e.g.,adaptationbased phenomenon of interest in sub-models. The decomposi-
on context), discreteness in system’s state and behavior, tioninvolvesboththedivisioninmodelsatdifferentscales
availability of and uncertainty in data and knowledge at and/orrelyingondifferentmodelingparadigms. Thetwo
different levels of abstraction (including the availability choicesarenotindependentastheselectionofamodeling
ofpreviouslydevelopedandvalidatedmodels). formalismisofteninfluencedbytherequiredlevelofres-
Third, to map the interactions among the models, the olutionorabstraction[18,19,36,56],whichisassociated
interaction points, relationships among such interaction withtheconsideredscale[71,32]. Assuch,atthisstage,
points,andthelevelsofaggregationrequiredforthesub- jointconsiderationsaboutthefunctionaldecompositionin
modelsneedtobeidentifiedbasedondomainknowledge. sub-models, the assigned modeling paradigm, and scale
Table A.4 summarizes the design choices related to separationarerequired.
MPM, and the associated domain knowledge required to Third, to complete the design of the architecture of a
informsuchchoices. multi-modelormultimodelingstructure(MMS)itisnec-
20TableA.4:Keychoicesinmulti-paradigmmodeling,andthedomainknowledgerequirementsforeachofthechoices.
Keydesignchoices Domainknowledgerequirements
ProblemIdentificationandDecom- Policy problem, modeling objective, functional decomposition in key and
position potentiallyinteractingsub-objectives.
Modelingparadigmselection Properties of the problem considered: nature of the problem, project con-
straints,modellingobjective. Propertiesofthesystem: Heterogeneity,mix-
ing,discreteness,complexityofbehavior,availabilityofdataandknowledge.
Identificationofinteractions interactionpoints,relationshipsamonginteractionpoints(valueassignment
and impact statements), mode of interaction among the sub-models (cyclic
orinparallel)
essarytoidentifytheinteractionsamongthesub-models. a multi-model space, the decomposition in sub-models,
In the following, we refer to the concept of interactions andtheidentificationofthescaleintervalscorresponding
as described in MSM literature but also draw a compar- to each sub-model defined within the multi-model space
ison with MPM (cf. Tables A.2 and A.4). The inter- (Cf. TableA.2). Theselectionofandfurtherdecomposi-
actions among sub-models include (a) the coupling tem- tionindifferentmodelingparadigmsrequiresthecharac-
platesdescribingwhenthemodelsinteract,(b)thetopol- teristics of the considered policy problem (already avail-
ogyoofinteractionsdescribinginformationflowsamong ablefromthepreviousstep),andthelevelforaggregation
thesub-models(definedasrelationshipsinMPM),and(c) ordetailrequiredcorrespondingtothescaleintervalsde-
the operations carried out to process information when finedinthefunctionaldecompositioninscales(Cf. Table
it is transferred among different models (defined as re- A.4andA.2). Additionally,thefunctionaldecomposition
lationships types in MPM). From what we learned from insub-modelsalsorequiresdomainknowledgeassociated
bothMSMandMPMliterature,thedifferenttypesofop- withtheparticularsystemconsideredincludingitslevelof
erations include value transfer, scale bridging operations heterogeneity,mixing,discreteness,complexityofbehav-
(includingaggregation/disaggregation),mathematicalex- ior,andtheavailabilityofdataandknowledge(Cf. Table
pressions representing causal relationships, impact state- A.4).
ments (e.g. if, then, else statements), and combinations Third, thedefinitionofthesub-modelsinteractionsre-
of such different types of operations. The MML enables quires their scale intervals (in space or governance level
modelers to capture an MMS including the sub-models and time). This knowledge is already available from
and their interactions (cf. Figure A.3). When used also the scale decomposition. Next, the topology of interac-
for MPM, the MML should include extra annotations to tions among sub-models constitutes two additional do-
showthemodelingparadigmchosenforthesub-models. mainknowledgerequirements. Theoperationsneededto
process and combine information when it is transferred
Appendix A.3.2. Domainknowledgerequirements among sub-models are also a requirement. Such oper-
First,theidentificationofthepolicyandmodelingob- ations can be of different types with different require-
jectiverequiresdomainknowledgefromexpertsaboutthe ments. Inthecaseofvaluetransfer,thesameexactvalue
policy problem to be addressed. Next, the modeling ob- is exchanged from one model to the other. These types
jective can be discussed between modelers and experts of operations do not require additional domain knowl-
also considering feasibility given time, budget, and data edge. However, other operations such as scale bridging,
availabilityconstraints(Cf. TableA.4). Assuch,domain causalrelationships(computedthroughmathematicalex-
knowledgeconcerningprojectconstraintsandthemodel- pressions), or impact statements (e.g., if, then, else op-
ingobjectiveisalsorequiredatthisstage. erations)requirefurtherdomainknowledgefromexperts
Second, the scale separation requires the definition of and,assuch,constituteanadditionalrequirement(Cf.Ta-
21bleA.4andA.2). [9] E. Molina-Perez, Harnessing the power of
Table1inthesection”Results”summarizesthedesign decision-support tools to trigger climate action,
choices and the associated domain knowledge require- Nature Computational Science 3 (6) (2023)
ments for multi-modeling found in the literature as dis- 461–463.
cussedinthisappendix.
[10] P. Smits, G. Listorti, Using models for
policymaking-The questions you should ask
References
when presented with the use of simulation
models in policymaking, Publications Office
[1] R. J. Klement, Systems Thinking About SARS-
of the European Union, Luxembourg, 2023.
CoV-2, Frontiers in Public Health 8 (2020)
doi:doi:10.2760/545843.
585229. doi:10.3389/fpubh.2020.585229.
[2] A. Goenka, L. Liu, Smart lockdowns to con- [11] O. M. Araz, T. Lant, J. W. Fowler, M. Jehn, Sim-
trolcovid-19,NatureComputationalScience2(4) ulation modeling for pandemic decision making:
(2022)217–218. A case study with bi-criteria analysis on school
closures, Decision Support Systems 55 (2) (2013)
[3] C. Haelermans, M. Jacobs, R. van der Velden,
564–575.
L. van Vugt, S. van Wetten, Inequality in the ef-
fects of primary school closures due to the covid- [12] B. Barracosa, J. Fel´ıcio, A. Carvalho, L. M. Mor-
19pandemic:Evidencefromthenetherlands,AEA eira,F.Mendes,S.C.Verde,T.Pinto-Varela,Deci-
PapersandProceedings112(2022)303–07. doi: sionsupporttooltodefinetheoptimalpooltesting
10.1257/pandp.20221107. strategyforsars-cov-2, DecisionSupportSystems
175(2023)114046.
[4] P.Engzell,A.Frey,M.D.Verhagen,Learningloss
due to school closures during the covid-19 pan- [13] Z. Ertem, O. M. Araz, M. Cruz-Aponte, A deci-
demic, Proceedings of the National Academy of sion analytic approach for social distancing poli-
Sciences118(17)(2021)e2022376118. ciesduringearlystagesofcovid-19pandemic,De-
cisionSupportSystems161(2022)113630.
[5] M. Janssen, H. Van der Voort, Agile and adaptive
governance in crisis response: Lessons from the
[14] J. Badham, P. Barbrook-Johnson, C. Caiado,
covid-19 pandemic, International journal of infor-
B. Castellani, Justified stories with agent-based
mationmanagement55(2020)102180.
modelling for local covid-19 planning, Journal of
Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 24 (1)
[6] B. A. Bettha¨user, A. M. Bach-Mortensen, P. En-
(2021)8.
gzell, A systematic review and meta-analysis of
theevidenceonlearningduringthecovid-19pan-
[15] N. Ferguson, D. Laydon, G. Nedjati Gilani,
demic,NatureHumanBehaviour7(3)(2023)375–
N. Imai, K. Ainslie, M. Baguelin, S. Bhatia,
385.
A. Boonyasiri, Z. Cucunuba Perez, G. Cuomo-
[7] F.Agostinelli,M.Doepke,G.Sorrenti,F.Zilibotti, Dannenburg, et al., Report 9: Impact of non-
When the great equalizer shuts down: Schools, pharmaceutical interventions (npis) to reduce
peers, and parents in pandemic times, Journal of covid19mortalityandhealthcaredemand(2020).
publiceconomics206(2022)104574.
[16] M.Bicher,M.Zuba,L.Rainer,F.Bachner,C.Rip-
[8] N. Gilbert, P. Ahrweiler, P. Barbrook-Johnson, pinger, H. Ostermann, N. Popper, S. Thurner,
K. P. Narasimhan, H. Wilkinson, Computational P. Klimek, Supporting covid-19 policy-making
modelling of public policy: Reflections on prac- with a predictive epidemiological multi-model
tice,JournalofArtificialSocietiesandSocialSim- warning system, Communications Medicine 2 (1)
ulation21(1)(2018). (2022)157.
22[17] M. M. Dekker, L. E. Coffeng, F. P. Pijpers, ing: Managing a system-of-systems modeling ap-
D.Panja, S.J.deVlas, Reducingsocietalimpacts proach,EnvironmentalModelling&Software135
ofsars-cov-2interventionsthroughsubnationalim- (2021)104885.
plementation,Elife12(2023)e80819.
[25] E. Weinan, B. Engquist, X. Li, W. Ren,
[18] B. P. Zeigler, T. I. O¨ren, Multifaceted, multi- E. Vanden-Eijnden, Heterogeneous Multiscale
paradigm modeling perspectives: Tools for the Methods: A Review, Communications in Compu-
90’s, in: Proceedings of the 18th conference on tationalPhysics2(3)(2007)367–450.
Wintersimulation,1986,pp.708–712.
[26] E. Weinan, Principles of multiscale modeling,
[19] H.Vangheluwe,J.DeLara,P.J.Mosterman,Anin- CambridgeUniversityPress,2011.
troductiontomulti-paradigmmodellingandsimu-
[27] N. Bellomo, R. Bingham, M. A. Chaplain,
lation,in:ProceedingsoftheAIS’2002conference
G. Dosi, G. Forni, D. A. Knopoff, J. Lowengrub,
(AI, Simulation and Planning in High Autonomy
R. Twarock, M. E. Virgillito, A multiscale model
Systems),Lisboa,Portugal,2002,pp.9–20.
of virus pandemic: Heterogeneous interactive en-
[20] J. Borgdorff, M. Ben Belgacem, C. Bona-Casas, titiesinagloballyconnectedworld,Mathematical
L. Fazendeiro, D. Groen, O. Hoenen, A. Miz- Models and Methods in Applied Sciences 30 (08)
eranschi, J. Suter, D. Coster, P. Coveney, et al., (2020)1591–1651.
Performanceofdistributedmultiscalesimulations,
[28] P.M.Sloot,A.G.Hoekstra,Multi-scalemodelling
PhilosophicalTransactionsoftheRoyalSocietyA:
in computational biomedicine, Briefings in bioin-
Mathematical, Physical and Engineering Sciences
formatics11(1)(2010)142–152.
372(2021)(2014)20130407.
[29] X.Wang,S.Wang,J.Wang,L.Rong,Amultiscale
[21] H. van Delden, P. Luja, G. Engelen, Integration
model of covid-19 dynamics, Bulletin of Mathe-
of multi-scale dynamic spatial models of socio-
maticalBiology84(9)(2022)99.
economic and physical processes for river basin
management, Environmental Modelling & Soft- [30] G. F. Laniak, G. Olchin, J. Goodall, A. Voinov,
ware 22 (2) (2007) 223–238. doi:10.1016/j. M.Hill,P.Glynn,G.Whelan,G.Geller,N.Quinn,
envsoft.2005.07.019. M. Blind, et al., Integrated environmental model-
ing: avisionandroadmapforthefuture,Environ-
[22] E. A. Fulton, F. Boschetti, M. Sporcic, T. Jones,
mentalmodelling&software39(2013)3–23.
L. R. Little, J. M. Dambacher, R. Gray, R. Scott,
R. Gorton, A multi-model approach to engaging [31] L. Yilmaz, A. Lim, S. Bowen, T. Oren, Require-
stakeholderandmodellersincomplexenvironmen- ments and design principles for multisimulation
tal problems, Environmental Science & Policy 48 with multiresolution, multistage multimodels, in:
(2015)44–56. 2007 Winter Simulation Conference, IEEE, 2007,
pp.823–832.
[23] L. Bollinger, C. Davis, R. Evins, E. Chappin,
I. Nikolic, Multi-model ecologies for shaping fu- [32] B.Chopard,J.Borgdorff,A.G.Hoekstra,Aframe-
ture energy systems: Design patterns and devel- work for multi-scale modelling, Philosophical
opment paths, Renewable and Sustainable Energy Transactions of the Royal Society A: Mathemati-
Reviews82(2018)3441–3451. cal,PhysicalandEngineeringSciences372(2021)
(2014)20130378.
[24] T. Iwanaga, H.-H. Wang, S. H. Hamilton,
V. Grimm, T. E. Koralewski, A. Salado, S. El- [33] R. A. Kelly, A. J. Jakeman, O. Barreteau, M. E.
sawah, S. Razavi, J. Yang, P. Glynn, et al., Socio- Borsuk, S. ElSawah, S. H. Hamilton, H. J. Hen-
technical scales in socio-environmental model- riksen, S. Kuikka, H. R. Maier, A. E. Rizzoli,
23et al., Selecting among five common modelling [41] F. Squazzoni, J. G. Polhill, B. Edmonds,
approaches for integrated environmental assess- P. Ahrweiler, P. Antosz, G. Scholz, E. Chappin,
ment and management, Environmental modelling M.Borit,H.Verhagen,F.Giardini,etal.,Computa-
&software47(2013)159–181. tionalmodelsthatmatterduringaglobalpandemic
outbreak: A call to action, JASSS-The Journal of
[34] H. J. Scholl, Agent-based and system dynamics
Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 23 (2)
modeling: acallforcrossstudyandjointresearch,
(2020)10.
in: Proceedingsofthe34thannualHawaiiinterna-
tionalconferenceonsystemsciences,IEEE,2001, [42] A. Voinov, K. Jenni, S. Gray, N. Kolagani,
pp.8–pp. P. D. Glynn, P. Bommel, C. Prell, M. Zellner,
M. Paolisso, R. Jordan, et al., Tools and methods
[35] E. Bonabeau, Agent-based modeling: Meth-
in participatory modeling: Selecting the right tool
ods and techniques for simulating hu-
for the job, Environmental Modelling & Software
man systems, Proceedings of the National
109(2018)232–255.
Academy of Sciences 99 (suppl 3) (2002)
7280–7287. arXiv:https://www.pnas.
[43] A.vanBruggen,I.Nikolic,J.Kwakkel,Modeling
org/doi/pdf/10.1073/pnas.082080899,
with stakeholders for transformative change, Sus-
doi:10.1073/pnas.082080899.
tainability11(3)(2019)825.
[36] A.Borshchev,A.Filippov,Fromsystemdynamics
[44] E.Cuppen,I.Nikolic,J.Kwakkel,J.Quist,Partic-
and discrete event to practical agent based mod-
ipatorymulti-modellingasthecreationofabound-
eling: reasons, techniques, tools, in: Proceedings
ary object ecology: the case of future energy in-
ofthe22ndinternationalconferenceofthesystem
frastructures in the rotterdam port industrial clus-
dynamicssociety,Vol.22,Oxford,England,2004,
ter,SustainabilityScience16(3)(2021)901–918.
pp.25–29.
[45] E. A. Rouwette, J. A. Vennix, T. v. Mullekom,
[37] A. Voinov, H. H. Shugart, ‘integronsters’, inte-
Group model building effectiveness: a review
gralandintegratedmodeling,EnvironmentalMod-
of assessment studies, System Dynamics Review:
elling&Software39(2013)149–158.
TheJournaloftheSystemDynamicsSociety18(1)
[38] A. Voinov, P. Perez, J. C. Castilla-Rho, D. C. (2002)5–45.
Kenny, Integrated ecological economic modeling:
whatisitgoodfor?,in: SustainableWellbeingFu- [46] A.Voinov,F.Bousquet,Modellingwithstakehold-
tures: AResearchandActionAgendaforEcolog- ers, Environmental modelling & software 25 (11)
ical Economics, Edward Elgar Publishing, 2020, (2010)1268–1281.
pp.316–341.
[47] F. Buffa, G. Marzano, M. F. Norese, Macrame: A
[39] D.H.Meadows,D.L.Meadows,J.Randers,W.W. modellingmethodologyinmultiactorcontexts,De-
Behrens, The limits to growth: A Report for the cisionSupportSystems17(4)(1996)331–343.
Club of Rome’s Project on the Predicament of
Mankind,PotomacAssociates,1975. [48] J.A.M.Vennix,GroupModelBuilding: Facilitat-
ing Team Learning Using System Dynamics, Wi-
[40] G.E.Tucker,E.W.Hutton,M.D.Piper,B.Camp- ley,1996.
forts, T. Gan, K. R. Barnhart, A. J. Kettner,
I. Overeem, S. D. Peckham, L. McCready, et al., [49] E.A.Rouwette, H.Korzilius, J.A.Vennix, E.Ja-
Csdms: acommunityplatformfornumericalmod- cobs,Modelingaspersuasion: theimpactofgroup
eling of earth surface processes, Geoscientific model building on attitudes and behavior, System
ModelDevelopment15(4)(2022)1413–1439. DynamicsReview27(1)(2011)1–21.
24[50] A. Voinov, N. Kolagani, M. K. McCall, P. D. [59] J.-P.Mu¨ller,Aframeworkforintegratedmodeling
Glynn,M.E.Kragt,F.O.Ostermann,S.A.Pierce, usingaknowledge-drivenapproach(2010).
P. Ramu, Modelling with stakeholders–next gen-
[60] P. Barbrook-Johnson, A. S. Penn, Systems Map-
eration, Environmental Modelling & Software 77
ping: How to build and use causal models of sys-
(2016)196–220.
tems,SpringerNature,2022.
[51] L. Freebairn, L. Rychetnik, J.-A. Atkinson,
P. Kelly, G. McDonnell, N. Roberts, C. Whittall, [61] J. Sterman, Business Dynamics. Systems thinking
S. Redman, Knowledge mobilisation for policy andmodelingforacomplexworld.,McGraw-Hill,
development: implementing systems approaches Inc.Boston,2000.
through participatory dynamic simulation mod-
[62] M.ElJaouhari, R.Edjoc, L.Waddell, P.Houston,
elling, Health research policy and systems 15 (1)
N.Atchessi,M.Striha,S.Bonti-Ankomah,Impact
(2017)1–12.
of school closures and re-openings on COVID-19
[52] D.N.Ford,J.D.Sterman,Expertknowledgeelic- transmission, Canada Communicable Disease Re-
itationtoimproveformalandmentalmodels,Sys- port = Releve Des Maladies Transmissibles Au
temDynamicsReview: TheJournaloftheSystem Canada47(12)(2021)515–523. doi:10.14745/
DynamicsSociety14(4)(1998)309–340. ccdr.v47i12a02.
[53] R. Mooy, E. Rouwette, G. de Valk, J. Vennix, [63] S. Walsh, A. Chowdhury, V. Braithwaite, S. Rus-
A. Maas, Quantification and evaluation issues in sell, J. M. Birch, J. L. Ward, C. Waddington,
groupmodelbuilding: anapplicationtohumanre- C. Brayne, C. Bonell, R. M. Viner, O. T. Myt-
sourcemanagementtransition(2001). ton, Doschoolclosuresandschoolreopeningsaf-
fect community transmission of COVID-19? A
[54] L. Crielaard, J. F. Uleman, B. D. Chaˆtel, S. Ep-
systematic review of observational studies, BMJ
skamp,P.Sloot,R.Quax,Refiningthecausalloop
open 11 (8) (2021) e053371. doi:10.1136/
diagram: A tutorial for maximizing the contri-
bmjopen-2021-053371.
bution of domain expertise in computational sys-
tem dynamics modeling., Psychological Methods [64] S. Krishnaratne, H. Littlecott, K. Sell, J. Burns,
(2022). J. E. Rabe, J. M. Stratil, T. Litwin, C. Kreutz,
M.Coenen,K.Geffert,A.H.Boger,A.Movsisyan,
[55] K. Chahal, T. Eldabi, T. Young, A conceptual
S. Kratzer, C. Klinger, K. Wabnitz, B. Strahwald,
framework for hybrid system dynamics and dis-
B. Verboom, E. Rehfuess, R. L. Biallas, C. Jung-
crete event simulation for healthcare, Journal of
Sievers, S. Voss, L. M. Pfadenhauer, Measures
EnterpriseInformationManagement(2013).
implemented in the school setting to contain the
[56] K. Mykoniatis, A. Angelopoulou, A modeling COVID-19 pandemic, The Cochrane Database of
framework for the application of multi-paradigm SystematicReviews1(1)(2022)CD015029. doi:
simulationmethods,Simulation96(1)(2020)55– 10.1002/14651858.CD015029.
73.
[65] M. Yearworth, L. White, The uses of qualita-
[57] J. De Lara, H. Vangheluwe, M. Alfonseca, Meta- tivedatainmultimethodology: Developingcausal
modellingandgraphgrammarsformulti-paradigm loopdiagramsduringthecodingprocess,European
modellinginatom3,Software&SystemsModel- Journal of Operational Research 231 (1) (2013)
ing3(2004)194–209. 151–161.
[58] J. P. Mu¨ller, The mimosa generic modelling and [66] A. Wittenborn, H. Rahmandad, J. Rick, N. Hos-
simulation platform: The case of multi-agent sys- seinichimeh, Depression as a systemic syndrome:
tems,2004. mapping the feedback loops of major depressive
25disorder, Psychological medicine 46 (3) (2016) [75] H.V.DykeParunak,R.Savit,R.L.Riolo,Agent-
551–562. based modeling vs. equation-based modeling: A
casestudyandusers’guide,in:Internationalwork-
[67] J. F. Uleman, R. J. Melis, R. Quax, E. A. van der
shoponmulti-agentsystemsandagent-basedsim-
Zee, D.Thijssen, M.Dresler, O.vandeRest, I.F.
ulation,Springer,1998,pp.10–25.
vanderVelpen, H.H.Adams, B.Schmand, etal.,
Mappingthemulticausalityofalzheimer’sdisease [76] J.-L. Falcone, B. Chopard, A. Hoekstra, Mml: to-
through group model building, GeroScience 43 wards a multiscale modeling language, Procedia
(2021)829–843. ComputerScience1(1)(2010)819–826.
[68] W. O. Kermack, A. G. McKendrick, A contribu-
[77] P.S.Hovmand,D.F.Andersen,E.Rouwette,G.P.
tiontothemathematicaltheoryofepidemics,Pro-
Richardson, K. Rux, A. Calhoun, Group model-
ceedings of the royal society of london. Series A,
building ‘scripts’ as a collaborative planning tool,
Containingpapersofamathematicalandphysical
Systems Research and Behavioral Science 29 (2)
character115(772)(1927)700–721.
(2012)179–193.
[69] S.P.Andeweg, B.deGier, D.Eggink, C.vanden
Ende, N. van Maarseveen, L. Ali, B. Vlaemynck, [78] C. Guivarch, R. Lempert, E. Trutnevyte, Scenario
R.Schepers,S.J.Hahne´,C.B.Reusken,etal.,Pro- techniquesforenergyandenvironmentalresearch:
tectionofcovid-19vaccinationandpreviousinfec- Anoverviewofrecentdevelopmentstobroadenthe
tionagainstomicronba.1,ba.2anddeltasars-cov- capacity to deal with complexity and uncertainty,
2infections,NatureCommunications13(1)(2022) Environmental modelling & software 97 (2017)
4738. 201–210.
[70] OECD, Education at a glance, Netherlands, Tech. [79] J. G. Polhill, M. Hare, T. Bauermann, D. An-
rep., OECD, Paris (Oct. 2022). doi:10.1787/ zola, E. Palmer, D. Salt, P. Antosz, Using agent-
15a32e93-en. basedmodelsforpredictionincomplexandwicked
systems, Journal of Artificial Societies and Social
[71] J. Borgdorff, J.-L. Falcone, E. Lorenz, C. Bona-
Simulation24(3)(2021).
Casas,B.Chopard,A.G.Hoekstra,Foundationsof
distributed multiscale computing: Formalization, [80] R.Abbott, M.Hadzˇikadic´, Complexadaptivesys-
specification, andanalysis, JournalofParalleland tems,systemsthinking,andagent-basedmodeling,
DistributedComputing73(4)(2013)465–483. in: Advanced technologies, systems, and applica-
tions,Springer,2017,pp.1–8.
[72] T. Lorenz, A. Jost, Towards an orientation frame-
workinmulti-paradigmmodeling,in: Proceedings
[81] P. Antosz, T. Szczepanska, L. Bouman, J. G. Pol-
ofthe24thInternationalConferenceoftheSystem
hill, W. Jager, Sensemaking of causality in agent-
Dynamics society, System Dynamics Society Al-
based models, International Journal of Social Re-
bany,NewYork,NY,2006,pp.2134–2151.
searchMethodology(2022)1–11.
[73] H.Rahmandad,J.Sterman,Heterogeneityandnet-
workstructureinthedynamicsofdiffusion: Com- [82] N.Gilbert,Varietiesofemergence,in: Agent2002
paring agent-based and differential equation mod- Conference:Socialagents:ecology,exchange,and
els,Managementscience54(5)(2008)998–1014. evolution,Chicago,2002,pp.11–12.
[74] W. G. Wilson, Resolving discrepancies between [83] R.Conte,G.Andrighetto,M.Campennl,Minding
deterministic population models and individual- norms: Mechanismsanddynamicsofsocialorder
based simulations, The American Naturalist in agent societies, Oxford Cognitive Models and
151(2)(1998)116–134. Ar,2014.
26[84] S. Elsawah, J. H.Guillaume, T.Filatova, J.Rook, URL https://doi.org/10.1007/
A.J.Jakeman,Amethodologyforeliciting,repre- s00168-007-0136-4
senting, and analysing stakeholder knowledge for
[92] A.Brandt,MultiscaleScientificComputation: Re-
decisionmakingoncomplexsocio-ecologicalsys-
view 2001, in: M. Griebel, D. E. Keyes, R. M.
tems:Fromcognitivemapstoagent-basedmodels,
Nieminen, D. Roose, T. Schlick, T. J. Barth,
Journalofenvironmentalmanagement151(2015)
T. Chan, R. Haimes (Eds.), Multiscale and Mul-
500–516.
tiresolutionMethods,Vol.20,SpringerBerlinHei-
[85] S. Mehryar, R. Sliuzas, N. Schwarz, A. Shar- delberg,Berlin,Heidelberg,2002,pp.3–95,series
ifi, M. van Maarseveen, From individual fuzzy Title: LectureNotesinComputationalScienceand
cognitive maps to agent based models: Model- Engineering.
ingmulti-factorialandmulti-stakeholderdecision-
[93] G.D.Ingram,I.T.Cameron,K.M.Hangos,Clas-
makingforwaterscarcity, Journalofenvironmen-
sificationandanalysisofintegratingframeworksin
talmanagement250(2019)109482.
multiscale modelling, Chemical Engineering Sci-
[86] S. Bharwani, M. Coll Besa, R. Taylor, M. Fis- ence 59 (11) (2004) 2171–2187. doi:10.1016/
cher,T.Devisscher,C.Kenfack,Identifyingsalient j.ces.2004.02.010.
driversoflivelihooddecision-makingintheforest
[94] A. Yang, W. Marquardt, An ontological concep-
communitiesofcameroon: Addingvaluetosocial
tualization of multiscale models, Computers &
simulation models, Journal of Artificial Societies
Chemical Engineering 33 (4) (2009) 822–837.
andSocialSimulation18(1)(2015)3.
doi:10.1016/j.compchemeng.2008.11.015.
[87] A.Ghorbani,G.Dijkema,N.Schrauwen,Structur- [95] J. Borgdorff, M. Mamonski, B. Bosak,
ing Qualitative Data for Agent-Based Modelling,
K. Kurowski, M. B. Belgacem, B. Chopard,
Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simula-
D. Groen, P. V. Coveney, A. G. Hoekstra, Dis-
tion18(1)(2015)2.
tributed multiscale computing with muscle 2,
the multiscale coupling library and environment,
[88] V.Nespeca,T.Comes,F.Brazier,AMethodology
Journal of Computational Science 5 (5) (2014)
to Develop Agent-Based Models for Policy Sup-
719–731.
port Via Qualitative Inquiry, Journal of Artificial
SocietiesandSocialSimulation26(1)(2023)10.
[96] N. Mustafee, S. Brailsford, A. Djanatliev, T. Eld-
abi,M.Kunc,A.Tolk,Purposeandbenefitsofhy-
[89] L. A. Bollinger, I. Nikolic´, C. B. Davis, G. P. Di-
bridsimulation: contributingtotheconvergenceof
jkema, Multimodel ecologies: cultivating model
its definition, in: 2017 Winter Simulation Confer-
ecosystemsinindustrialecology,JournalofIndus-
ence(WSC),IEEE,2017,pp.1631–1645.
trialEcology19(2)(2015)252–263.
[97] B. P. Zeigler, T. G. Kim, H. Praehofer, Theory of
[90] B. Edmonds, C. Le Page, M. Bithell, E. Chattoe-
modelingandsimulation,Academicpress,2000.
Brown,V.Grimm,R.Meyer,C.Montanola-Sales,
P.Ormerod,H.Root,F.Squazzoni,Differentmod-
[98] A.Barisˇic´,I.Ruchkin,D.Savic´,M.A.Mohamed,
ellingpurposes.,JournalofArtificialSocietiesand R. Al-Ali, L. W. Li, H. Mkaouar, R. Eslampanah,
SocialSimulation(2019). M. Challenger, D. Blouin, et al., Multi-paradigm
modeling for cyber–physical systems: A system-
[91] P. H. Verburg, B. Eickhout, H. van Meijl, A
aticmappingreview,JournalofSystemsandSoft-
multi-scale, multi-model approach for analyzing
ware183(2022)111081.
the future dynamics of European land use, The
Annals of Regional Science 42 (1) (2008) 57–77. [99] Y. Kwon, Z. Lee, A hybrid decision support sys-
doi:10.1007/s00168-007-0136-4. tem for adaptive trading strategies: Combining a
27rule-based expert system with a deep reinforce- Adaptivehumanbehaviorinepidemiologicalmod-
ment learning strategy, Decision Support Systems els, Proceedings of the National Academy of Sci-
177(2024)114100. ences108(15)(2011)6306–6311.
[100] J. M. Epstein, R. Axtell, Growing artificial soci-
eties:socialsciencefromthebottomup,Brookings
InstitutionPress,1996.
[101] J. De Lara, H. Vangheluwe, M. Alfonseca, Meta-
modellingandgraphgrammarsformulti-paradigm
modelling in atom3, Software & Systems Model-
ing3(3)(2004)194–209.
[102] A. Borshchev, S. Brailsford, L. Churilov, B. Dan-
gerfield, Multi-method modelling: Anylogic,
Discrete-eventsimulationandsystemdynamicsfor
managementdecisionmaking(2014)248–279.
[103] W.Jones,K.Kotiadis,J.R.O’Hanley,S.Robinson,
Aiding the development of the conceptual model
forhybridsimulation: Representingthemodelling
frame,JournaloftheOperationalResearchSociety
(2021)1–19.
[104] N. M. Shnerb, Y. Louzoun, E. Bettelheim,
S.Solomon,Theimportanceofbeingdiscrete:Life
alwayswinsonthesurface,ProceedingsoftheNa-
tionalAcademyofSciences97(19)(2000)10322–
10324.
[105] F.E.Cellier,E.Kofman,Continuoussystemsimu-
lation,SpringerScience&BusinessMedia,2006.
[106] J. O. Lloyd-Smith, S. J. Schreiber, P. E. Kopp,
W. M. Getz, Superspreading and the effect of in-
dividual variation on disease emergence, Nature
438(7066)(2005)355–359.
[107] S.Bansal, B.T.Grenfell, L.A.Meyers, Whenin-
dividualbehaviourmatters: homogeneousandnet-
workmodelsinepidemiology,JournaloftheRoyal
SocietyInterface4(16)(2007)879–891.
[108] J.M.Epstein,Agent zero,in: Agent Zero,Prince-
tonUniversityPress,2014.
[109] E. P. Fenichel, C. Castillo-Chavez, M. G. Ceddia,
G.Chowell,P.A.G.Parra,G.J.Hickling,G.Hol-
loway, R. Horan, B. Morin, C. Perrings, et al.,
28