This is an author preprint. Please refer to the final
published version:
Dinneen, J. D. & Julien, C.-A. (2019). What’s in People’s Digital
File Collections?. In ASIS&T ‘19: Proceedings of the 82nd
Annual Meeting of the Association for Information Science &
Technology, 56.What’s in People’s Digital File Collections?
Jesse David Dinneen Charles-Antoine Julien
Victoria University of McGill University
Wellington, New Zealand Montreal, Canada
jesse.dinneen@vuw.ac.nz charles.julien@mcgill.ca
ABSTRACT collections (i.e., those not used in work or study), and while
Thoughtfully designing services and rigorously testing several studies of personal information management (PIM)
software to support personal information management have suggested occupational factors likely determine users’
(PIM) requires understanding the relevant collections, but behaviour and collections, empirical data for comparing
relatively little is known about what people keep in their such collections has been scarce. Further, though two
file collections, especially personal collections. studies (Henderson, 2011; Hicks, Dong, Palmer, &
Complementing recent work on the structure of 348 file McAlpine, 2008) found a surprising amount of duplication
collections, we examine those collections’ contents, how of contents in work collections, the causes of duplication
much content is duplicated, and how collections used for remain unknown.
personal matters differ from those used for study and work.
As knowledge about the contents of file collections is
Though all collections contain many images, some
limited, so too is our ability to model and understand them,
intuitively common file types are surprisingly scarce.
test and compare relevant software improvements, and
Personal collections contain more audio than others,
ultimately support their management. For example, it is
knowledge workers’ collections contain more text
unclear what kinds of files should comprise representative
documents but far fewer folders, and IT collections exhibit
test collections to be used in evaluating PIM prototype
unusual traits. Collection duplication is correlated to
software, and without such collections it is hard to perform
collections’ structural traits, but surprisingly, not to
comparable tests of alternative interfaces and
collection age. We discuss our findings in light of prior
improvements. Without a thorough, baseline description of
works and provide implications for various kinds of
the artefact created during the process of managing files, it
information research.
is difficult to model that process and the many possible
KEYWORDS determinants suggested by past studies (e.g., technological,
Personal information management; computer files demographic, and individual differences).
ASIS&T THESAURUS Here we examine the contents of 348 collections used for
1577 Personal files; 2988 Personal documents; 1469
personal, work, and study activities. We provide tabular
Personal collections; 1524 Interfaces
data that describe the typical composition of such
INTRODUCTION collections, discuss notable differences across collection
The task of managing digital files, also called file types, and examine potential causes of content duplication.
management (FM), is ubiquitous in computing: at home and We end by discussing implications for future work.
at work, people create, download, copy, name, rename,
organise (or leave unorganised), delete (or not), share,
LITERATURE REVIEW AND RESEARCH QUESTIONS
navigate to, and search for digital files and folders (Dinneen
Personal information management refers to the study and
& Julien, 2019). The result of such activities are collections
practice of individuals managing information owned by or
of files and folders people personally manage for personal,
about them and to individuals personally managing
professional, and educational purposes. Such collections are
information, owned by them or otherwise (Jones, Dinneen,
very large, typically containing tens and even hundreds of
Capra, Pérez-Quiñones, & Diekema, 2017), typically with
thousands of files (Dinneen, Julien, & Frissen, 2019). But
the intention of later returning to that information. PIM
what is in these collections? What are people storing?
research has explored a broad range of contexts and
To our knowledge, only five recent (e.g., since 1999) activities within this scope, including the common
studies have examined the contents of people’s file computing phenomenon of managing digital files, where
collections, though none have examined strictly personal personal could mean, for example, using a private computer
to backup travel photos, using a company computer to
organise project files, or retrieving manuscripts previously
[Author preprint – refer to final version for copyright
information.]downloaded to a laboratory computer. Beyond PIM, files across prototypes requires consistency in those collections
have been considered important digital possessions (Gurrin et al., 2019). However, no such collections are
(Cushing, 2013) and a common part of personal archives available for testing FM prototypes, as was acknowledged a
(Marshall, 2008). decade ago (Chernov, Demartini, Herder, Kopycki, &
Nejdl, 2008). A thorough description of collections’
Hundreds of studies have covered various topics in file
contents is also needed for studying and modelling the
management (Dinneen & Julien, 2019), like searching and
many possible determinants suggested by past studies,
navigating to files (Bergman, Tene-Rubinstein & Shalom,
including technological (Bergman et al., 2010; Boardman
2013; Teevan, Alvarado, Ackerman, & Karger, 2004), file
& Sasse, 2004), demographic (Khoo et al., 2007), and
sharing (Capra, Vardell, & Brennan, 2014), and developing
individual (Lansdale, 1988) differences, and to compare the
augmentations to FM software (Fitchett, Cockburn, &
FM habits and collections of particular professional or
Gutwin, 2013). To investigate the common PIM activities
social groups to a baseline, but such modelling, study, and
of storing, organising, and retrieving (or exploiting) digital
comparisons require a baseline of data to compare to.
items (Jones et al., 2017; Whittaker, 2011), many studies
have characterised the artefacts produced by FM activities: Five recent (i.e., in the last two decades) studies have
people’s digital collections (i.e., files and folders). sought to understand the contents of people’s collections,
Specifically, studies have measured collections’ scale (i.e., evidenced by file extensions or categorised file types. Two
how many files users store; Boardman & Sasse, 2004; studies of work collections – one of eleven varied
Gonçalves & Jorge, 2003), structure (i.e., how files and professionals (Goncalves & Jorge, 2003) and one of
folders are organised; Bergman, Whittaker, Sanderson, seventy-three university staff (Henderson, 2009) – mostly
Nachmias, & Ramamoorthy, 2010; Henderson & agree in their findings: collections are, on average,
Srinivasan, 2009), and contents (i.e., files and their types, approximately 30% text files, 20% image files, 10%
discussed next). unidentifiable, with spreadsheets, presentations, system
files, source code, and extensionless files each comprising
Contents of file collections
less than 10%, and audio, video, shortcuts, and other kinds
The contents of file collections (i.e., the files a user
of files being relatively negligible (i.e., approaching 0%). A
manages on some computer) are generated or acquired by
third study, of forty engineers’ collections (Hicks et al.,
users actively storing files and folders (e.g., by creating and
2008), differed in that it showed 10% less text and a
downloading them) or passively keeping (i.e., not deleting)
considerably higher 24% unidentified files. Finally, two
files and folders (e.g., in downloaded archives; Watkins,
studies (Agrawal, Bolosky, Douceur, & Lorch, 2007;
Sellen & Lindley, 2015). Users’ files come from various
Douceur & Bolosky, 1999) observed thousands of
sources, including the Web (Jones, Bruce, & Dumais,
Microsoft employees’ work collections over six years, but
2001), external devices (Capra, Vardell, & Brennan, 2014),
reported the thirty most common file extensions rather than
and peer-to-peer or cloud software (Marshall & Tang,
categorised file types, preventing easy comparison to the
2012). Users keep files for many different purposes (e.g.,
other previously mentioned works. They observed .gif files
personal or professional) and reasons, for example, because
to be the most frequent (9%), .h, .htm, and .dll files to be
they are needed only briefly, or are being modified over the
slightly less frequent, and .jpg, .bmp, and .doc files to be
duration of some ongoing project, or will be needed again
infrequent (e.g., 0.6% for .doc), at least until extensionless
at some future time (Nardi, Anderson, & Erickson, 1995).
files became more frequent than any single extension.
In extreme cases, participants self-identifying as hoarders
However, the authors note that the presence of technical
and minimalists have explained that they hoard because
staff collections, which make up the majority, have skewed
they are afraid of missing some data at a crucial moment, or
the results as some differences were present among job
do otherwise because they are reacting to or trying to
roles (e.g., technical staff had considerably fewer .gif and
prevent information overload (Vitale, Janzen & McGrenere,
more .c files). Such differences are intuitive – it seems
2018). The end result is that, even in typical cases,
reasonable to assume developers keep programming files,
collections contain tens to hundreds of thousands of files
while teachers keep presentations and documents – but
across tens of thousands of folders (Dinneen et al., 2019),
while such differences have been suggested by past works
and those items necessarily compete for attention when
(Khoo et al., 2007; Kwaśnik, 1991), they have not been
users navigate through and retrieve them. It is therefore
explored or quantified.
hard not to wonder: what are the contents of these
collections?
Beyond satisfying scholarly curiosity, answering the above Duplication in file collections
question also has practical implications. Evaluating PIM An additional concern about the contents of file collections
prototypes (e.g., those designed to improve user experience) is content duplication (i.e., file and folder duplication).
requires test collections, and making sound comparisons Duplication can cause confusion during navigation andsearch, sharing, and version control, and duplicates may METHODOLOGY
occupy limited storage space. Indeed, in one study 47% of
Recruitment and data collection
participants reported struggling with duplicate files
Various methods have been used to collect data about
(Henderson, 2011). Several tools have been developed to
personal file collections, such as guided tours of users’
prevent and treat duplication, for example file version
computers (Thomson, 2015), recording participants
control and software to identify duplicate images (Bergman,
desktops during structured tasks (Bergman et al., 2010),
Tucker & Dahamshy, 2018), but is unclear if such tools are
and taking snapshots of user’s collections (e.g., Henderson,
commonly used, and duplication nonetheless persists;
2009). We used the last approach, employing cross-
additional potential causes therefore warrant consideration.
platform, open-source software called Cardinal, described
Duplication has, so far, been studied by examining the and validated by Dinneen, Odoni, Frissen, and Julien
presence of repeating file and folder names, both of which (2016) and used later by Dinneen et al. (2019).
appear common, ranging from 20% (Henderson, 2005,
When run, Cardinal solicits a participant’s demographic
2011) to 30% (Hicks et al., 2008) duplication in collections.
information and use(s) of the computer, then accesses the
The causes of duplication are unclear; participants often
portions of their folder hierarchy where they have specified
suggest for example, they may download the same file from
they manage files, and records various properties (e.g., file
an email multiple times (Henderson, 2011). But given the
extensions). Known system folders were ignored unless the
size of collections and the high percentage of duplication, it
user explicitly stated they manage files within them, and
is unclear if incremental actions like downloading
hidden files and folders were assumed to be either actively
attachments could be the primary cause. Surprisingly, only
hidden by participants (i.e., we are not meant to see them)
four participants suggested copy and pasting folders may
or else unknown to participants (i.e., not managed by them),
lead to duplication, but recent works suggests this may be a
and so were ignored. Files pointing to other files (i.e.,
primary cause, as multiplicative actions (like copy and
shortcuts, aliases, and symlinks) were counted as pointers
paste) may shape other attributes of the file system (like
rather than the kind of file they pointed to. Though no file
extreme imbalance in file classification; Dinneen et al.,
or folder names were recorded, instances of non-unique
2019). Some telling properties of duplication have been
names were noted to provide a measure of duplication.
examined; for example, file name duplication has been seen
to correlate strongly with folder name duplication, We recruited participants1 from February of 2016 to August
collection size (in files and folders), and the mean depth of of 2018 by posting calls on study recruitment Websites,
folders within the folder tree (Henderson, 2011), but online communities (e.g., Facebook, Reddit), and mailing
additional file system variables possibly related to lists (e.g., industrial, governmental, and academic). Criteria
duplication remain to be examined (e.g., file classification for participation were only that participants have files
skew and the maximum depth of the folder tree) or the time stored locally (i.e., not exclusively in the cloud, whether at
required to produce duplicates (i.e., the age of the home, work, or school) that they personally manage, and
collection). have the abilities to read English and download and run the
software. Participation thus consisted of running the
Summary and research questions
software, answering the questionnaires, specifying where
In short, we do not know what is in personal file
on the computer they manage files (both active, working
collections, how work collections differ, or what causes
areas and backup locations like external drives were
content duplication, and these gaps in knowledge limit our
encouraged), and reviewing a summary of the results before
ability to model FM, test improvements, and support
choosing to let the software submit the data to the
computer users. To address these issues, in this manuscript
researchers. Participation was therefore remote and
we examine 349 collections to answer the following
anonymous.
research questions:
Data analysis
RQ1. What are the typical contents of people’s personal,
To facilitate comparison with prior studies, file extensions
professional, and scholarly file collections?
were categorised into file types. There is currently no
RQ2. How do the contents of different collection types common taxonomy of file types nor consensus about how
differ? to categorise extensions, but the skewed distributions of
extension frequency previously observed (Douceur &
RQ3. Do file and folder duplication correlate with other
Bolosky, 1999) suggest that categorising the few, most
collection traits (e.g., folder depth or classification
common extensions will account for most files. We adapted
skew)?
the 18 file type categories used by Goncalves and Jorge
1 This study was approved by ethics committees at Victoria University of Wellington (HEC #25658) and McGill University (REB #75-
0715).(2003), with some modifications: (1) the source code and pairwise (with the Mann-Whitney U test) since n-way tests
Web script categories were merged into a new category, like MANOVA require normal data distributions and log
development files; (2) shockwave was merged into video; transformation of skewed data containing many 0 values is
(3) PDA-related was merged into PIM; and (4) a pointers not straightforward.
category was added to account for shortcuts and symlinks.
RESULTS
The result was 15 categories, discussed below, which have
We received data describing 348 collections, totalling 50
only minor differences to the categories used by Goncalves
million files and nearly 8 million folders. Table 1
and Jorge (2003), Henderson (2011), and Hicks et al.
summarises the samples’ demographic features, uses of the
(2008).
collections, and operating systems.
We categorised the most common extensions within each
Sample trait Values
participant’s collection until each collection was at least
80% categorised (excluding two outliers) and unidentified Range 14-64
Age
files comprised on average only 7% of a collection. This Mean 30 (SD 9.96)
entailed categorising 453 extensions, each of which we Male: 218 (63%)
researched to determine the best category, and which Gender Female: 123 (35%)
together include all the extensions listed in the prior works
Other: 7 (2%)
discussed above. The extensions, categories, and python
Mac OS: 169 (48%)
function to categorise them are available on GitHub.2 Operating
system Windows: 135 (39%)
Collections were divided into those used for personal GNU/Linux: 44 (13%)
matters, work, or study, according to participants’ Work: 166 (48%)
responses. To account for potential differences in work Knowledge work: 93
collections (discussed above), those were further divided Other: 48
Collection use
(using participants’ stated occupations) into three broad IT: 25
groups: (1) knowledge workers, (2) IT staff, or (3) other. School: 143 (41%)
Knowledge workers included quality assurance managers, Personal: 39 (11%)
doctors, journalists, librarians, and so on, whereas IT staff
Table 1. Summary of attributes of sampled participants,
included positions like programmer, system administrator,
systems, and collections.
or IT technician. The other category included occupations
that are not obviously knowledge work (e.g., tradespeople, Complete statistical descriptions of each collection type are
retail associates, and artists), null values, and people provided on the Web2, while in this section we present an
unemployed at the time of participation. overview of the range of file extensions, the categorised
collections, how collection types contrast, and results of
Following Henderson (2011), proportions of file and folder
inferential testing of duplication and related phenomena.
duplication within each collection was inferred by the
For brevity, after describing personal collections we present
presence of duplicate file and folder names. Limitations to
only the strongest differences between collection types
this approach are discussed below.
rather than describing each exhaustively.
As in prior studies of computer files, data along most
File extensions
measures were highly skewed, and approximated log The collected data contain 85,000 unique extensions,
normal distributions even after outliers were removed using distributed in a highly skewed and long-tailed manner as
interquartile range (Wilcox, 2011). Thus, to convey the observed in prior works (Douceur & Bolosky, 1999). Thus,
range of typical values and avoid overestimation, log despite our categorisation efforts accounting for less than
normal medians and means – hereafter, median* and mean* 1% of the variety of extensions, and despite extensionless
– are reported when appropriate (see Limpert, Stahel, & files comprising on average 10%, 83% of all files were
Abbt, 2001 for more detail). Further, nonparametric tests categorised and on average only 7% of each collection was
were used: Mann-Whitney U tests assess significance (p) in left uncategorised.
differences between groups with skewed data of unequal
variance, and Kendall’s tau (τ) assesses correlation strength. Personal collections
Personal collections were, in typical cases, comprised of 45
Though such tests are often used for ordinal (rank) data,
thousand to 85 thousand files across 7 thousand to 21
they perform well with continuous (interval or ratio) data
thousand folders. The data across most file types was highly
and are more suitable for heavily skewed distributions than
skewed, indicating great variation across the collections,
parametric equivalents (e.g., t tests and Pearson’s rho;
but a few general claims can be made. Images and
Chok, 2010). Differences between groups were tested
2 https://github.com/jddinneen/file-extension-categoriserdevelopment files were the most common types at 22-29% Personal and other work collections had the most system
and 4-35%, respectively (e.g., 20,000 image files and files (5-24%), whereas other groups had fewer with IT staff
12,000 development files, depending on collection size). having the fewest (2-5%; p=0.0495 when comparing to
Next most common were system, audio, and extensionless other). Personal collections contained the highest
files at roughly 5-25% each (e.g., ~7,000 of each kind). The proportion of audio files of all collection types, with
typical proportion of audio files varied greatly, however, students having the second most and knowledge workers’
from 1% to 20%. Unidentified files comprised 6-9% of collections having the least (0-1%; p<0.001 when
collections, and text files 3-5% (e.g., ~2,000 text files). PIM comparing to students). Although IT collections resembled
and video files were relatively scarce (0-1%), and every personal collections in the proportion of text files,
other type (i.e., databases, spreadsheets, executables, knowledge workers’, students’, and other workers’
backups, presentations, bookmarks, and pointers) was collections each contained almost twice as many (5-10%;
relatively non-existent (e.g., a dozen or so files each). p<0.001 when comparing knowledge workers’ to personal
collections). In all collection types there were relatively few
Differences across groups
video files (e.g., 0-2%) and almost none (approaching 0%)
Figure 1 displays treemaps of example personal, knowledge
of all remaining file types; for example, even knowledge
work, and IT collections that feature proportions of file
workers had ~0% presentation files.
types within the typical range (e.g., median* and mean*)
for their respective groups. Treemapping is a method for All work and student collections exhibited smaller
visually displaying differences in group compositions, and proportions of extensionless files than personal collections
originally, file system data (Shneiderman & Wattenberg, did, and with much narrower ranges of typical values, but
2001). The full results tables should be consulted for the pairwise differences were not statistically significant;
discrete values and comprehensive descriptions of the for example IT collections had on average 4-6% (SD* 2.3)
composition of typical collections in each group. as compared with 2-29% in personal collections (SD* of
9.7; p=0.359).
On average, personal collections were smaller than all other
collection types while IT collections were the largest, Duplication results
generally ten times larger than personal collections Across all groups we observed that 23-34% of files in a
(p=0.059) at 61 thousand to 829 thousand files. Knowledge collection were typically duplicated (excludes two outliers),
workers’ collections had the least folders, typically 2.5 to while on average 44% (traditional mean) of folders were
14 thousand, or about half that of typical student collections duplicated. IT collections exhibited the most duplication of
(p=0.006) and a fifth of IT collections (p=0.007). files (40-48%), and personal collections the least (20-26%;
p=0.002 when comparing to IT), while folder duplication
Most collection types had proportions of images and
was greater overall but followed a similar pattern: IT
development files comparable to personal collections, with
collections had the most (53-60%), and personal collections
the most notable differences being that on average IT
had the least (33-47%; p=0.021).
collections had fewer images (11-26%; p=0.019) and more
development files (up to 49% even in typical cases; All correlations reported here were statistically significant
p<0.001). Knowledge workers also had smaller proportions (p<0.001; omitted below for brevity). File and folder
of images than personal collections (16-24%; p=0.076). duplication correlated moderately (τ=0.39), and each
Figure 1. Treemaps showing examples of typical collections for personal use (left), knowledge work (middle), and IT work (right).
All collection types typically contain many images and development files and relatively few of the rarest file types (e.g., video,
databases, etc; here collectively called other). Personal collections contain more images and audio files, knowledge workers’
collections contain more text files, and IT collections contain more development files and few system files.correlated moderately with their total counts (τ=0.36 for focusing on professional contexts. Surprisingly, like most
files, 0.40 for folders). We found weak correlations other collections, personal ones contained relatively few
between folder tree width and file and folder duplication (e.g., 0.1%) file types like backups, executables, PIM files,
(τ=0.29 and 0.33, respectively), and folder depth correlated and so on, thus suggesting the variety of file extensions are
moderately with file duplication (τ=0.45) and folder variations within the main categories (e.g., different image
duplication (τ=0.48), and similarly, maximum folder tree extensions). Personal collections also featured relatively
depth (i.e., the deepest part of the tree) correlated few text files, likely reflecting the popularity of such
moderately with folder duplication (τ=0.45) and weakly formats (e.g., .docx) in knowledge work (as contrasted with
with file duplication (τ=0.26). We also found weak personal matters). Perhaps because of their size (considered
correlations between skewness in the classification of files below), personal collections featured the least duplication,
into folders (i.e., the degree to which files are placed into though still roughly 20-50%.
relatively few folders, leaving most folders relatively
Knowledge workers’ collections (e.g., work collections
empty) and file (τ=0.16) and folder duplication (τ=0.29).
managed by doctors, teachers, librarians…) were the
Duplication had no linear relationship with the age of
smallest of the work collections, and while bigger than
collections whether measured by mean or maximum file
personal collections, they nonetheless featured ~30% fewer
age (e.g., τ < 0.05).
folders, which is surprising given the popularity and many
DISCUSSION uses of folders identified in previous PIM research on
Here we synthesise and discuss our results and compare knowledge workers. Such collections had the least audio
them to commensurable findings from prior works. files, perhaps indicating an absence of music collections on
work machines, and predictably, more text files, perhaps
File extensions
due to reasons considered above.
We saw 85 thousand extensions, a far greater variety than
reported in prior works (e.g., 623 occurring more than once; The percentages of system, development, and images files
Henderson, 2009). This suggests file extension variety is observed in knowledge workers’ collections are roughly
growing, but the distribution of extensions remains a consistent (i.e., within 2-3%) with prior works (Goncalves
similar shape (e.g., following Lotka’s law; Douceur & & Jorge, 2003; Henderson, 2009; Hicks et al., 2008),
Bolosky, 1999) and consequently categorising the majority suggesting no meaningful change over time, but the
of the collection can still be done with relatively few (e.g., percentage of text files observed (7-12%) was much less
450) extensions (c.f. 350; Goncalves & Jorge, 2003). than in those works, which saw 21-34%. The cause for this
difference is unclear; given the data are highly skewed, it is
Characterisations of collections by type
RQ1 asked “what are the typical contents of people’s possible that in prior works averages were inflated by
personal, professional, and scholarly file collections?” The outliers. That knowledge workers had relatively few
tabular data provide an uninterpreted answer to the archive, audio, video, shortcut, PIM, and database files also
question, which we contextualise below by characterising roughly aligns with the prior similar studies, but
and interpreting each collection type, with emphasis on surprisingly, knowledge workers kept relatively few (e.g., <
differences between collection types so to answer RQ2. 1%) of other types that are commonly associated with
knowledge work, like spreadsheets and presentation files,
Personal collections are the smallest (in terms of files), and
which contrasts with those works, which found 4-8%
despite containing relatively many image files (as did most
spreadsheets and 2-7% executable files. Such differences
collection types) they exhibit some uniqueness in their
may be attributable to the high portion of previously
composition. They had the most audio files and system
uncategorised files (e.g., 24%) or to occupational
files, second most development files (behind IT), and
differences (e.g., examining only engineers; Hicks et al.,
widest range of extensionless files. While image and audio
2008).
files are unsurprising given that many people keep personal
music and image collections, the prevalence of system files Other work collections were generally big, but otherwise
is surprising, particularly as the data collection software like the other work collections in most ways. However, they
scanned only user-managed folders and ignored system did feature more image and audio file percentages,
folders unless users specified otherwise. It is similarly comparable to personal collections, perhaps reflecting the
unclear what caused the presence of so many development multiple uses of machines people working in less traditional
files and the occasional cases of so many extensionless roles (e.g., whereas knowledge workers may not store many
files. personal images on machines owned by their employers,
freelance designers may work from the same machine on
Personal collections also exhibited the widest range of file
which they store such photos). These collections were also
types, perhaps reflecting a wide variety personal computing
highly varied, which may reflect the diversity of the
activities that may not be reflected in PIM research
participants’ occupations.Students’ collections resembled knowledge workers’ structure that is harder to navigate (Julien et al., 2013),
collections, but with twice as many folders and more audio which is therefore more costly to maintain. For example,
files; this may reflect that many students are knowledge users may multiply branches of the tree downward, thus
workers in training (and/or that education is often increasing measures of file system depth, and consequently
knowledge work) and therefore may manage computer files be less likely to later navigate back down to those files to
similarly. address the resulting duplicates. This could explain why
measures of depth are the strongest correlates with
IT collections are huge and unsurprisingly contain many
duplication, stronger even than collection size.
development files. They also contain relatively few other
text files, but surprisingly, contain far fewer system files Surprisingly, we found no notable correlations between
than other collections (and perhaps far fewer extensionless duplicate files or folders and the age of collections whether
files, though this lacked statistical significance). Absolute measuring age by the mean age of files or the oldest file in
values indicate the difference is not simply due to having a collection. This is surprising because prior studies (e.g.,
more development files (i.e., thus lowering the proportion Dinneen et al., 2019; Henderson, 2011) suggest that it takes
of system files): IT collections contain up to 5,500 system time for a collection to grow, even multiplicatively, and
files, whereas knowledge workers’ collections typically thus older collections should exhibit greater duplication. It
contain up to 32,000. Although in this manuscript we do not is possible the majority of duplication is produced near to
examine differences across operating systems, because IT the creation of a folder system and that only incremental
collections were distributed no differently across the OSes duplication (i.e., downloading duplicates) happens later,
than other collections (and comprised only 16% of the though this warrants further investigation.
Linux machines) it seems unlikely OS is the main cause of
RQ3 asked if file and folder duplication correlate with other
the relative scarcity of system files in IT collections. It is
collection traits. In summary, duplication does appear to
possible that IT professionals make a concerted effort to
correlate with structural properties of the file system,
separate their systems’ files from other work files (and/or
especially folder depth. Given that duplication is so
consider it routine maintenance), whereas, for example, it
common despite the availability of anti-duplication tools
may be rare for knowledge workers to do so. That IT
like those mentioned above, perhaps additional strategies
collections had 0% executables shows a decrease from 3%
should be implemented to prevent and treat duplication; for
in 1999 (Douceur & Bolosky), and likely reflects general
example, upon a user initiating a large copy and paste
collection growth (e.g., in development files) over time.
action, the file manager interface could provide a dialogue
RQ2 asked “How do the contents of collection types to exclude some subfolders, and the OS could periodically
differ?” In summary, personal collections are generally scan for duplicates and prompt the user to resolve them.
smaller than work collections and contain more images and
Implications for assessing collections
audio files, and are generally more varied than other
The tabular data and characterisations of collections
collection types. Knowledge workers’ collections contain
provided by this study can be consulted when assessing
more text files and far fewer folders than personal
existing collections managed by particular groups of
collections. IT collections exhibit some predictable traits
participants, and also when generating or selecting
like having many development files, but also some
collections for use in evaluations of PIM software. For
surprising ones, like having far fewer system files.
example, a study examining digital information
File and folder duplication management of administrative staff at a university could
Results regarding duplication were broadly similar to but compare the contents of their collections to the knowledge
weaker than observations made by Henderson (2011), with workers’ collections described here to assess if the
the most notable exception being that we observed more participants are representative or typical (e.g., if those
duplication overall: roughly 30% for files (matching Hicks, collections have <7% or >12% text files, they are not
2008) and 44% for folders (as compared with ~20%). This typical). Similarly, to increase the generalisability of
may be attributable to general collection growth over the evaluations of prototypes like file manager plugins or
last decade – Henderson (2011) suggests that larger desktop search improvements, the collections used should
collections may have more duplication, and the results here be representative of those likely to be used in practice (e.g.,
support this – but the results here also suggest the story is in personal contexts, or by IT staff, or by general users),
more complicated. Specifically, the presence of several and this can be achieved by consulting the ranges of typical
correlations (ranging from weak to moderate) between values reported here and choosing or generating only
duplication and structural variables suggests that collections that fit within the ranges given.
multiplicative actions may not just cause duplication
directly (pasting causes duplicates), but also indirectly:
multiplying parts of the tree produces a more complexLIMITATIONS remaining limitations to be addressed. Trends and
The present study has notable limitations, some of which differences in these results across prior studies and across
are attributable to using extensions to identify file types: time were also discussed, including those related to file
23% of all files did not fit a traditional file type category, duplication. We also discussed the implications of the
either because they had no extensions or had extensions so results for PIM research, and provide the statistical tables to
rare we did not categorise them (i.e., 84.5k of the 85k facilitate such works. Expanding on those implications, we
different extensions, or 99% of the variety). Categorisation next consider concrete implications for both narrow and
is often imperfect, and some extensions fit multiple broader research.
categories (e.g., .py is a text file, used for development, and
Starting narrowly, several aspects of the data remain to be
used by the system). While the majority of extensions fit
analysed, for example of duplication across file types,
neatly into one category, studies categorising files (and
occupations, or operating systems (Bergman et al., 2010),
extensionless files) differently may observe different
and of individual differences that may pertain to FM, like
results. As our categorisation method is the most
age, gender, education, and individual differences. Going
comprehensive thus far, and is shared on the Web, we hope
forward, follow-up work would benefit from more actively
it facilitates consistency and comparison in future works.
involving participants in data collection to add valuable
Similar limitations are present in the collection groupings. context (present in many qualitative studies) to the numeric
For example, though work collections were separated from results, thus potentially overcoming persistent
those used only for personal matters, they included methodological debates about qualitative and quantitative
collections used for both, and those used strictly for work approaches and yielding a more holistic and comprehensive
may differ further still. Likewise, the occupation categories understanding of the relevant phenomena.
used (e.g., knowledge workers) here are broad; future work
More broadly, considering the role of files in other areas of
may find it useful to examine differences across more
information science is also likely to be fruitful, and is a
specific title groupings, like those provided by the
natural fit. For example, information behaviour research
International Standard Classification of Occupations.
that examines how people “seek, manage… and use
The method used in this study and prior works to infer information” in wider information ecosystems (Fisher,
duplicates from name duplication is imperfect as it can Erdelez, & McKechnie, 2005, p. xix) and related activities
detect false positives (files can share names without like filing, archiving, and organising collected information
containing the same content) and miss duplicates (files can (Meho & Tibbo, 2003) matches very closely previous
have different names despite containing the same content). characterisations of what users do with files (Boardman &
The effect of such limitations is currently unclear, but Sasse, 2004; Malone, 1983). We hope the contents of
future studies may address them by implementing purpose- people’s digital collections can be useful in considering
built methods for detecting duplication (e.g., full-text how PIM integrates into broader information behaviour.
analysis or computer vision).
One area that may benefit from FM research is (digital)
Finally, the data collection method used in this study cultural heritage: it may interest cultural heritage
necessarily omits some information useful in interpreting institutions (especially digital ones) to know what is in
the results, like users’ reports of why they keep duplicates people’s collections, because the contents and (original)
or particular file types, and the analyses used were intended order of personal collections of relevant individuals
primarily to explore basic potential differences between influences what value can later be made of such collections
collection types. In future work it would be useful to (e.g., by libraries, archives and museums) and how those
complement such quantitative descriptions with qualitative collections can best be preserved and accessed. Further, the
reports and further analyses for nonparametric data. way people collect and organise their personal and work
collections (often with blurred boundaries between them)
CONCLUSION
can have impact on areas where personal and collective
Supporting people in the daily task of managing
meets, such as records management (because personal
information requires understanding many dimensions of the
attitudes, practices, and habits are often mirrored in the
relevant phenomena, including, for example, what is in
workplace) and digital curation, for example, because the
their file collections. In this manuscript we established the
way files are curated from the point of creation directly
contents of people’s file collections, including personal,
affects their longevity and authenticity (Oliver & Harvey,
study, and work collections of various kinds, and discussed
2016). When personal collections belong to people whose
commonalities and notable differences among the broad
life and work has significance for cultural heritage sector,
collection types. In doing so we identified an extreme
the way they organised, preserved and explained their
variety in file extensions, provided an updated
collections will greatly influence the interpretation and
categorisation scheme for the extensions, and discussed
long-term usability of such collections. Some works haveconsidered files as part of the personal archive (Cushing, Dinneen, J. D. & Julien, C.-A. (2019). The ubiquitous
2013; Kaye et al., 2006; Marshall, Bly, & Brun-Cottan, digital file: a review of file management research.
2006), but fuller synthesis of the areas remains to be done. Journal of the American Society for Information
Science and Technology, AIS Reviews.
In summary, while the present manuscript elucidates what
is in people’s file collections and what might cause Dinneen, J. D., Julien, C.-A., & Frissen, I. (2019). The scale
duplication, we hope to have further stimulated researchers and structure of personal file collections. In CHI ‘19:
in and beyond PIM to consider the everyday role of FM. Proceedings of the 37th Annual ACM Conference on
Human Factors in Computing Systems (327:1--
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
327:12). ACM.
We thank our participants for their time and effort, and
Maja Krtalić and anonymous peer reviewers for their Dinneen, J. D., Odoni, F., Frissen, I., & Julien, C.-A.
feedback. (2016). Cardinal: novel software for studying file
management behavior. In Proceedings of the 79th
REFERENCES Annual Meeting of the Association for Information
Agrawal, N., Bolosky, W. J., Douceur, J. R., & Lorch, J. R.
Science and Technology (36:1-36:10).
(2007). A five-year study of file-system metadata.
Douceur, J. R., & Bolosky, W. J. (1999). A large-scale
ACM Transactions on Storage (TOS), 3(3), 9.
study of file-system contents. ACM SIGMETRICS
Bergman, O., Tene-Rubinstein, M., & Shalom, J. (2013).
Performance Evaluation Review, 27(1), 59–70
The use of attention resources in navigation versus
Fisher, K. E., Erdelez, S., & McKechnie, L. (Eds.). (2005).
search. Personal and ubiquitous computing, 17(3),
Theories of information behavior. Information Today,
583-590.
Inc.
Bergman, O., Tucker, S., & Dahamshy, S. (2018). The
Fitchett, S., Cockburn, A., & Gutwin, C. (2013). Improving
effect of demoting near‐duplicate
navigation-based file retrieval. In CHI ‘13:
pictures. Proceedings of the Association for
Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on Human
Information Science and Technology, 55(1), 755-756.
Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 2329-2338). ACM.
Bergman, O., Whittaker, S., Sanderson, M., Nachmias, R.,
Gonçalves, D. J., & Jorge, J. A. (2003). An empirical study
& Ramamoorthy, A. (2010). The effect of folder
of personal document spaces. In International
structure on personal file navigation. Journal of the
Workshop on Design, Specification, and Verification of
American Society for Information Science and
Interactive Systems (pp. 46-60). Springer, Berlin.
Technology, 61(12), 2426-2441.
Gurrin C., Schoeffmann, K., Joho, H., Munzer, B., Rami
Boardman, R., & Sasse, M. A. (2004). Stuff goes into the
Albatal, R., Hopfgartner, F., … Dang-Nguyen, D.-T.
computer and doesn't come out: a cross-tool study of
(2019). A Test Collection for Interactive Lifelog
personal information management. In CHI ‘04:
Retrieval. In: Kompatsiaris I., Huet B., Mezaris V.,
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
Gurrin C., Cheng WH., Vrochidis S. (eds) MultiMedia
factors in computing systems (pp. 583-590). ACM.
Modeling. MMM 2019. Lecture Notes in Computer
Capra, R., Vardell, E., & Brennan, K. (2014). File
Science, vol 11295. Springer, Cham.
synchronization and sharing: User practices and
Henderson, S. (2005). Genre, task, topic and time: facets of
challenges. Proceedings of the American Society for
personal digital document management. In
Information Science and Technology, 51(1), 1-10.
Proceedings of the 6th ACM SIGCHI New Zealand
Chernov, S., Demartini, G., Herder, E., Kopycki, M., &
Conference (pp. 75-82). ACM.
Nejdl, W. (2008). Evaluating personal information
Henderson, S. (2009). How do people manage their
management using an activity logs enriched desktop
documents?: an empirical investigation into personal
dataset. In PIM Workshop at CHI ‘08: the SIGCHI
document management practices among knowledge
Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems,
workers. Doctoral dissertation, University of Auckland.
Florence, Italy.
Henderson, S. (2011). Document duplication: How users
Chok, N. S. (2010). Pearson's versus Spearman's and
(struggle to) manage file copies and versions. In
Kendall's correlation coefficients for continuous
Proceedings of the American Society for Information
data (Dissertation, University of Pittsburgh).
Science and Technology, 48(1), 1–10.
Cushing, A. L. (2013). “It's stuff that speaks to me”:
Henderson, S., & Srinivasan, A. (2009). An empirical
Exploring the characteristics of digital possessions.
analysis of personal digital document structures. In
Journal of the American Society for Information
Symposium on Human Interface (pp. 394-403).
Science and Technology, 64(8), 1723-1734.
Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.Hicks, B. J., Dong, A., Palmer, R., & Mcalpine, H. C. Marshall, C., & Tang, J. C. (2012). That syncing feeling:
(2008). Organizing and managing personal electronic early user experiences with the cloud. In Proceedings
files: A mechanical engineer's perspective. ACM of the Conference on Designing Interactive Systems
Transactions on Information Systems, 26(4), 23. (pp. 544-553). ACM.
Jones, W., Bruce, H., & Dumais, S. (2001). Keeping found Meho, L. I., & Tibbo, H. R. (2003). Modeling the
things found on the web. In Proceedings of the 10th information‐seeking behavior of social scientists:
International Conference on Information and Ellis's study revisited. Journal of the American society
Knowledge Management (pp. 119-126). ACM. for Information Science and Technology, 54(6), 570-
587.
Jones, W., Dinneen, J. D., Capra, R., Diekema, A., &
Pérez-Quiñones, M. (2017) Personal Information Nardi, B., Anderson, K., & Erickson, T. (1995). Filing and
Management. In J. McDonald & M. Levine-Clark finding computer files. In Proceedings of East-West
(Eds.), Encyclopedia of Library and Information HCI. Moscow.
Sciences, Fourth Edition, (pp. 3584-3605). CRC Press.
Oliver, G., & Harvey, R. (2016). Digital Curation.
Kaye, J., Vertesi, J., Avery, S., Dafoe, A., David, S., Onaga, Chicago: ALA Neal-Schuman.
L., ... & Pinch, T. (2006). To have and to hold:
Shneiderman, B., & Wattenberg, M. (2001). Ordered
exploring the personal archive. In CHI ‘06:
treemap layouts. In INFOVIS 2001: IEEE Symposium
Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on Human
on Information Visualization (pp. 73-78). IEEE.
Factors in computing systems (pp. 275-284). ACM.
Teevan, J., Alvarado, C., Ackerman, M. S., & Karger, D. R.
Khoo, C. S., Luyt, B., Ee, C., Osman, J., Lim, H. H., &
(2004). The perfect search engine is not enough: a
Yong, S. (2007). How users organize electronic files on
study of orienteering behavior in directed search. In
their workstations in the office environment: a
CHI ‘04: Proceedings of the SIGCHI conference on
preliminary study of personal information organization
Human factors in computing systems (pp. 415-422).
behaviour. Information research, 11(2), 12-2.
Thomson, L. (2015). The guided tour technique in
Kwaśnik, B. (1991). The importance of factors that are not
information science: explained and illustrated. In
document attributes in the organisation of personal
Proceedings of the 78th Annual Meeting of the
documents. Journal of documentation, 47(4), 389-398.
Association for Information Science and Technology
Lansdale, M. W. (1988). The psychology of personal (135:1-135:5).
information management. Applied ergonomics, 19(1),
Vitale, F., Janzen, I., & McGrenere, J. (2018). Hoarding
55-66.
and Minimalism: Tendencies in Digital Data
Limpert, E., Stahel, W.A., & Abbt, M. (2001). Log-normal Preservation. In CHI ‘18: Proceedings of the 36th
distributions across the sciences: keys and clues. Annual ACM Conference on Human Factors in
BioScience, 51(5), 341–352. Computing Systems (587:1--587:12). ACM.
Malone, T. W. (1983). How do people organize their Watkins, R. D., Sellen, A., & Lindley, S. E. (2015). Digital
desks?: Implications for the design of office collections and digital collecting practices. In CHI ‘15:
information systems. ACM Transactions on Proceedings of the 33rd Annual ACM Conference on
Information Systems (TOIS), 1(1), 99-112. Human Factors in Computing Systems (pp. 3423-
3432). ACM.
Marshall, C. (2008) Rethinking Personal Digital Archiving
Part 2, Implications for Services, Applications, and Whittaker, S. (2011). Personal information management:
Institutions. D-Lib Magazine 14(3/4). from information consumption to curation. Annual
Review of Information Science and Technology
Marshall, C., Bly, S., & Brun-Cottan, F. (2006). The long
(ARIST), 45(1), 1-62.
term fate of our digital belongings: Toward a service
model for personal archives. In Archiving Conference Wilcox, R. (2011). Modern statistics for the social and
(Vol. 2006, No. 1, pp. 25-30). Society for Imaging behavioral sciences: a practical introduction. CRC.
Science and Technology.