A communication protocol based on NK boolean networks for
coordinating collective action
Yori Ong
University of Groningen
yori.ong@gmail.com
Abstract
In this paper, I describe a digital social communication protocol (Gridt) based on
Kauffman’s NK boolean networks. The main assertion is that a communication network
withthistopologysupportsinfinitelyscalableself-organizationofcollectiveactionwithout
requiringhierarchyorcentralcontrol. Thepaperpresentsthefunctionalityofthisprotocol
and substantiates the following propositions about its function and implications:
• Communication via NK boolean networks facilitates coordination on collective ac-
tion games for any variable number of users, and justifies the assumption that the
game’s payoff structure is common knowledge;
• Use of this protocol increases its users’ transfer empowerment, a form of intrinsic
motivation that motivates coordinated action independent of the task or outcome;
• Communication via this network can be considered ’cheap talk’ and benefits the
strategyofplayerswithalignedinterests,butnotofplayerswithconflictinginterests;
• Absence of significant barriers for its realization warrants a timely and continuing
discussion on the ethics and implications of this technology;
• Fullrealization of thetechnology’spotential calls for afree-to-use service with max-
imal transparency of design and associated economic incentives.
1 Introduction
The ideas proposed in this article result from addressing the following question: under which
conditions can person A (Alice) do action X to intentionally cause person B (Bob) to do
action Y? Alternatively phrased, it asks what it means for Alice to hold power over Bob’s
motivation for a certain action. This question is inspired by a state of the world that asks
for behavior change interventions on large scales and in many forms. As stated, the question
is underspecified. A reasonable answer would be that it depends on the specific action Y
which Alice intends to elicit from Bob and the relation between the two. However, it is worth
exploring where a rational approach to this question can lead while maintaining generality
as much as possible. Therefore, I refrain from overspecifying the intended outcome Y or
characteristicsofAliceandBob,butIwilldesirethatageneralsolutionisscalable,repeatable,
and valid under common knowledge (i.e.: does not hinge on any person knowing less than
others).
1
4202
rpA
42
]IS.sc[
1v04261.4042:viXraCommon knowledge is a pivotal concept in this discussion, referring to the state in which
a everyone in a group knows ϕ, everyone knows that everyone knows ϕ, and so on. In the
contextofthisarticle, Iusethetermtoinclude’sufficientcommonp-belief.’ Thatis, everyone
believes ϕ with a certain probability p, everyone p-believes that everyone p-believes ϕ, etc.
The probability p can be considered sufficient to keep the optimal strategies of players in a
game the same as they would be under certain knowledge of ϕ [1]. This interpretation allows
for common knowledge to be inferred from information that is public, and weakened by signs
of others not knowing. Where common knowledge is mentioned in this article, a reader may
interpret it as referring to a sufficiently justified common p-belief.
Alice doing X contributes to Bob doing Y, if it leads to Bob expecting an increased
utility from doing Y compared to not doing Y. For Alice to influence Bob intentionally,
she must know how the utility that Bob expects from his actions is affected by her action
X. For example, this is the case if Alice an Bob commonly know that when Alice does X
(commands), Bob is sufficiently rewarded for doing Y (obey) or penalized for not doing Y
(disobey). Unequal ability to dispense monetary rewards or threats of harm often provide
two people with sufficient common knowledge to infer a simple game structure.
In reality, such clear hierarchical relations between any pair of people are rare. We are
oftenuncertainabouthowtheutilitiesofotherpeopleareaffectedbyactionsofthemselvesand
others. In Bayesian game theory, variations in the correspondence between people’s actions
and their utility is referred to as their player type. In uncertain situations, Alice doing X
might lead to Bob doing Y, but it might also deter him from doing Y and turn out costly for
her if she misjudges Bob’s type. Intentionally influencing the actions of others would require
knowledge their player type first, or cleverly dealing with uncertainty.
Dealing with uncertainty in another person’s type is discussed by Steven Pinker [2] in an
example of how indirect speech can be used when bribing a police officer. A person pulled
over for speeding would not blatantly offer the officer a bribe to let them go, since doing so
could lead to an even bigger penalty. Instead, the person hides a bank note in his ID papers
and asks the officer if ’they see a way to make the situation easier for both’. A corrupt officer
will take the bribe and let the driver go. An honest officer may still know what the diver is
trying to do, but will have no proof of a bribery attempt and can still only issue a ticket. This
indirect speech strategy avoids the worst outcome for the driver in case the officer is honest,
but still results in a mutually beneficial outcome with a corrupt (or cooperative) officer.
Commonknowledgebetweenindividualsofone’sintenttoinfluencetheotherisessentially
a proposal to define their relation as ’influencer’ and ’influencee’. Both ratifying and rejecting
such a proposal can damage the social standing of either individual. The indirect speech
strategy therefore intends to avoid this common knowledge, and taps into common knowledge
of a higher level cooperation game. At this higher level, a cooperative receiver will be given
a reason to act as suggested, without this affecting the relation between the individuals. A
scalable and generally applicable strategy to evoke cooperation from the right player types,
without the risk of negatively affecting any relations could bring great value for orchestrating
behavior change on a societal scale.
IillustrateinthisarticlethatacommunicationprotocolbasedonKauffman’sNK boolean
networks [3] provides such a strategy. These networks are characterized by N nodes with a
corresponding boolean output from a function that takes exactly K directed inputs from
other nodes. This logic results in dynamical systems that transition between ordered and
chaotic behavior, dependent on the connectivity parameter K. As a communication network,
the semi-regular and directed properties of the underlying graph have unique implications for
common knowledge and social influence among connected individuals. The rationale behind
this claim is illustrated in figure 1. Imposing this model onto social systems sparks a range of
theoretical, technological and societal questions. Section two of this paper conceptualizes this
2protocol as a digital technology and explains its functionality. The third section motivates
the protocol’s utility for coordination, distribution of social influence and its relation with
intrinsic motivation. Finally, I discuss the protocol in relation to the collective behavior of
NK networks of automata and its potential societal implications.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 1: (a) Direct speech is unambiguous, making Alice’s attempt to influence Bob common knowledge
to both. Bob may or may not take it well. (b) Using indirect speech avoids common knowledge of what
Alice wants to achieve, but Bob may not get her hint, or wonder what she is implying. (c) Transmitting
signalsoveradirectednetworkavoidscommonknowledgeofanyinformationgoingfromsendertoreceiver,
but still allows for unambiguous communication. It does require that the connection and communication
protocol is common knowledge to all in the network.
2 Communication protocol
This section conceptualizes the communication protocol on the NK boolean network as a
digital technology. The terms user and player are both used to refer to a person using the
protocol, depending on the technological or theoretical context of the discussion.
Users of the protocol can make the autonomous decision to connect themselves to others
in an NK network topology. These networks consist of N nodes/users, all of which receive
input from exactly K other nodes through directed links. The primary input and output
values of each node are (0) or (1). For the purpose of illustration, we choose K = 4, for
which I provide argumentation later on. The following information associated with each user
is continuously transmitted along the directed links to users who receive their input:
• A username and profile;
• A boolean signal, set to (0) by default, that the user can activate by changing it to (1);
• An optional, free form message that the user can formulate, once their signal has been
set to (1);
A public information channel presents at least the following information to all users upon
connecting to the network:
• A specification of an action that users can take and confirm to others by setting their
signal from (0) to (1);
• An implicit or explicit reward that can be expected by cooperating users who have
activated their signal;
• The reset condition under which all (1) signals are simultaneously set back to (0),
repeating the cycle.
3This information remains public to all connected users. Outside of the network, this informa-
tion is communicated publicly or privately. In addition, we may assign a private ID to each
user in the network, which is privately known and communicated at the users discretion. The
completeprotocolitselfispublicinformationanditspurposeandfunctioncanbesummarized
as follows:
1. All users can deduce that they have common knowledge of the action on which they co-
ordinate, thenumberof2K possiblesignalcombinationstheycanobserve, theirpossible
signal states (0,1) and the fact that all their decisions are made autonomously.
2. This common knowledge provides the basis for playing repeated coordination games,
while the network lets users asynchronously communicate their decisions to each other.
3. No information transmitted via this network converts to common knowledge between
sender and receiver. (Alice seeing Bob does not imply that Bob sees Alice: users cannot
see who receives their signal.)
4. Any variable number of N users can self-organize into this network, while the relevant
neighborhood properties of each node are conserved at all time.
The directed network property gives users autonomous control over (re)wiring their in-
coming links, since doing this leaves the inputs of others unaffected. Therefore, users can
either sample their links randomly, or link with specific others in the network after learning
their IDs. The semi-regular property ensures that the number of inputs for all users and the
average size of their output sets (users who receive their input) are both equal to K. Adding
users to the network at any time does not affect this condition. However, to maintain these
conditions throughout the play of a coordination game, restrictions must apply to users who
want to disconnect and rewire their links. Therefore, rewiring incoming links is restricted to
users who have made their final choice by setting their signal to (1). Users who opt to leave
can be disconnected from the network as soon as the reset conditions of the game are met.
Communicating exclusively over directed links prevents any pair of users from seeing each
other mutually and converting transmitted information to common knowledge. This also
prevents the basis of common knowledge from being changed by internal communication. By
eliminating the possibility of conversation, relations between users remain solely based on the
purpose of coordinating their actions. Free expression is facilitated by the messages users can
attach to their activated signal, but contradicting common knowledge will then result in a
degree of self-inconsistency. This protects the game against disruption from within. Users
who no longer wish to coordinate under the conditions of the network can still choose to leave
and join or initiate other networks.
The importance of directed links does not mean that no information can ever be trans-
mitted in the reverse direction. As long as this information does not disclose the number or
identity of users in the outgoing set, the conditions for the protocol to function are upheld.
For instance, a boolean signal activated anonymously ’from behind’ would inform a user that
their activity is seen by at least one active user. This information is valuable for coordina-
tion, but uninformative enough to uphold the basic conditions of the protocol. In the figures
2 and 3, the communication protocol is visualized with a basic user interface and diagram
representing the information flow to and from a user.
4Figure2: AbasicapplicationinterfaceforcommunicatingovertheNK-booleannetwork, fromtheperspec-
tive of user Bob. Bob receives input information from Alice, Chris, Daisy and Eva. Left: Bob’s signal is
inactive. Right: Bob has activated his signal. Additionally he receives the signal that his activity is seen by
at least one active user.
Figure 3: Diagram depicting the information received by and sent from user Bob, corresponding to the
right screen of Figure 1.
53 Utility and relation with intrinsic motivation
I have implied that this communication protocol is mainly useful for coordinating decisions in
collective action games. These games are characterized by the highest utility being obtained
by each player if all cooperate, while doing so is costly if the number of cooperators is too low.
Thisresultsinnon-cooperationalwaysbeingaNashequilibrium. Standardgametheoryoffers
nosolutiontosuchdilemmas,butinreality,commonknowledgeoftheoptimalsolutionisoften
a sufficient condition for people to coordinate successfully [4, 5]. Although the underpinning
graph topology preserves common knowledge of the game structure at any scale, it does not
make guarantee an instantaneous payoff from collective action in real life. Adoption of this
communication protocol on a meaningful scale would thus depend on whether there is a task-
independent utility associated with its use. In this section, I substantiate the claim that
this protocol promotes cooperation, and that its use is driven by intrinsic ’empowerment’
motivation.
Thereasoningbehindtheassertionthatthecommunicationprotocolpromotescooperation
isbasedonusers’inabilitytoverifythetruthfulnessofthesignalstheyreceive. Signalsindicate
a user’s cooperation with some collective action, which in reality may be true or not. The
fact that users do not see each other mutually also removes possible social costs associated
with lying. So, how is this helpful? Costless and unverifiable information exchanged between
players in a game without limiting their strategies is referred to as ’cheap talk’. Assuming
that the technology can indeed be used at no cost, and noting that it establishes the game
structure for its players, the protocol provides them with a cheap talk channel. Theoretical
andcomputationalworkhasdemonstratedthatwhetherplayerstransmittruthfulinformation
in equilibrium depends on the game’s payoff structure [6, 7, 8]. When players’ interests fully
align,communicatingtruthfullyisaNashequilibrium. Inthecaseoffullyconflictinginterests,
babbling (signaling with no correlation to the truth) is the only equilibrium. In intermediate
cases, players can be expected to partially disclose private information. The utility of the
communication protocol is therefore strongly biased toward players coordinating on actions
based on common interest, since it provides no improved strategy for self-interested players.
Unlike in simulations, real collective action often comes with an uncertain and delayed
reward, even if coordination succeeds. (Collective health behavior, climate adaptation and
political protest are typical examples.) The use of a new technology to support coordination
thus requires a form of motivation that is separable from its outcome, or intrinsic motivation.
I specifically consider having causal influence on the actions of others to be this intrinsic
motivator, which served as the introductory problem of this paper. The underlying network
logic invites a computational perspective on this concept, even though it is focused on human
decisions. In multi-agent reinforcement learning, the (potential) causal influence of one agent
onanothercanbecomputedasthemutualinformationbetweenanagent’sactionandanother
agent’s action or observation. A proportional reward function for the influencing agent is
referred to as transfer empowerment [9]. Equipping artificial agents with this form of intrinsic
motivation has been shown to promote emergent cooperation in multi-agent simulations [10,
11].
Decentralized evaluation of transfer empowerment requires agents to have access to a
model of other agents’ inputs and processing functions. When internalized, such a model is
equivalent to a basic ’theory of mind’ mechanism: the capacity to assign mental states to oth-
ers. Humans are capable of recursively nesting representations of others’ mental states up to
five orders [12]. However, this also complicates predicting the influence our actions can have
on others. Only under specific conditions can we construct a reliable model of others’ mental
state and transmit our influence to them. Connecting people in NK networks creates such a
conditionbybothsecuringcommonknowledgeofacoordinationgameandfacilitatingthenec-
6essary communication. This makes the evaluation of ’player-to-player’ transfer empowerment
a trivial matter: signaling cooperation will cause an observer to expect an increased payoff
from their own cooperation. The fact that all players have the same information from which
to derive their potential influence suggests that the basis for experiencing this empowerment
is distributed evenly.
Connection to psychological theory
The concept of computational transfer-empowerment as intrinsic motivation paints a consis-
tent picture with validated psychological theory on the topic. Self Determination Theory,
mainly developed by Ryan and Deci [13] identifies autonomy, competence and relatedness
as the three basic psychological needs for humans to thrive. I hypothesize that coordinat-
ing collective action over NK networks creates conditions that contribute positively to the
user’s three basic psychological needs. Competence refers to a person’s need for the ability to
meaningfully influence their own environment. If we consider other people to be part of this
environment, transfer empowerment of one person to another is an aspect of competence. Co-
ordinationviathenetworkcanalsoproduceasenseofjointcompetenceinachievinggoalsthat
cannotbereachedindividually. Theprotocolalsopreservesautonomyofallusersthroughout,
since the directed flow of information prevents any form of coercion. Furthermore, a sense of
relatedness may be derived from the common knowledge of a shared goal between connected
individuals.
Although digging deeper into the psychology of intrinsic motivation would result in a rich
nuance, many psychological concepts are not operational from a computational perspective
[14]. Since the operationalization of this communication protocol is highly feasible, unifying
both perspectives becomes increasingly necessary. Various forms of intrinsic motivation have
been formalized in (multi-agent) reinforcement learning and modeled in computational cog-
nitive sciences. Some resulting definitions and architectures have a clear correspondence to
fundamental aspects of human intelligence. Examples of such work include Schmidhuber’s
formal theory of creativity, fun, and intrinsic motivation [15], the Clarion cognitive architec-
ture [16] and intrinsic reward mechanisms derived from social influence [10], empowerment
[11] and theory of mind [17]. The conceptualization of NK boolean networks for human com-
munication holds potential for social experiments and thought experiments that help ground
thesocialsciencesincomputationalfoundations. Theinfluenceoflogicalnetworkarchitecture
ontheenhancementorsuppressionofcertainhumanexperiencescanofferaglimpseintotheir
computational nature. For example, preventing pairwise common knowledge in favor of col-
lective common knowledge could impact experiences like trusting others, feeling disciplined,
taking offense, or detecting hypocrisy. Conversely, computational models of cognition and
intrinsic reward could be validated by their ability to account for aspects of real collective
behavior on the network.
The implications of the proposed communication architecture on human behavior need
to be understood from a computational frame in order to anticipate them. However, not
formally understanding societal impact is typically not a barrier for technology to be realized,
as long as the incentives for its development are sufficient. In fact, a common and informal
language will be indispensable for the experiencing, disseminating and achieving acceptance
of new possibilities. To reference the connection between the exact and social sciences, the
communication protocol has been named ’Gridt’, a blend of grid, a network for distributing
some property, and grit, the trait of maintaining intrinsic motivation for goals with delayed
payoff [18].
74 The connectivity parameter K
Building upon the preceding discussion on transfer empowerment, I will give a computational
motivation for choosing the indegree K of all nodes on the network. The argument revolves
aroundthefractionQofcooperators,whosesignalstateis(1). Inacollectiveactiongame,the
utility a player obtains is an increasing function of this fraction. Knowing the state variable
Q means knowing whether a player’s best choice is to cooperate or not. However, users of the
Gridt network have no knowledge of Q or the number of users in the network by default, and
are left to estimate these state variables based the information available to them.
We consider the situation in which Alice’s signal is one of the K inputs seen by Bob. We
denoteBob’sestimateofQbyQ˜ ,thestateofAlice’ssignalbyS = (0,1),andthenumberof
B A
(1) signals observed by Bob as ω . Using only K and ω as input information, Bob’s inferred
B B
probability density over Q˜ would be a Beta distribution: Q˜ ∼ Beta(ω +1, K−ω +1).
B B B B
The influence of Alice activating her signal on Bob’s estimate Q˜ can then be quantified as a
statistical distance between Q˜ (K,ω ) and Q˜ (K,ω +1):
B B B B
(cid:104) (cid:12)(cid:12) (cid:105)
I = D p(Q˜ |S = 1,ω )(cid:12)(cid:12)p(Q˜ |S = 0,ω )
A KL B A B,A¯ (cid:12)(cid:12) B A B,A¯
This expression measures change in Bob’s estimate of the fraction of cooperators in the
network caused by Alice’s signal, while conditioning on Bob’s other input signals (written as
ω ). The use of the Kullback-Leibler divergence (D ) as distance measure results in an
B,A¯ KL
expression proportional to the transfer empowerment from Alice to Bob. Since the optimal
strategy ina collective actiongame is determinedbythe number ofcooperators, Alice’s signal
has a potential influence on his action as well. The potential influence of an individual signal
is inversely proportional to the K, which is fixed for all users.
Additionally, we consider the probability P that a player’s outgoing set is empty, under
∅
theassumptionthattheinputsetofeachusersissampleduniformlyatrandomfromallothers
onthenetwork. ThisprobabilityasafunctionofN andK isgivenbyP = (1− K )N−1. On
∅ N−1
the domain [K +1,∞), P is a monotonically increasing function of N. In the limit N → ∞
∅
this function reduces to P = e−K. Therefore, P < e−K, for a given K.
∅ ∅
The choice of K is therefore a trade-off between the potential influence of each signal on
observerandtheexpectednumberofplayersintheoutgoingset. Figure3displaysanexample
of the case N = 12 and K = 4 with corresponding histogram of outdegree k . The expected
out
value of the influence of each signal I on each observer is computed for values of K, where
a
the distribution over ω is taken to be binomial with p = 0.5. The resulting ballpark range
B,A¯
for optimal K is the highlighted domain [3,6], corresponding to the highest influence of an
individual player’s signal for which P < 0.05.
∅
We find that an increasing the connectivity parameter K increases the expected number
ofobservers, butdecreasesthepotentialcausalinfluenceofeachsignal. Theballparkestimate
K ∈ [3,6] shows interesting parallels with other works that theoretically and experimentally
studied coordinating behavior in humans. Jiang et al. [19] studied the dependence of coor-
dination failure rate in successive public goods games on the number of players M. Their
simulation showed low rates of failure in groups up to M = 5, which increased abruptly when
the group size was increased to M = 7 and jumped again to certain failure for groups beyond
M = 19 players. Social experiments with group sizes of 2 and 20 showed that all large groups
failed to coordinate, while the outcomes of groups of 2 were more varied. The psychologi-
cal interpretation given to these results was that smaller groups reduce the bystander effect.
Centola et al. [20] found empirically that in groups of 20 to 30 people, the influence of a
committed minority of 25-31% defying an existing convention is sufficient to overturn it. This
was accurately predicted by their theoretical model, which converged on a critical mass of
825% for large population sizes and many interaction rounds. For predicting collective behav-
ior, these studies respectively modeled evolving strategies of agents based on realized payoffs
and a contagion process among agents endowed with memory. These distinct approaches also
seem to suggest that collective action takes off once roughly one in four cooperates. This
motivates the choice of of K ∼ 4 on the Gridt network, which makes each individual signal
represent ∼ 25% of the total input.
(a) Example of a random NK network with N = 12, K = 4 and the outdegree
histogram corresponding to the graph.
(b) Left: Expected influence I and the probability P of k = 0 as a function of
a ∅ out
K. Right: Beta distributions for estimating Q for K =4 and subsequent numbers of
active signals.
Figure 4
Dynamics of NK boolean networks
Inherent to any discussion on NK boolean networks is their behavior as dynamical networks
of automata. The original model defined by Stuart Kauffman [3] was invented to study the
regulation of gene expression. It consists of N automata, each with two possible output
values (0,1) produced by a random function of K inputs received from randomly chosen
other automata. The behavior of the network is found to transition between an ordered and
chaotic phase, depending on the connectivity parameter K and the bias of boolean functions
toward returning the value (1) [21, 22]. In the ordered phase, the state of the network
evolves in repeating patterns with short cycles (attractors) that are robust against external
perturbations. In the chaotic phase, cycles of repetition are long and small perturbations
9propagate easily into new patterns of the system’s behavior.
Kauffman’s NK boolean network model is encountered mostly in studies of biological and
physicalsystems,butmakesnomeaningfulappearencesinthesocialsciences. Clearly,humans
arenosimpleautomata,andtheNK topologyisnoteasilyrecognizableasasocialinteraction
network. The Gridt protocol is also not intended as a model of an existing reality, but as
an unexplored technological possibility to make social networks with this topology emerge.
To interpret the meaning of ordered and chaotic behavior in this context, we first note that
onlinecommunicationscanindeedcausallyinfluenceofflinebehavior[23,24]. Propertiesofthe
network’s collective dynamics can be determined with sufficient knowledge of how individuals
respond to social influence, which depends on each player’s utility function [25]. We may
treat any other external motivators as perturbations to their response to social influence. The
underlying graph can then be expected to promote collective human behavior that responds
either predictably or capriciously to individual whims or external influences. The boundary
between these phases, or the ’edge of chaos’, is considered the optimal state in which complex
adaptive systems balance between stability and adaptability [26].
The Gridt protocol presents us with the interesting opportunity to control the connectiv-
ity parameter K in social networks, among other variables. Although the underlying graph
adheres to the basic definition of the NK model, its implementation introduces important
differences from the original model. These include a time-varying node and edge set, an ex-
pected skewness of the outdegree distribution, and the (1) → (0) transition being allowed
only collectively. Previous theoretical and computational work is not directly applicable to
the Gridt network, but does hint at what might be found. The annealed model of Derrida
and Pomeau [22] shows the existence of a critical connectivity when the boolean functions
and inputs of each node are randomly resampled at each time step. In boolean networks with
scale-free directed and undirected topologies, the phase diagram forms a landscape deter-
mined by the network density, degree exponent and output bias [27, 28]. The Gridt network
presents the case of a fixed indegree and an outdegree that will likely tend toward a heavy-
tailed distribution, as a result of network growth and individual users’ connection preferences.
Furthermore, acollective(1) → (0)transitionimposesaperiodicityonthesystem, whichsug-
geststhatitsdynamicscouldresemblecardiactissue, inwhichthetransitionfromtachycardia
to fibrillation is a transition to spatiotemporal chaos [29]. Tuning the connectivity parameter
K, recommendation algorithms for establishing links and collective action thresholds might
thus be used to influence collective human behavior on various scales, without coercion or any
traceable influence on people’s individual decisions.
5 Considerations for implementation
What value for science and society can be expected from an actual digital implementation of
theGridtprotocol? Whowouldsetupsuchadigitalinfrastructureandcontroltheparameters
that determine the system’s dynamics? And if it works as suggested, does it foster only
constructive, or also destructive collective behavior? These are naturally arising questions,
fueled by the ever growing impact of digital networks and algorithms on roughly 7 billion
current users. The question whether it is a good idea to create this technology at all seems
to present a false dilemma, if the incentives and resources to do so are widely available. In
this final section, I briefly theorize which new strategies can be devised, whom they benefit,
and which perspectives help us understand the potential consequences.
TheGridtprotocolcontributestointegratingthemanydisciplinesandmethodsforstudy-
ing collective human behavior. As a start, it bridges two main modeling approaches, based on
contagion diffusion and an individual’s utility, each of which has its respective strengths and
weaknesses. Diffusion models replace the ’micro-mechanics’ of human decision making with
10simpleheuristicstoaccommodatethestudyofcomplexnetworksatlargerscales. Utility-based
models provide a general framework for the micro-mechanics of decision making, but make
implicit assumptions of common knowledge that can often not be justified in uncontrolled so-
cial environments. Self-organization of people in NK networks accounts for the justification
of common knowledge assumptions, a tractable game environment for each individual, and
emergent complexity at large scales. Science-driven development of the technology can be
motivated by new ways of measuring collective human behavior and further developing the
theories that predict the system’s behavior.
In addition to scientific advancement, the ability to orchestrate collective action toward a
specific goal can contribute greatly to economic and social power. So far, there has been no
mention of the entities responsible for facilitating the digital infrastructure and controlling
each network’s parameters and public information channel. What are relevant decisions and
payoffs for them and how do they affect the users’ perception of a coordination game? We
remind ourselves that users remain fully autonomous in their decision to join and cooperate,
which they do based on the inference that the protocol and payoffs are commonly known to
all. As mentioned in the introduction, the term common knowledge needs to be interpreted
broadly to include a sufficiently certain common belief. To secure the protocol’s function, I
assert that this belief must also be justified and complete. This means that the algorithm
implementation is public and verifiable, and no payoff-relevant information is kept hidden.
Since confirmation of this belief cannot be obtained via the network itself, this information
must be globally public. Therefore, successful coalitions between a technology provider, or-
ganizers and end users need transparent architectures for technology and business that best
align the interests of those involved. Such interests include data-autonomy and economic
fairness, which can respectively be secured by the use of decentralized web standards (e.g.
Solid [30]) and purpose-driven business models (e.g. steward-ownership [31, 32].
Interestingly, the suggestions to deal ethically with privacy and profit did not result from
weighing prescribed moral values. They instead seem to arise naturally as preferred strategies
for optimizing individual utility by forming the most stable coalition, given possibilities of
the Gridt protocol. One might suspect on this basis that a deeper logical connection exists
between the NK network topology in social systems and the emergence of moral or prosocial
behavior. However, such a connection does not mean that collective action is exclusively
constructive. While many cooperation games yield greater payoffs as the coalition becomes
larger (e.g. climate adaptation or lifestyle improvement), there are usually also players who
benefitfromcollectivenon-cooperation. Onecanimaginethatcollectiveactionswitheconomic
or political consequences will always leave some who are negatively affected. The morality of
self-organization is therefore not entirely indisputable and calls for a continuing investigation,
which I leave as an exercise for the philosophers.
Despite the simple definition of NK boolean networks, their conceptualization as social
communication networks gives rise to a complex adaptive system, whose characterization re-
quiresatransdisciplinaryview. Adisciplinespecificapproachwillquicklyencounterviolations
of its basic assumptions. For example, analysing the possible outcomes of coalition formation
games is the terrain of cooperative game theory. In this particular case, coalitions do not
involve binding agreements between players, which is otherwise a basic assumption. Dealing
with the resulting complexity, especially at larger scales, motivates the adoption of methods
from other disciplines like statistical mechanics. The necessity of merging viewpoints arose
previously in identifying aspects of individual utility and motivation. The expected emer-
gence of this complex adaptive system is directly linked to the ’action’ of the Gridt protocol.
This action is to introduce a structure to agents that limits their communication to transmit-
tingprimaryknowledgeandestablishingglobalcommonknowledge, whileinhibitingrecursive
mentalizing. Approximate network regularity and simple information transmission seem to
11be recurring features in complex adaptive systems and may be recognized in flocking birds
[33] and schooling fish [34], but also in road traffic and party people forming a conga line.
Conclusion
I have proposed that Gridt, a social communication protocol based on Kauffman’s NK
boolean networks, can trigger the emergence of self-organized collective action. Its directed
andsemi-regulartopologysecurescommonknowledgeofacollectiveactiongameamongplay-
ers, and allows causal social influence to be transmitted between them without hierarchy or
coercion. Thehighfeasibilityofimplementingthisprotocolinthedigitalagecallsforatimely,
transdisciplinary investigation into its implications and ethics.
References
[1] Nuh Aygun Dalkiran, Moshe Hoffman, Ramamohan Paturi, Daniel Ricketts, and Andrea Vattani. Com-
mon Knowledge and State-Dependent Equilibria, volume 7615 LNCS, pages 84–95. 2012.
[2] Steven Pinker, Martin A. Nowak, and James J. Lee. The logic of indirect speech. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 105:833–838, 1 2008.
[3] S.A. Kauffman. Metabolic stability and epigenesis in randomly constructed genetic nets. Journal of
Theoretical Biology, 22:437–467, 3 1969.
[4] KyleA.Thomas,PeterDeScioli,OmarSultanHaque,andStevenPinker. Thepsychologyofcoordination
and common knowledge. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 107:657–676, 2014.
[5] Julian De Freitas, Kyle Thomas, Peter DeScioli, and Steven Pinker. Common knowledge, coordination,
and strategic mentalizing in human social life. Proceedings of the National Academy of Sciences of the
United States of America, 116:13751–13758, 2019.
[6] VincentP.CrawfordandJoelSobel. Strategicinformationtransmission. Econometrica,50:1431,111982.
[7] Kris Cao, Angeliki Lazaridou, Marc Lanctot, Joel Z Leibo, Karl Tuyls, and Stephen Clark. Emergent
communication through negotiation, 2018.
[8] Joseph Farrell and Matthew Rabin. Cheap talk. Journal of Economic Perspectives, 10:103–118, 8 1996.
[9] ChristophSalgeandDanielPolani. Empowermentasreplacementforthethreelawsofrobotics. Frontiers
Robotics AI, 4, 6 2017.
[10] Natasha Jaques, Angeliki Lazaridou, Edward Hughes, Caglar Gulcehre, Pedro A. Ortega, DJ Strouse,
Joel Z. Leibo, and Nando de Freitas. Social influence as intrinsic motivation for multi-agent deep rein-
forcement learning. Proceedings of the 36 th International Conference on Machine Learning, 10 2019.
[11] T.vanderHeiden,C.Salge,E.Gavves,andH.vanHoof. Robustmulti-agentreinforcementlearningwith
social empowerment for coordination and communication. 12 2020.
[12] PeterKinderman,RobinDunbar,andRichardP.Bentall.Theory-of-minddeficitsandcausalattributions.
British Journal of Psychology, 89:191–204, 1998.
[13] EdwardL.DeciandRichardM.Ryan.ConceptualizationsofIntrinsicMotivationandSelf-Determination,
pages 11–40. Springer US, Boston, MA, 1985.
[14] Pierre Yves Oudeyer and Frederic Kaplan. What is intrinsic motivation? a typology of computational
approaches. Frontiers in Neurorobotics, 3, 2009.
[15] Ju¨rgenSchmidhuber. Formaltheoryofcreativity,fun,andintrinsicmotivation(1990-2010). IEEETrans-
actions on Autonomous Mental Development, 2:230–247, 9 2010.
[16] Ron Sun. Intrinsic Motivation for Truly Autonomous Agents, pages 273–292. Springer International
Publishing, Cham, 2018.
[17] Ini Oguntola, Joseph Campbell, Simon Stepputtis, and Katia Sycara. Theory of mind as intrinsic moti-
vation for multi-agent reinforcement learning. 7 2023.
[18] Angela L. Duckworth, Christopher Peterson, Michael D. Matthews, and Dennis R. Kelly. Grit: Perse-
verance and passion for long-term goals. Journal of Personality and Social Psychology, 92:1087–1101, 6
2007.
[19] Luo Luo Jiang, Jian Gao, Zhi Chen, Wen Jing Li, and Ju¨rgen Kurths. Reducing the bystander effect via
decreasing group size to solve the collective-risk social dilemma. Applied Mathematics and Computation,
410, 12 2021.
12[20] Damon Centola, Joshua Becker, Devon Brackbill, and Andrea Baronchelli. Experimental evidence for
tipping points in social convention. Science, 360:1116–1119, 6 2018.
[21] StuartA.Kauffman. Emergentpropertiesinrandomcomplexautomata. Physica D: Nonlinear Phenom-
ena, 10:145–156, 1 1984.
[22] Bernard Derrida and Yves Pomeau. Random networks of automata : A simple annealed approximation.
EPL-Europhysics Letters, 1:45–49, 1986.
[23] DamonCentola. Thespreadofbehaviorinanonlinesocialnetworkexperiment. Science,329:1194–1197,
2010.
[24] Tim Althoff, Pranav Jindal, and Jure Leskovec. Online actions with offline impact: How online social
networksinfluenceonlineandofflineuserbehavior. pages537–546.AssociationforComputingMachinery,
Inc, 2 2017.
[25] Dunia Lo´pez-Pintado and Duncan J. Watts. Social influence, binary decisions and collective dynamics.
Rationality and Society, 20:399–443, 11 2008.
[26] Christof Teuscher. Revisiting the edge of chaos: Again? Biosystems, 218:104693, 8 2022.
[27] Maximino Aldana. Boolean dynamics of networks with scale-free topology. Physica D: Nonlinear Phe-
nomena, 185:45–66, 10 2003.
[28] PiotrFronczak,AgataFronczak,andJanuszA.Ho(cid:32)lyst. Kauffmanbooleanmodelinundirectedscale-free
networks. Physical Review E - Statistical, Nonlinear, and Soft Matter Physics, 77, 3 2008.
[29] Zhilin Qu. Chaos in the genesis and maintenance of cardiac arrhythmias. Progress in Biophysics and
Molecular Biology, 105:247–257, 5 2011.
[30] Andrei Vlad Sambra, Essam Mansour, Sandro Hawke, Maged Zereba, Nicola Greco, Abdurrahman
Ghanem, Dmitrij Zagidulin, Ashraf Aboulnaga, and Tim Berners-Lee. Solid : A platform for decen-
tralized social applications based on linked data. 2016.
[31] Purpose Foundation. Steward-ownership - rethinking ownership in the 21st century. Available via
https://purpose-economy.org/file/364/. Date accessed: 21/04/2024.
[32] Nikolaos Kavadis and Steen Thomsen. Sustainable corporate governance: A review of research on long-
term corporate ownership and sustainability. Corporate Governance: An International Review, 31:198–
226, 1 2023.
[33] M. Ballerini, N. Cabibbo, R. Candelier, A. Cavagna, E. Cisbani, I. Giardina, V. Lecomte, A. Orlandi,
G. Parisi, A. Procaccini, M. Viale, and V. Zdravkovic. Interaction ruling animal collective behavior
depends on topological rather than metric distance: Evidence from a field study. Proceedings of the
National Academy of Sciences, 105:1232–1237, 1 2008.
[34] Charlotte K. Hemelrijk and Hanno Hildenbrandt. Schools of fish and flocks of birds: their shape and
internal structure by self-organization. Interface Focus, 2:726–737, 12 2012.
13