The Impact of Social Environment and Interaction
Focus on User Experience and Social Acceptability
of an Augmented Reality Game
Lorenzo Cocchia1,4, Maurizio Vergari1, Tanja Kojic´1, Francesco Vona3,4,
Sebastian Mo¨ller1,2, Franca Garzotto4, Jan-Niklas Voigt-Antons3
1Quality and Usability Lab, TU Berlin, Germany
2German Research Center for Artificial Intelligence (DFKI), Berlin, Germany
3Immersive Reality Lab, Hamm-Lippstadt University of Applied Sciences, Germany
4Department of Electronics, Information and Bio-engineering, Politecnico di Milano, Italy
Abstract—One of the most promising technologies inside the “The Metaverse [...] will change the future of online social
Extended Reality (XR) spectrum is Augmented Reality. This networking” [2]. Therefore, the paper wants to investigate
technology is already in people’s pockets regarding Mobile
how individuals should use these technologies and how they
Augmented Reality with their smartphones. The scientific com-
shouldinteractwitheachotherthroughXRtechnologies.Even
munity still needs answers about how humans could and should
interact in environments where perceived stimuli are different without considering technology, this subject understanding is
from fully physical or digital circumstances. Moreover, it is still already a complex matter. With the expectation that these
being determined if people accept these new technologies in technologies will become widely available, it’s predicted that
different social environments and interaction settings or if some
theywillalsochangehowpeoplesocialize,especiallyinpublic
obstaclescouldexist.ThispaperexplorestheimpactoftheSocial
places.
Environment and the Focus of social interaction on users while
playing a location-based augmented reality game, measuring
A. User Experience in AR and Games
it with user experience and social acceptance indicators. An
empirical study in a within-subject fashion was performed in UserExperience(UX)isameasurableaspectofallproducts
different social environments and under different settings of
andservices.OngoingresearchinUXspansvariousareasand
social interaction focus with N = 28 participants compiling
industries,makingitchallengingtoidentifyaunifiedapproach
self-reported questionnaires after playing a Scavenger Hunt in
Augmented Reality. The measures from two different Social for broad fields like AR. In one study [3], an attempt was
Environments (Crowded vs. Uncrowded) resulted in statistically made to establish standard UX metrics specifically for the
relevantmeandifferenceswithindicatorsfromtheSocialAccept- educational sector. Another research [4] concentrated on UX
ability dimension. Moreover, the analyses show statistically rele-
in cultural applications, such as heritage museums. Regarding
vant differences between the variances from different degrees of
Mobile AR (MAR), it was noted [5] that the methodology for
Social Interaction Focus with Overall Social Presence, Perceived
Psychological Engagement, Perceived Attentional Engagement, designing high-quality UX still needs to be explored despite
and Perceived Emotional Contagion. The results suggest that a an extensive literature review. A framework to enhance UX
location-based AR game played in different social environments by fostering emotional connections with MAR was suggested
andsettingscaninfluencetheuserexperience’ssocialdimension.
[6]. The domain of gaming offers a distinct experience and
Therefore, they should be carefully considered while designing
product category, with dedicated research focusing on the UX
immersive technological experiences in public spaces involving
social interactions between players. quality of games. A study [7] outlined three dimensions for
Index Terms—Mobile Augmented Reality, Location-Based evaluatingUXingames,aimingtoimproveplayerinteraction:
Games,UserExperience,SocialAspects,TechnologyAcceptance, cognitive factors (like learnability and memorability), social
Social Acceptability, Social Presence
factors (such as social influence and behavioral intentions),
and technical factors (providing engaging tools or surveys to
I. INTRODUCTIONANDRELATEDWORK
identify user personas). However, these frameworks serve as
Extended Reality (XR) technologies, which include Aug- guidelines rather than precise methodologies for systematic
mentedReality(AR),MixedReality(MR),andVirtualReality research.
(VR), are currently seeing a big increase in economic interest
B. Social Acceptability
as this study is being conducted. It’s expected that, due to
this trend, more people will soon be regularly using AR, Social acceptability is often defined through its absence in
VR, or MR applications. Many leading digital companies the Human-Computer Interaction (HCI) field, as highlighted
that greatly influence various industries invest money in XR byonestudy[8].TheAPADictionaryofPsychologydescribes
technologies [1]. An important issue they are dealing with is it as the lack of disapproval. Similarly, another study on
how users should interact with one another. It’s believed that wearable technology [9] characterizes it as the absence of
©2024IEEE.Personaluseofthismaterialispermitted.PermissionfromIEEEmustbeobtainedforallotheruses,inanycurrentorfuturemedia,including
reprinting/republishingthismaterialforadvertisingorpromotionalpurposes,creatingnewcollectiveworks,forresaleorredistributiontoserversorlists,or
reuseofanycopyrightedcomponentofthisworkinotherworks.DOIandlinktooriginalpublicationwillbeaddedassoonastheyareavailable.
4202
rpA
52
]CH.sc[
1v97461.4042:viXranegativefeedbackorjudgmentfromothers.Regardingmobile E. Objectives
devices, it is described as a balance between the desire to use
Overall, an interesting focus is on things that could affect
technologyandthesocialnormsoftheenvironment,involving
UX and how people socially interact when they use these
more than just avoiding embarrassment or being polite. It
applicationsinpublicplaces.Thisworkfirstaimstodetermine
includes a range of factors such as appearance, social status,
whether social settings can change the UX and how socially
and cultural norms [10].
acceptable XR technology is. Also, it looks closely at social
C. Social Context interactions to see if having a common goal affects UX and
social acceptability. Another key point is to look at Social
Theenvironmentarounduserswhentheyuseaproductisa
Presence,whichisabouthowpeoplefeelandconnectinthese
crucial factor affecting their overall experience. This context
environments,andseehowit’sinfluencedbythepublicsetting
is often considered more significant than previously thought
and how people interact. To explore these questions, a study
in discussions on UX. Among various definitions of UX, the
that exploits a mobile AR game of a Scavenger Hunt was
concept of “context” frequently appears as a key element. For
designed, leading to the following research questions:
instance, UX is defined as the outcome of actions motivated
by a specific context in one study [11]. Recent research has • To what extent can User Experience and/or Social Ac-
furtherexploredtherelationshipbetweenenvironmentandUX ceptability in a Mobile Augmented Reality game be af-
[12]. fected by Social Environments and the Social Interaction
1) Public Spaces: Research focusing solely on public Focus?
spaces, including studies on public delivery services, public • Canobservationsofusers’SocialPresencewhileplaying
display applications, and VR experiences in public areas, a Mobile Augmented Reality game under various Social
often seeks to identify design patterns or external factors Environments and Social Interaction Focus conditions
influencingUXbeyondthephysicalsetting[13]–[15].Intheir provide any insights?
analysis, these investigations commonly treat public spaces as
II. METHODS
a backdrop rather than a variable. An interesting concept is
Social Environment, which can be defined by the number A. Participants
of people, their proximity, and possibly their behavior in Theexperimentincluded28participants(N=28,17female,
the environment [16]. When there are no people in such an 11 male). The average age of participants was 22.54 (median
environment, we refer to it as “Uncrowded”, while if some = 23, SD = 1.05). Participants’ education was self-declared.
people are present, it is called “Crowded”. FifteendeclaredtobeintheprocessofobtainingaBachelor’s
2) Social Interactions: Social interaction is defined for
Degree, 12 of them are Master’s Degree or Master in Busi-
gamesin[17]asapurposefulbilateralcommunicationthatcan
ness Administration (MBA) candidates, while 1 participant
be either natural or stimulated by the game, depending on the
declared not to be a scholar of any higher education institute.
rules of the game: if rules are encouraging players to interact,
The Affinity for Technology Interaction [23] scores resulted
thenthegamehasastimulatedtypeofinteraction.Otherwise,
in a mean value of ATI= 4.13 (median = 4.44, SD = 0.85).
it is natural. Furthermore, it is relevant to understand all the
ParticipantswererecruitedfromthePolytechnicUniversityof
possibleinteractionsthatcouldbeaccomplishedwhileplaying
Milan and word of mouth.
agame.Fonsecaandtheirteammadearelevantcontributionto
thisfield[18]–[20].Thefirstdistinctionishavingornothaving B. Test Setup
acommongoalbetweenplayers.Thisisdefinedas“Focused” Asanexperimentalsetting,acitylandmarkandpublicpark
if people have common goals, “Unfocused”otherwise. were chosen. Moreover, a 2x2 factorial within-subject design
D. Social Presence withrandomizationofconditionshasbeensetup.Thestudy’s
data were collected using web-based surveys that included
Social Presence needs a universally agreed-upon definition
open-ended and multiple-choice items. In total, there were
withinthescientificcommunitysinceitsometimesneedstobe
fourexperimentalconditionsgivenbyallcombinationsoftwo
clarified. Despite this, the work in this area often serves as a
independent variables with two levels each:
foundational reference. The distinction between Telepresence,
orSpatialPresence,andSocialPresence—theformerrelating • Social Environment (Crowded, Uncrowded),
to the sensation of “being there” and the latter to the feeling • Social Interaction Focus (Unfocused, Focused).
of “being together with another” — is made clear. While 1) Social Environment: The environment of the game has
these definitions may initially not cover all aspects, they often toallowuserstoplayinpublic.Thismeansthatplayersshould
implicitlyincludethementalconstructsofsuchspaces,which feellikebeinginpublic,includingcrowdedareasorlandmarks
fosterasenseofspatialillusion.Inotherwords,intheHuman- of a city. At the same time, for the sake of the experiment,
Computer Interaction field, the concept of Presence examines they should be able to play even in an uncrowded area. The
how people perceive and interact with various technologies choicetouseARforthisapplicationcomesfromtheexpressed
[21]. This research led to the development of the Networked environmental need. With AR, a clear connection with the
Minds Social Presence Inventory [22], a validated tool based physical world is maintained during the experiment, and at
on self-reports for evaluating Social Presence. the same time, a digital layer is added to the experience.In consideration of this, two environmental conditions should found it, the second was released, and so on. When playing
be created: (C) Crowded scenario, (U) Uncrowded scenario in teams, each team member could collect the item for the
(see Fig. 1). A place in which the movement from Crowded whole team. However, this had to be a location-based game
to Uncrowded was easy and not too tiring was identified in in an AR experience. Therefore, it was decided that the items
places related to tourist landmarks close to city parks. With to be found had to be digital, hidden in the physical space,
this vision, playing at the landmark is the Crowded scenario, with clues distributed digitally. This should be done with the
while playing in the park is the Uncrowded one. Examples of same software deployed as a smartphone application to allow
such public spaces are probably present in most cities. playerstoplaywiththeirphones.Inthiscontext,theLocation-
2) Focus: Focused social interaction is an interaction in Based Augmented Reality technology serves as infrastructure
which many players have a common goal. For the sake of to place items in specific places related to real physical spots
the empirical study, it should be possible to have a setting in (location-basedfeature)andtomaketheitemsappearoverlaid
which social interactions between players are elicited and one over the information from the camera (Augmented Reality).
in which this is avoided. Given the extreme flexibility of this According to Fonseca et al., [19], this game satisfies the
game, this leads the research to have two other conditions to framework’srequirementsforcreatingagoodLocation-Based
be considered: (0) Unfocused social interaction (or playing Game (LBG). It establishes an underlying communication
individually not sharing a common goal), (1) Focused social between players (Social Interaction), while the changing icon
interaction (sharing a common goal in a team). ontheUIprovokesAchievementandReinforcementemotions.
Lastly, it is intrinsically a Real-World Play. Following Fon-
seca’s framework [18], the players are conducting activities
resembling Detective, Explorer, and Hunter.
(a)Crowded (b)Uncrowded
Fig. 1: Social Environments: a) Crowded - “Sforza’s Castle,
Milan, Italy”, b) Uncrowded - “Simplon Park, Milan, Italy”
C. Task Design
ThetaskwastoplayaScavengerHunt(orTreasureHunt)1. (a) (b) (c)
The traditional concept of the game is that whoever organizes
Fig.2:(a)Welcomeandnicknameinputpage.(b)Gamelobby.
the game prepares some physical items to be found by the
(c) Scan QR code message
players. When playing, players must find those items, often
hidden in some spots that are hard to find. In many versions
of this game, clues are distributed to the players: just one
D. Game Flow
clue may be distributed, and the next can be found only by
1) Moderator: The game starts by scanning a QR code
finding the previous item. A competition layer was added by
placed in specific locations depending on the Crowded or
displaying a timer to users and declaring the time record for
Uncrowded setting. The moderator must select a specific con-
that particular setting before each experiment run. According
figuration based on the condition (C0, C1, U0, U1), allowing
to [17], the choice to play a Scavenger Hunt fosters social
them to place an item. Once the item is placed, a clue can
interactions between players thanks to its particular rules:
be inputted in a banner that appears. This last step can be
Cooperation is brought by the teamwork to find objects, The
repeated for as many items as needed. When all the players
time score brings competition, and Meta-Gaming is present
join, the moderator starts the hunt.
since the coordination on how to tackle the clue solution
2) Player: Whentheplayerstartstheapplication,abanner
problem is completely left to the participants. It was decided
pops up asking for a nickname to be inputted, and they can
to implement a Scavenger Hunt version in which clues were
confirm by clicking the button “Connect” (see Fig. 2a). The
distributed sequentially to overview the players’ behavior
player sees their nickname among those who already joined
better while playing. Thus, at the start of the game, only the
(see Fig. 2b). When the moderator starts the experience, the
clue related to the first item is provided. When the player
player’s smartphone camera activates, and a banner asks to
1en.wikipedia.org/w/index.php?title=Scavenger hunt&oldid=1201190336 scan a QR code (see Fig. 2c). At this point, the player scansinteraction.Then,atutorialgameisplayedtofamiliarisethem
with the UI and explain how it works. After this introductory
part, the participant could start the condition communicated
by the moderator. The participants were supposed to play all
four conditions. After each condition, they had to stop and
answer web-based questionnaires encompassing Short User
Experience (UEQ-S) [24], Networked Minds Social Presence
Inventory (NMSPI) [22] and Social Acceptability [25]. Once
all the conditions had been played and rated, the participants
were asked to answer multiple-choice and open-ended ques-
tionsinafinalqualitativequestionnaire.Thecompleteduration
of the experiment was between 45-60 minutes per participant.
III. RESULTS
(a) (b) (c)
A repeated measure Analysis of Variance (ANOVA) was
Fig. 3: (a) Successful QR code scan. (b) Timer, collected performedtodeterminestatisticallysignificantdifferences.An
objects, remaining objects, unlocked objects. (c) Example of overview of all significant effects that will be explained in the
a clue following sections is given in Table I.
TABLE I: Effects of Social Environments (Environment) and
Social Interaction Focus (Focus) on Social Acceptability,
OverallSocialPresence,PerceivedPsychologicalEngagement,
Perceived Attentional Engagement, and Perceived Emotional
Contagion.
Parameter Effect dfn dfd F p ηp2
Environment SocialAcceptability 1 24 3.160 .013 .028
Focus OverallSocialPresence 1 24 10.561 .003 .109
Focus PerceivedPsychologicalEngagement 1 24 10.749 .003 .116
Focus PerceivedAttentionalEngagement 1 24 27.268 ¡.001 .215
Focus PerceivedEmotionalContagion 1 24 13.584 .016 .073
A. Social Environment
The Social Environment independent variable has a statis-
(a) (b) (c) tically significant effect on the dependent variable of Social
Acceptability(seeFig.5).Resultshaveshownthatparticipants
Fig. 4: (a) Collectable object. (b) Bump the phone into the
reported significantly higher average Social Acceptability for
object to collect. (c) Collected object icon.
the Uncrowded environment conditions (U0: M= 2.46, SD=
0.93; U1: M= 2.60, SD= 0.88) compared to the Crowded
environment conditions (C0: M= 2.20, SD= 1.21; C1: M=
the previous QR code the moderator placed and waits for the
2.10, SD= 1.39). The effects of Social Environments on User
hunttostart(seeFig.3a).Whenthehuntbegins,thegameUI
Experiencewerenotfoundtobesignificant.Nevertheless,itis
appears, the timer starts, and some items are assigned to be
interesting for later discussion to report the descriptive values
found (see Fig. 3b). The player can see the clue to reach the
(U0: M= 1.64, SD= 0.71; U1: M= 1.84, SD= 0.70, C0: M=
first item (see Fig. 3c), and when its location is reached, an
1.65, SD= 1.04; C1: M= 1.57, SD= 0.82).
object appears on top of what they saw from the camera (see
Fig. 4a). The player hits the digital object with the phone as B. Social Interaction Focus
if it were in the physical space (see Fig. 4b). The UI shows TheindependentvariableFocushasastatisticallysignificant
that the item has been collected, and the next clue is available effect on the dependent variables: Overall Social Presence,
(seeFig.4c).Whenalltheitemsarecollected,thegameends. Perceived Psychological Engagement, Perceived Attentional
Engagement, and Perceived Emotional (see Fig. 5). The main
E. Procedure
effect of Focus found on the Overall Social Presence score
Participants were invited to meet the moderator near a shows higher average values for the Unfocused Interaction
city landmark and public park. Initially, the participants were conditions (U0: M= 0.10, SD= 0.90; C0: M=0.01, SD= 0.95)
welcomed by a moderator and presented with an introduction compared to the Focused Interaction ones (U1: M=-0.53, SD
tothestudy,includingthegamerules.Aftersigningaconsent =0.84;C1:M=-0.65,SD=0.97).WhenitcomestoPerceived
form, the participants were given a pre-questionnaire about Psychological Engagement, participants have reported signif-
demographic information and their affinity for technology icantly higher average values for the Unfocused Interactionconditions (U0: M= 0.11, SD= 0.84; C0: M=0.01, SD= 0.96) Looking at the values of this piece of data, it is surprising
compared to the Focused Interaction ones (U1: M=-0.53, how the absolute values are small. The mean values are all
SD= 0.86; C1: M= -0.68, SD= 1.03). Furthermore, results in the range (-0.86, 0.57), and even quartiles rarely lie in the
haveshownsignificantlyhigheraveragePerceivedAttentional absolute values (2,3). An interesting case is the one coming
Engagement scores for the Unfocused Interaction conditions fromPerceivedAttentionalEngagement.Thisdimensiongives
(U0: M= 0.57, SD= 0.77; C0: M=0.26, SD= 1.14) compared lower scores if users feel that their attention was addressed
to the Focused Interaction ones (U1: M=-0.50, SD= 1.07; C1: to other teammates, and higher scores result from users self-
M=-0.86,SD=1.13).ForwhatconcernsPerceivedEmotional reporting that they felt that teammates were addressing their
Contagion,theresultshaveshownsignificantlyhigheraverage attention to them. This is when the difference between the
scoresfortheUnfocusedInteractionconditions(U0:M=0.02, means is the highest. This shows how strongly users were
SD = 1.31; C0: M=0.15, SD= 1.41) compared to the Focused convinced that their attention was directed to others when
Interactionones(U1:M=-0.63,SD=1.24;C1:M=-0.67,SD= playing in teams and how they felt like their teammates’
1.27).FocushadnosignificanteffectonUserExperience(see attention was addressed to them when they played alone.
Subsec. III-A for UX descriptive values).
B. Social Acceptability
C. Qualitative Results ANOVA results show a significant difference in the means
driven by the Social Context. Statistically, users regarded
Thefinalquestionnaireincludedthreeopenquestionsabout
the Uncrowded setting as more acceptable than the Crowded
general impressions of the testing procedure and the game.
one. This result follows what intuition could state: people
Some users were bothered by repeatedly filling in question-
should regard a more intimate public context as more socially
nairesregardingthetestingprocess.Otherfeedbackwasabout
acceptable, while a public context in which many people
how teams were formed, saying it would have been nice to
are passing around looking at you should be considered less
trythegameoutwithtotalstrangers.Finally,ausersuggested
socially acceptable. Nevertheless, even the more intensive
competitivesessions,withmoreteamscompetingagainsteach
publiccontextsettingissociallyaccepted,showinghighscores
other. Regarding the game, some participants suggested better
in the self-reported questionnaire.
position management and including other objects rather than
just green boxes. Some positive feedback was “It’s hard to
C. User Experience
imagine a clearer way to connect gamer and game”. Thus,
When analyzing the User Experience results, Schrepp et
this player felt like being inside a digital game in which
al. [26] benchmark was used to compare the results obtained.
they were the main character. In terms of future scenarios,
UEQ-S overall means lay between 1.57 and 1.84, depending
many people suggested the game for children’s events like
on the conditions. According to the benchmark comparison,
birthdays or scavenger hunts organized by the school. Some
thesemeanvaluescorrespondtoanexperiencemarkedaround
comments were about company events to improve teamwork
the distinction between the average mean related to Good and
skills, others as a game to play with friends with physical
Excellent. Therefore, the overall score of UEQ-S can tell that
prizes (like snacks or drinks) for picnics. Finally, many users
users had a Good to Excellent experience with the game.
mentionedthetouristicscenarioswhereonecouldfindhidden
Considering Hedonic and Pragmatic qualities, it is visible
spots or landmarks brought there by riddles. Then, according
how all the means related to the Hedonic quality are higher
to users, it could be used in zoos or museums.
than the Pragmatic one. According to the benchmark, all
IV. DISCUSSION hedonic qualities lie in the excellent experience area, while
most pragmatic qualities are good. This suggests that the
A. Social Presence
most preferred quality from the user was not related to the
Resultsshowhighersocialpresencescoresintheconditions tasks but more to the leisure or fun while playing. Qualitative
in which they are playing alone and lower social presence results align with this vision since the negative feedback
scoresintheconditionsinwhichtheyareinteams.Thismeans was not about the boredom of the experiment but about the
that users who were playing in teams were more cautious complexity of tasks or an improvement in the collectible
about their teammates’ thoughts, feelings, and actions, while position management and their relative riddles. The mean
when they were playing individually, they did not feel much values show how condition U1 gave higher results in Overall
influenced by the others and felt like others’ attention was Pragmatic and Hedonic qualities. This condition is relative to
addressed to them. This result is supported by statistical the Uncrowded public context and team play. According to
analysis as well. Two-way repeated measures ANOVA results UEQ-S results, this configuration is the most preferred one.
show significant statistical differences between the means of Thus, it is possible to conclude by simple mean comparison
many (but not all) Social Presence-related dimensions. Each fromdifferentdependentvariablesthattheSocialEnvironment
oftheseisaffectedbythesocialinteractionFocus.Theoverall and the social interaction Focus affect UX qualities, and
score and the Perceived Psychological Engagement, Atten- users prefer to play in an Uncrowded setting and teams or
tional Engagement, and Emotional Contagion are affected by with a Focus on Social Interaction between them. However,
the focus of social interaction. ANOVA results show no statistical relevance to the differenceFig. 5: Box plots of statistically significant results (-3...3). Whiskers indicate the first and third quartile, the continuous line
indicates the median, and the dashed line indicates the mean values.
in the means between the conditions. Therefore, no further were moreinvolved inbringing theircontribution to theteam.
conclusioncanbegivenfromstatistics.Thus,accordingtothe Playingindividually,ontheotherhand,theywerenotthinking
statisticalanalysisthathasbeenmade,UXdimensionsarenot anymore about their role inside the game but more about how
affected by the variation of public space or social interaction their behavior was seen by their teammates and passers-by
focus conditions. who were looking at the player playing the game.
V. CONCLUSION A. Limitations
In this research work, the Social Environment and Social
Some limitations have been identified with this work. A
Interaction Focus were the conditions of an empirical study
within-subjectdesignappliedinpublichastheriskofreporting
conducted in a public space. This work aimed to understand
biased results from users’ backgrounds. In other words, user
how these conditions could affect User Experience and So-
recruitmentcouldhavebeenmoredetailed.Forexample,users
cial Acceptability in a game based on Augmented Reality.
could have been foreigners in the public space where the
Particular attention was brought to Social Presence, which
empirical study is done. Moreover, more data could have
overlaps with User Experience and Social Acceptability. An
been gathered from users to understand different affective
AR application was specifically designed for this experiment.
dimensions.ThefullUEQquestionnairecouldhavebeenused
The game was a Scavenger Hunt-based game: players had to
rather than the short version, together with other surveys such
solve riddles to find digital items only visible if users were
as Self-Assessment Manikin and a between-subject design.
close enough to them in the physical public space. Results
werebuiltbyquantitativeanalysisofdatafromdifferenttypes B. Future Work
of questionnaires filled out by the participants. This analysis
More empirical research has to be done in this area to
included descriptive statistics and two-way repeated measures
understand how users interact with technologies and other
analysis of variances (ANOVA). Furthermore, qualitative data
people while using immersive technologies. Future studies
coming from observation was considered. Regarding Social
shouldconsiderdifferenttechnologiessuchasVR,MR,orAR
environments, it has been found that there is statistical evi-
paradigms. More dependent variables should be considered,
dence of users’ self-reported Social Acceptability differences
such as all the UEQ dimensions, and the study design should
betweenthesettings.Resultsreportgenerallyhighscoresasif
consider other types, such as the between-subject design.
usershadnoproblemswiththepublicenvironment.Neverthe-
Finally, these future studies should not only involve a larger
less, Uncrowded public settings were preferred, in particular,
number of participants and a more heterogeneous group in
the setting of playing in teams. This aspect, which comes
terms of nationality but also take into account precisely their
fromquantitativedataanalysis,isalsosupportedbyqualitative
profiles, such as their ATI profile and their education.
analysis.Usershardlycomplainedaboutthepublicsettingand
never seemed embarrassed while playing the game in front of
REFERENCES
strangersandapublicspace.Moreover,theylookedforwardto
playingthoseteamgamesoncetheyunderstoodthedynamics. [1] J. Kelly, “To build the metaverse, facebook plans to hire 10,000
tech workers in europe and bypass american talent,” Apr 2022.
Social Interaction Focus was statistically important in Social
[Online]. Available: https://www.forbes.com/sites/jackkelly/2021/10/18/
Presence. Users cared more about people experiencing co- to-build-the-metaverse-facebook-plans-to-hire-10000-tech-workers-in-europe-and-bypass-american-talent/
presence with them in unfocused settings than focused ones. ?sh=de3917281451
[2] Y. Cai, J. Llorca, A. M. Tulino, and A. F. Molisch, “Compute-and
Statistical evidence supports these findings. When playing in
data-intensive networks: The key to the metaverse,” arXiv preprint
teams, users thought more about their role in the game and arXiv:2204.02001,2022.[3] Y. Arifin, T. G. Sastria, and E. Barlian, “User experience metric for [24] M. Schrepp, A. Hinderks, and J. Thomaschewski, “Design and evalu-
augmented reality application: a review,” Procedia Computer Science, ation of a short version of the user experience questionnaire (ueq-s),”
vol.135,pp.648–656,2018. International Journal of Interactive Multimedia and Artificial Intelli-
[4] R. Hammady, M. Ma, and A. Powell, “User experience of mark- gence,vol.4,p.103,012017.
erless augmented reality applications in cultural heritage muse- [25] M. Koelle, S. Ananthanarayan, S. Czupalla, W. Heuten, and S. Boll,
ums:‘museumeye’as a case study,” in International Conference on “Your smart glasses’ camera bothers me! exploring opt-in and opt-
AugmentedReality,VirtualRealityandComputerGraphics. Springer, outgesturesforprivacymediation,”inProceedingsofthe10thNordic
2018,pp.349–369. ConferenceonHuman-ComputerInteraction,2018,pp.473–481.
[5] S.IrshadandD.R.B.A.Rambli,“Userexperienceofmobileaugmented [26] M. Schrepp, J. Thomaschewski, and A. Hinderks, “Construction of a
reality: A review of studies,” in 2014 3rd international conference on benchmarkfortheuserexperiencequestionnaire(ueq),”2017.
userscienceandengineering(i-USEr). IEEE,2014,pp.125–130.
[6] A.DirinandT.H.Laine,“Userexperienceinmobileaugmentedreality:
emotions, challenges, opportunities and best practices,” Computers,
vol.7,no.2,p.33,2018.
[7] A.Persada,“Userexperienceongamesdevelopmenttrends,”inJournal
ofPhysics:ConferenceSeries,vol.1341,no.4. IOPPublishing,2019,
p.042010.
[8] M.Koelle,S.Ananthanarayan,andS.Boll,“Socialacceptabilityinhci:
Asurveyofmethods,measures,anddesignstrategies,”inProceedings
ofthe2020CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,
2020,pp.1–19.
[9] N.KellyandS.Gilbert,“Thewearscale:Developingameasureofthe
social acceptability of a wearable device,” in Proceedings of the 2016
CHI Conference Extended Abstracts on Human Factors in Computing
Systems,2016,pp.2864–2871.
[10] J. Rico and S. Brewster, “Usable gestures for mobile interfaces: eval-
uating social acceptability,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
onHumanFactorsinComputingSystems,2010,pp.887–896.
[11] A. Ma¨kela¨ and J. Fulton Suri, “Supporting users’ creativity: Design
toinducepleasurableexperiences,”inProceedingsoftheInternational
ConferenceonAffectiveHumanFactorsDesign,2001,pp.387–394.
[12] A.Sonderegger,A.Uebelbacher,andJ.Sauer,“Theuxconstruct–does
theusagecontextinfluencetheoutcomeofuserexperienceevaluations?”
inIFIPConferenceonHuman-ComputerInteraction. Springer,2019,
pp.140–157.
[13] T.Chen,W.Guo,X.Gao,andZ.Liang,“Ai-basedself-servicetechnol-
ogyinpublicservicedelivery:Userexperienceandinfluencingfactors,”
GovernmentInformationQuarterly,vol.38,no.4,p.101520,2021.
[14] T.Keskinen,J.Hakulinen,T.Heimonen,M.Turunen,S.Sharma,T.Mi-
ettinen, and M. Luhtala, “Evaluating the experiential user experience
of public display applications in the wild,” in Proceedings of the 12th
internationalConferenceonMobileandUbiquitousMultimedia,2013,
pp.1–10.
[15] P.Eghbali,K.Va¨a¨na¨nen,andT.Jokela,“Socialacceptabilityofvirtual
reality in public spaces: Experiential factors and design recommenda-
tions,” in Proceedings of the 18th international conference on mobile
andubiquitousmultimedia,2019,pp.1–11.
[16] M. Vergari, T. Kojic´, F. Vona, F. Garzotto, S. Mo¨ller, and J.-N. Voigt-
Antons, “Influence of interactivity and social environments on user
experience and social acceptability in virtual reality,” in 2021 IEEE
VirtualRealityand3DUserInterfaces(VR). IEEE,2021,pp.695–704.
[17] J.P.Zagal,M.Nussbaum,andR.Rosas,“Amodeltosupportthedesign
ofmultiplayergames,”Presence:Teleoperators&VirtualEnvironments,
vol.9,no.5,pp.448–462,2000.
[18] X.Fonseca,G.Slingerland,S.Lukosch,andF.Brazier,“Designingfor
meaningful social interaction in digital serious games,” Entertainment
Computing,vol.36,p.100385,2021.
[19] X.Fonseca,S.Lukosch,H.K.Lukosch,andF.Brazier,“Requirements
forlocation-basedgamesforsocialinteraction,”IEEETransactionson
Games,2021.
[20] X. Fonseca, S. Lukosch, and F. Brazier, “Design framework for social
interactionwithlocation-basedgames,”InternationalJournalofSerious
Games,vol.9,no.1,pp.59–81,2022.
[21] F. Biocca, C. Harms, and J. K. Burgoon, “Toward a more robust
theoryandmeasureofsocialpresence:Reviewandsuggestedcriteria,”
Presence:Teleoperators&virtualenvironments,vol.12,no.5,pp.456–
480,2003.
[22] P. F. Biocca and P. C. Harms, “Guide to the networked minds
social presence inventory v. 1.2,” 2003. [Online]. Available: http:
//cogprints.org/6743/
[23] T.Franke,C.Attig,andD.Wessel,“Apersonalresourcefortechnology
interaction: development and validation of the affinity for technology
interaction (ati) scale,” International Journal of Human–Computer In-
teraction,vol.35,no.6,pp.456–467,2019.