Time Shift Governor for Constrained Control of Spacecraft Orbit
and Attitude Relative Motion in Bicircular Restricted Four-Body
Problem
Taehyeun Kim, Ilya Kolmanovsky, and Anouck Girard
Abstract—This paper considers constrained spacecraft The BCR4BP model is an extension of the Earth-Moon
rendezvous and docking (RVD) in the setting of the Bi- CR3BP, as it accounts for the fourth body gravitational
circular Restricted Four-Body Problem (BCR4BP), while
influence, the Sun gravity effect - disregarded by the
accountingforattitudedynamics.WeconsiderLineofSight
CR3BP model. The BCR4BP model sustains important
(LoS)coneconstraints,thrustlimits,thrustdirectionlimits,
and approach velocity constraints duringRVD missions in geometric propertiesof targetorbits in the CR3BP, such
a near rectilinear halo orbit (NRHO) in the Sun-Earth- asperiluneandapoluneradiiandeclipseavoidance.This
Moon system. To enforce the constraints, the Time Shift coherence makes it a valuable substitute for NRHOs
Governor(TSG),whichusesatime-shiftedChiefspacecraft
in the CR3BP, allowing for realistic dynamical simula-
trajectory as a target reference for the Deputy spacecraft,
tions. By using the BCR4BP to leverage the dynamical
isemployed. Thetimeshiftisgraduallyreducedtozero so
that the virtual target gradually evolves towards the Chief equivalents of the 9:2 NRHO in the CR3BP framework
spacecraft as time goes by, and the RVD mission objective originally intended for the Lunar Gateway, our goal is
canbeachieved.Numericalsimulationresultsarereported to demonstrate the effectiveness of our proposed con-
to validate the proposed control method.
trol scheme within the modeled cislunar environment,
I. INTRODUCTION thereby reducing the gap between the model, used by
missiondesigners,andtheactualdynamicsofthesystem.
TherecentGlobalExplorationRoadmappublishedby
Various control schemes have been considered for
the InternationalSpace Exploration Coordination Group
RVD missions with coupled orbit and attitude dynam-
envisions the development and operation of an outpost
ics. A linear quadratic controller [6] solving a Two-
in the cislunar space, called the Lunar Orbital Platform-
point Boundary Value Problem has been employed for
Gateway(LOP-G).Autonomousrendezvousanddocking
spacecraftRVDaroundEarthorbits;itsdesignwasbased
(RVD) technology is an integral part of the LOP-G,
ontheClohessy-Wiltshire-Hillequationsfortranslational
enabling supply delivery, on-orbit maintenance, large-
motion, and a quaternion-based PD attitude controller
scale structure assembly, and lunar sample return.
tracks the desired orientation of the spacecraft. For
A near rectilinear halo orbit (NRHO) family around
spacecraft RVD in near-rectilinear halo orbits, a PID
the L2 Lagrange point in the Earth-Moon system has
controller [4] and a nonlinear control algorithm [7] that
been proposed as a destination for the Lunar Gate-
relies on an Interior Point Optimizer (IPOPT) have also
way [1]. In particular,the 9:2 southernL2 NRHO in the
been considered.
Earth-Moon system, which is considered in this work,
The TSG is a variantof a parametergovernor[8] that
has been chosen as the target orbit for the Gateway,
adjusts parameters in the nominal control law to satisfy
as it provides low orbit maintenance cost, favorable
pointwise-in-time state and control constraints at a low
communication opportunities, and safe power supply,
computationalcost.TheTSGadjuststhetimeshiftalong
which come from eclipse avoidance [2].
thereferencetrajectorytosatisfyconstraintsandachieve
The coupled translational and rotational dynamics
convergence. The TSG has been previously applied to
have been considered for RVD in near-Earth orbits [3]
spacecraft formation control in circular Earth orbits [9],
and in the circular restricted three-body problem set-
RVDinellipticEarthorbits[10],andRVDinHaloorbits
ting [4]. Colagrossi and Lavagna [5] have studied a
in the CR3BP setting [11], where the attitude dynamics
coupled orbit-attitude dynamical model that addresses
of the spacecraft were not considered. In this paper,
the effects of large structural flexibility, considering the
we extend the TSG for halo orbit RVD missions in the
Sun’s gravitational effect and solar radiation pressure.
BCR4BPsetting,incorporatingcoupledtranslationaland
In this paper, we consider the control of coupled
attitude dynamics.
orbit and attitude dynamics in the Bicircular Restricted
Therestofthepaperisorganizedasfollows.SectionII
Four-Body Problem (BCR4BP) setting. The Circular
describes the problem formulation, including models
Restricted Three-Body Problem (CR3BP) is commonly
for spacecraft translational dynamics in the BCR4BP
considered in the preliminary cislunar trajectory design.
setting and rotational dynamics. Section III outlines
the nominal control system design and constraints that
Taehyeun Kim, Ilya Kolmanovsky, and Anouck Girard are
with the Department of Aerospace Engineering, University of are addressed during the RVD mission. The TSG is
Michigan, Ann Arbor, 48109 MI, USA. {taehyeun, ilya, discussed in Section IV. Section V provides numerical
anouck}@umich.edu.
simulation results demonstrating the capability of the
This research is supported by the Air Force Office of Scientific
Research GrantnumberFA9550-20-1-0385 andFA9550-23-1-0678. TSG to enforce constraints. Lastly, Section VI presents
4202
luJ
51
]YS.ssee[
1v07111.7042:viXraconclusions and future research directions. with the assistance of a robotic arm or by engaging the
terminaldockingcontroller,takesplaceoncethe Deputy
II. PROBLEM FORMULATION
spacecraftisincloseproximityoftheChiefspacecraft,in
A spacecraft rendezvous and docking mission (RVD)
the same halo orbitaltrack and in the correctorientation
is considered in a near rectilinear halo orbit (NRHO)
to initiate the actual docking procedure.
from the perspective of satisfying various mission-
specificconstraints.DuringtheRVDmission,weassume C. Bicircular Restricted Four-Body Problem
The translational motion of the spacecraft is mod-
that the primary spacecraft, named Chief, is located
eled using the Bicircular Restricted Four-Body Problem
further behind the secondary spacecraft, named Deputy,
(BCR4BP) formulation.TheBCR4BP isanextensionof
alongtheorbitaltrackattheinitialtimeinstant.Areverse
the Circular Restricted Three-Body Problem (CR3BP)
situation when the Deputy is located behind the Chief
to account for the gravitational influence of the third
is addressed similarly. Subscripts c and d designate the
massive body [12]. In the CR3BP setting, we assume
Chief spacecraftandthe Deputyspacecraft,respectively.
that the two primary celestial bodies, the Earth and the
A. Coordinate Systems
Moon, are point masses in circular orbits around their
Threedifferentframesareusedhere:aninertialframe
shared barycenter, referred to as O1 in Figure 1 [13]. In
N, the barycentric frame b, and the body-fixed frame
the BCR4BP, additionally, the Sun and O1 are assumed
B. The spacecraft dynamics are first written in the
tofollowacircularorbitcenteredatthebarycenterofthe
barycentric frame, assumed rotating with respect to the
Earth-Moon-Sun system, referred to as O2 in Figure 1,
inertial frame. This barycentric frame is defined by b :
sharingthesameorbitalplanewiththeEarth-Moonplane
ˆ ˆ ˆ
tO1,i b,j b,k bu where O1 is the center of mass of the
of motion, as illustrated in Figure 1. Note that the units
ˆ
Earth-Moon system, i points in the direction from the
b of distance andtime are normalized,respectively,by the
ˆ
Earth to the Moon, k b is aligned with the Earth-Moon Earth-Moondistance andthe mean motionof the Moon.
systemangularmomentumvectorrelativetotheSun,and TheequationsofmotionfortheBCR4BParegivenin
ˆ
j b completes the right-handed system, as shown in Fig- non-dimensionalform as
ure1.Theinertia ˆlframe,N “tO1,ˆ i N,ˆ j N,kˆ Nu,hasthe
x:“2y9`
BU
`
BΓ
`u ,
same originandk N asthebarycentricframe.Thebody- Bx Bx x
BU BΓ
y:“´2x9 ` ` `u , (2)
y
By By
BU BΓ
z:“ ` `u ,
z
Bz Bz
wherex,y,zarethecoordinatesinthebarycentricframe;
U and Γ are the pseudo-potentials stemming from the
Earth-Moon system and the Sun, respectively. These
pseudo-potentials are defined as [12], [13]
Fig. 1: Barycentric frame b and Body-fixed frame B in U“ 1 px2 `y2 q` 1´µ ` µ ,
the Sun-Earth-Moonsystem. 2 r sc{‘ r sc{K (3)
fixed frame is defined by B : tOB,ˆ iB,ˆ jB,kˆ Bu where Γ“ rµ d ´ µ a3d px dx`y dy`z dzq,
OB is the center of mass of the Deputy spacecraft, the sc{d d
body frame B is chosen such that the inertia expressed where
ˆ
in B is diagonal and a single thruster aligns with ´kB, r
sc{‘
“ px`µq2`y2`z2,
as illustrated in Figure 1.
r sc{K “apx`µ´1q2`y2`z2, (4)
B. Coupled Orbit and Attitude Dynamics
The spacecraft equations of motion can be expressed
r
sc{d
“apx´x dq2`py´y dq2`pz´z dq2,
in the barycentric frame as and whereaµ represents the mass ratio of the Moon to
¯9 ¯ ¯ the total mass of the Earth-Moon system, m is the
X pτq“f τ,X pτq,u pτq,M pτq , (1) ‘
i i i i mass of the Earth, and mK is the mass of the Moon.
where X¯ i P R12, i `P tc,du incorporates th˘e position, Additionally,we use µ d to denote the ratio of the Sun’s
velocity, attitude, and angular velocity of the spacecraft, mass to the total mass Earth-Moon system, and a d
u P R3, i P tc,du is the translational control input represents the distance between the Sun and the Earth-
i
(thrust-induced acceleration) to the spacecraft, M P R3 Moonbarycenter.Note the spacecraft’sstate and control
i
is the rotational control input (control moment) applied inputareexpressedinthebarycentricframebinFigure1.
to the spacecraft by the attitude control system (e.g., The variables, x d, y d, and z d, are the components of
reaction wheels or CMGs), and τ P R ě0 denotes time. the position vector of the Sun relative to O1, expressed
We assume that the dockingportof the Chief spacecraft in the Earth-Moon barycentric frame,
automaticallyalignswithitsvelocitydirection,andfocus x
d
cospθ dpτqq cospω dτ `θ0q
on controlling the Deputy spacecraft to close proximity y
d
“a
d
sinpθ dpτqq “a
d
sinpω dτ `θ0q ,
of the Chief spacecraft without violating mission con- » z fi » 0 fi » 0 fi
d
straints.Weassumethatthefinaldockingprocedure,e.g., – fl – fl – fl(5)whereω
d
“´0.9252andθ0 representtheSun’sangular track. We employ the averaged-in-time linear-quadratic
velocity and an initial angle of the Sun, as measured regulator (ALQR)) [14] as our nominal controller.
from the ˆ i b axis in the Earth-Moon barycentric frame. LetpA,Bq“ N1 N k“´ 01 pA k,B kqbethepairoftheav-
The Sun angle, θ d, is a function of the nondimensional erageddynamics-inputmatrices,wherethepairpA k,B kq
time τ and also depends on ω
d
and θ0. Note that by denotes a linearizedřtranslational dynamics-input pair at
incorporating the gravitational influence of the Sun, (1) timeτ andN isthenumberofequidistanttimeinstants
k
becomesa non-autonomoussystem because the position over a single Chief spacecraft orbit period so that
o thf eth Be CS Ru 4n BPch man og de es la as nda tf hu en sc uti bo sn eqo uf et nim tTe S. GWe den so igte nt ch aa nt δX9
d
“ Bf τ k,X v,0 δX d` Bf τ k,X v,0 δu d,
BX Bu
be extended to the ECR4BP model, which, in addition, „ d  „ d 
“A δX``B δu˘, ` ˘
accountsfortheeccentricityoftheMoonandEarthorbits k d k d
(8)
anddependsonthetrueanomalyofMoonorbitalmotion
around the Earth. where δX “ X pτq ´ X pτq,δu “ u pτq ´ 0, and
d d v d
D. Attitude Kinematics and Dynamics X pτq denotes the virtual target state for the Deputy
v
We use modified Rodrigues parameters (MRP) to spacecraft.We assumethatthe Chiefspacecraftoperates
represent the Deputy spacecraft’s attitude. This param- in an NRHO and follows an unforced periodic natural
eterization comes from a stereographic projection of the motion trajectory (i.e., u cpτq “ 0,@τ P R ě0), while the
quaternion unit sphere onto the MRP hyperplane. The Deputy tracks the virtual target using the feedback law.
vector of MRPs σ can be expressed in terms of the With selected symmetric positive-definite cost matrices
Euler parameters β or the principal rotation elements QPR6ˆ6 and RPR3ˆ3, the ALQR is a solution to the
peˆ,Φq as σ “ tanΦeˆ “ βi , i “ t1,2,3u where following optimal control problem,
eˆ and Φ arei the prin4 cipal ax1 i` sβ u0 nit vector and rotation 8
a bn yg βle 0, r “esp ce oc st piv Φe {l 2y, qa an nd dth βe iE “ule er isp ia nr pa Φm {e 2t qe ,rs iar “e d 1e ,fi 2n ,e 3d
.
min
ż0
δX dT pτqQδX dT pτq` 9δuT dpτqRδuT dpτqdτ,
(9)
The kinematic equationsof motion using the MRPs are
subject to δX
d
“AδX d`Bδu d.
1 The solution to (9) is then a feedback control law that
σ9 B{b “ 4 p1´σ BT {bσB{bqrIs`2rσ˜ B{bs`2σB{bσ BT {b B ωB{b, provides the desired thrust u pτq,
d
„  (6)
where rIs is a 3 ˆ 3 identity matrix and σB{b is the u dpτq“KδX dpτq, uˆ d “u d{}u d}, (10)
attitude of the body-fixed frame B with respect to the where K “ ´R´1BTP, and P is the positive semi-
barycentric frame b represented by the MRP. BωB{b is definite solution to the algebraic Riccati equation, 0 “
theangularvelocityofthebody-fixedframewithrespect ATP ` PA ´ PBR´1BTP ` Q. Note that TSG is
to the barycentric frame, expressed in the body-fixed
applicable to other nominal controllers, such as LQR
frame.Thetildeoperator,r˜¨s,isaskew-symmetricmatrix
with gain re-computed along the orbit, as long as the
defined by
nominal controller is (locally) stabilizing. Such nominal
0 ´ω3 ω2 controllers have to ensure (local) uniform asymptotic
rω˜s“ ω3 0 ´ω1 , for ω “rω1, ω2, ω3sT , stability of the unforced trajectory X v, for the Deputy
» ´ω2 ω1 0 fi spacecraft dynamics, i.e., X dpτqÑX vpτq as τ Ñ8.
(7)
– fl B. Geometric Tracking Control
and _: R3ˆ3 ÑR3 is the inverse of the tilde operator,
The objective of the nominal attitude controller is to
i.e., ω “rω˜s_. align the actual thrust direction, uˆ in Figure 1, with the
TheEulerrotationalequationsofmotionsare:ω9 B{b “ desired thrust direction, uˆ . Since the spacecraft has a
rI scs´1 ´ rω˜ B{bsrI scsωB{b ` M , where rI scs is the
single thruster acting
alongd kˆ
B, the actual thrust is then
moment of inertia of the Deputy spacecraft. Note that
ˆ
ω
““ kˆ
is constant based
on‰
the assumptions in
upτq“´|u dpτq|kB. (11)
b{N b
the setting of the BCR4BP, resulting in ω9 “ 0, i.e.,
b{N We useageometrictrackingcontrollawthatensuresex-
ω9 B{N “ω9 B{b. ponential stability at the zero equilibrium of the attitude
III. NOMINAL CONTROLLER DESIGN tracking errors if the initial attitude error is less than
180˝, see [15]. The desired attitude R of the spacecraft
We design the nominal controller to track the transla-
is defined as
tional motion of the target and to control the rotational
motion of the Deputy spacecraft with the desired thrust
prˆ ‘{dˆuˆ dqT
d Ai .re Ac vti eo rn a.
ged-in-time LQR
rRbs“ »p´uˆ dˆp ´rˆ ‘ uˆ{
T
ddˆuˆ dqqT fi, (12)
The primarygoalof the nominalcontrolleris to track rˆ9– ˆuˆ `rˆ ˆuˆ9 fl
a translational state reference, including position and ‘{d d ‘{d d
v ree fl eo rc ei nty c, eth oa rt bic to orr res tp oon ad vs irto tuath le taC rgh eie t,f dsp eta ec re mcr inaf et din byth ae rR9 bs“» `rp prˆ rˆ9‘ ‘{ {d dˆ ˆu uˆ ˆd dq `ˆ rˆuˆ ‘9 d {dˆ¨¨ uˆ9¨
dqˆuˆ
dsfi, (13)
time-shiftedstateoftheChiefspacecraftalongtheorbital —
´uˆ9
ffi
— d ffi
– flwhere where pp¨q : R6 Ñ R3 draws the position vector and
~r “ppX ´X q, rˆ “~r }~r }, vp¨q:R6 ÑR3 drawsthevelocityvector,corresponding
‘{d ‘ d ‘{d ‘{d ‘{d
~r9
“vpX ´X q,
rˆ9 “~r9 {}~r9
},
to the full state X.
‘{d ‘ d ‘{d ‘{d ‘{d The thrust limit constraint is given by
~u9 “KpX9 ´X9
q,
uˆ9 “~u9 {}~u9
}.
d d v d d d
(14) h2 “|u d|´umax ď0, (19)
In(12), rRbsPR3ˆ3 denotesthe directioncosinematrix
(DCM) of the desired reference frame R with respect where umax denotes the maximum magnitude of the
to the barycentric frame b. The DCM rRbs in (12) is control input. Instead of managing (19) by TSG, the
made by stacking three physical vectors, expressed in saturation function is used to enforce (19) as a part of
the barycentric frame b. Remark that a DCM rACs the nominal controller as this typically leads to a faster
denotes a matrix that maps physical vectors in the C response [16]. The controller then takes the form
frame into A frame vectors, where A “ taˆ ,aˆ ,aˆ u
i j k
and C “ tcˆ i,cˆ j,cˆ ku are two arbitrary frames, and the u pτq:“ u dpτq, if |u dpτq|ďumax, (20)
entries of the DCM are rACs
ij
“ cosα
ij
“ aˆ
i
¨ cˆ j. d #umaxuˆ dpτq, if |u dpτq|ąumax.
With this notation, the transpose of a DCM can be
expressed by changing the order of letters in the DCM, The TSG takesinto accountthe saturationof the control
i.e., rCAs“rACsT. The kinematicdifferentialequation input in its prediction model based on (20).
9
for the DCM is given by rRbs“ ´rRω˜ srRbs, where TheanglebetweentheactualDeputy’sthrustdirection
R{b
9
rRbs is the time derivative of rRbs in (12) and the left and the desired direction is restricted by the maximum
superscript indicates the coordinate system in which the angle difference η, resulting in
angularvelocityisexpressed.Theangularvelocityofthe
reference frame can be obtained as
h3 “´u d¨u`cospηq}u d}}u}ď0, (21)
Rω “´prR9 bsrRbsT q_. (15) where u is the actualthrust, along the negativedirection
R{b
of the
kˆ
B axis, i.e.,
uˆ“´kˆ
B. To impose (21), an on/off
The attitude tracking error, e , is defined by e “
rCs rCs functionisapplied,whichleadstoafasterresponse[16],
1 prRbsrbBs´rBbsrbRsq_, where _:R3ˆ3 ÑR3 maps
2 rather than handling (21) using TSG. Such an on/off
aDCMtoavector,i.e.,representstheinverseofthetilde
method prevents the Deputy spacecraft from applying
operator, e ω “ BωB{b ´rBbsrbRsRω R{b. The time rate thrust in a wrong direction:
of change of the angular velocity is (15):
b
dd
t ˆω R{b ˙“R
dd
t ˆRω R{b
˙“R »ω
ω
ω9
9
9R
R
R{
{
{b
b
b,
,
,1
2 3fi (16)
upτq:“ #´ 0,|u dpτq|kˆ B, i if
f
π π´ ´= =u ud dp pτ τq qk kˆ ˆB
B
ď ąη η,
.
(22)
– fl As (22) is used to enforce (21), the TSG must account
andthefeedbacklawforthecontrolmomentisgivenby
for (22) being applied in prediction.
M “´k Pe rCs´k De ω`B ωB{bˆrI scsB ωB{b spaW ceh ce rn aft th ,e aD coe np su tt ry ainsp ta oc nec tr ha eft ao pp pe rr oa at ce hs n ve ea lor ct ih tye iC sh ei nef
-
´rI scs rB ω˜ B{bsrBbsrbRsRω R{b´rBbsrbRsRω9
R{b
, forced to avoid high-speed collisions. This constraint is
activated only when the Deputy spacecraft is in close
ˆ (1˙7)
proximity to the Chief spacecraft, i.e., ppX ´X q ď
where k ,k , and rI s denote the P gain, D gain, and d c
P D sc γ1. In such a case, the approach velocity is constrained
moment of inertia tensor of the spacecraft expressed in › ›
by a linearly decreasing functionof the›relative dista›nce
B, respectively. If we assume that the angular velocity
from the Deputy to the Chief location,
withrespecttothebarycentricframechangessufficiently
slowly, we can omit the last term, i.e., Bω9 R{b, in (17). h4 “ vpX d´X cq ´γ2 ppX d´X cq ´γ3 ď0, (23)
C. Constraints
› › › ›
TheDeputyspacecraftperformingtherendezvousand
where γ›2 and γ3 are›const›ant coefficien›ts.
docking (RVD) mission faces various constraints. We The convergence of the predicted closed-loop trajec-
consider four types of constraints to demonstrate the tory is restricted to a sufficiently small neighborhoodof
effectiveness of our method: a line of sight (LoS) cone the target reference at the end of the prediction horizon,
angle constraint, a limit on magnitude of thrust, a limit
on thrust direction, and a relative velocity constraint in h5 “}X dpτ `τ predq´X vpτ `τ predq}´ǫď0, (24)
the proximity of the Chief spacecraft.
While approachingthe Chief, the Deputy has to oper- where τ pred and ǫ denote the prediction horizon and the
ate within a prescribed Line of Sight (LoS) cone, which radius of the sufficiently small ball, respectively. Note
is defined by a LoS half-cone angle α as that this ball must be within the region of attraction of
theclosed-loopsystem.We refertothisconstraintasthe
T
h1 “´vpX cq ppX d´X cq
(18) terminalstability constraint.By enforcing(24), the TSG
`cospαq vpX cq ppX d´X cq ď0, can expand the closed-loop region of attraction.
› ›› ›
› ›› ›IV. TIME SHIFT GOVERNOR τ s, the time shift candidate τ updates the upper
pred lead,m
We apply the time shift governor (TSG) to enforce boundτ¯ pτq;otherwisethetimeshiftcandidateτ
lead lead,m
the constraints in a halo orbit rendezvous and dock- updates the lower bound τ . Conversely, it returns
lead
ing (RVD) problem in the BCR4BP setting. The TSG zero in the case of any constraint violations. Note the
augments a nominal closed-loop system consisting of time shift parameter ensures constraint satisfaction for a
spacecraft dynamics, the ALQR translational controller, sufficiently long prediction horizon, i.e., τ " P ,
pred lead
andthegeometricattitudetrackingcontroller.Ifthereare where τ and P denote the predictionhorizon and
pred lead
no constraints (and assuming closed-loop stability), the the TSG update period.
executionoftheRVD withtheChiefspacecraftbecomes After selecting the minimum feasible time shift pa-
straightforward. In this scenario, the state trajectory of rameter, the TSG updates the previous τ value with
lead
theChiefspacecraftalongthereferenceNRHOissimply thisvalue.Subsequently,theDeputyspacecraftischasing
governed by the nominal closed-loop system of the the virtual target associated with the current τ . At
lead
Deputy spacecraft. the beginning of the next iteration, the selected mini-
To avoid constraint violation, the TSG provides both mum time shift parameter τ pτq replaces the upper
lead
the time shift τ and the time shifted state trajectory bound τ of T at the time instant τ ` P , i.e.,
lead lead lead
of the Chief spacecraft as the reference to the nominal τ pτ `P q “ τ pτq. As T updates with τ ,
lead lead lead lead
controller of the Deputy spacecraft as T gradually shrinks, ensuring the feasible τ P T
lead
becomes a sufficiently small value, which means the
X pτq“X pτ `τ q, (25)
v c lead
Deputy spacecraft achieves the Chief spacecraft without
whereτ isthetimeshift.WhentheDeputyspacecraft constraint violation if the Deputy spacecraft reaches the
lead
islocatedinfrontoftheChiefspacecraftalongtheorbital virtual target. This TSG update process repeats every
track, the lower and upper bounds of the time shift can P until the end of the simulation.
lead
beset,respectively,tozeroandaninitialadmissibletime
V. SIMULATIONRESULTS
shift is τ ě0.
lead,0 Numerical simulations demonstrate the effectiveness
The TSG selects the minimum value of τ ě 0
lead of the TSG in enforcing constraints during rendezvous
for whichthe predictedresponse overa sufficientlylong
and docking (RVD) missions with the coupled orbit-
predictionhorizonsatisfiestheconstraints.Theupdateof
attitude dynamics model.
τ occurs at discrete time instants, and the prediction
lead
A. Simulation Specifications
horizon is chosen sufficiently long to ensure recursive
feasibility of the previously chosen value of τ . We
The 9:2 southern L2 NRHO in the Sun-Earth-Moon
lead
system is selected as a reference orbit of the Chief
refer to [11] for details.
spacecraft. Figure 2b illustrates the trajectories of the
Todetermineτ ,bisectionsareused.Inthisprocess,
lead
Deputyspacecraftand the Chief spacecraftfor two orbit
a time shift candidate τ is computed as
lead,m
τ “f pτ ,τ q“pτ `τ q{2, (26) periods.TheinitialstateoftheChiefspacecraft,provided
lead,m mean lead lead lead lead from [17], is corrected using a shooting method. The
its feasibility is evaluated for the predicted trajectory, initial state of the Deputy spacecraft is chosen as 300
andthisprocessrepeatsuntilthe minimumfeasibletime km apart from the initial Chief spacecraft state X p0q
c
shift is determined. We first determine the initial time in the reference trajectory. We use the values of mass
shift parameter τ
lead,0
P R ě0, such that (10), (17), ratio, length unit, time unit, and moon radius from [17].
(11), and (25) with τ “ τ result in trajectories The prediction horizon τ is selected as 6.56 days
lead lead,0 pred
satisfying the constraints. In (25), we restrict the time correspondingto one orbit period of the reference orbit.
shift parameter τ to non-negative values, τ “ 0, The nominalclosed-loopsystem of the Deputyspace-
lead lead
with upper bound, τ “ τ , i.e., τ pτq P T “ craftincorporatestranslationalandrotationalcontrollers.
lead lead,0 lead
tτ P R ě0 : τ lead ďτ ď τ leadu, where T stands for the ThecontinuousALQRcontroller(10)usestheaveraged-
time shift parameter set. The initial time shift parameter in-time LQR gain K, associated with the state weight
set T , determined by zero and τ , is used as an matrix Q “ diagp106,106,106,103,103,103 q, control
0 lead,0
initial guess to search for the next time shift. weight matrix R “ diagp10,10,10q, and the linearized
Within T , the TSG iteratively searches for the min- dynamics (8) for the entire simulation time. Then, the
0
imal feasible time shift parameter until the difference desired control input is computed using (10) and (20).
betweentheupperandthelower boundsofT converges The inertia tensor of the Deputy spacecraft is structured
to a sufficiently small value. The prediction function as rI s “ diagp4500, 4500, 1500q kg¨m2. To align
sc
evaluatesthefeasibilityofaproposedtimeshiftτ P the nozzle direction with the desired, (17) provides the
lead,m
T in (26) for all time instants within a fixed prediction corresponding control torque, and the actual thrust is
horizon τ based on the current time instant τ, the determined by (22) and (11).
pred
ChiefspacecraftstateX pτ q,andtheDeputyspacecraft The imposed constraints, defined in Section III-C, are
c k
state X pτ q. The prediction is based on the forward structuredwith thefollowingcoefficients:TheLoShalf-
d k
propagation of the nonlinear model defined in (1), (10), cone angle α is 20 deg, the maximum magnitude of the
(20), (11), and (22). Considering (22), (18), (19), (21), controlinputu is8.2ˆ10´8 km¨s´2,themaximum
max
and (23), if the resulting trajectory satisfies the con- nozzle angle deviation η is 9 deg, and the relative
straints over the prediction horizon, i.e., @τ P rτ k,τ
k
` velocity constraint is activated within γ1 “ 10 km andis designed with γ2 “ 5.3ˆ10´5 s´1 and γ3 “ 1.0ˆ controller with the TSG is evidenced by the resulting
10´3 km¨s´1. We skip the terminal stability constraint constrainttrajectoriesfromthevariousinitialstatesofthe
h5 in (24) as enforcing it adds to the simulation time. Deputy spacecraft, which include random perturbations
in positionand velocityandsatisfy the constraintsat the
B. Results
initialtime.Figure5ashowsthetimehistoryfortheLoS
Crossesmarktheinitial(magenta)andfinal(cyan)po-
coneconstrainth1.Inallscenarios,theTSGsuccessfully
sitions of the Chief spacecraft, while circles mark those
enforces the LoS cone constraint, while the nominal
of the Deputy spacecraft (initial in black and final in
controller without TSG results in constraint violations.
blue).Attheendofthesimulation,theDeputyspacecraft
achieves close proximity to the Chief spacecraft, with a
(a)300 (b) 0.02
finaldistanceof6.899mandarelativevelocityof0.0056
mm/sec. 0.15 0.015 10-6
200 0.1 3
0.01 2
0.05
100 1
0.005
290 300 310
290 300 310
0 0
0 100 200 300 0 100 200 300
(c)250 (d) 4 10-3
200
0.12 3
10-6
0.1 3
150 0.08
0.06 2 2
Fig. 2: (a) The reference trajectory of nine orbit periods 100 00 .. 00 24 1
for the Chief spacecraft. (b) the resulting trajectories 50 290 300 310 1
290 300 310
during the RVD mission with initial and final states. 0 0
0 100 200 300 0 100 200 300
15
Fig. 4: (a) The relative position and (b) relative velocity
10 0.08 of the Deputy spacecraftX d to the Chief spacecraftX c.
(c) The relative position and (d) relative velocity of X
0.06 d
5 to the virtual target X v.
290300310 (a)200 (b) 10-8
2
0
0 50 100 150 200 250 300 150 0
Fig.3:Thetimeshiftparameterasafunctionoftimedur- -2
100
ing the RVD scenario. The time unit is dimensionalized -4
50 -6
bydividingitbythemeanmotionn,i.e.,t “τ {n.
lead lead
-8
0
Figure 3 shows the evolution of the time shift param- 0 100 200 300 0 100 200 300
eter during the RVD simulation. Initially set to 15.828
(c)12 (d)
min, this parameter is updated hourly and successfully 0
10
converges to zero at the end. 8 -20 -0.0 1
Figure 4 shows the magnitude of the relative position 6 -40 -- 00 .. 32
andvelocityoftheDeputyspacecraftwith respectto the 4 -60 230 240 250
Chief spacecraft and the virtual target, respectively. In 2 -80
Figures 4a and 4b, the Deputy spacecraft achieves close
0 -100
0 100 200 300 0 100 200 300
proximity to the Chief spacecraft with a small relative
velocity and completes the RVD mission. Figures 4c Fig. 5: The constraint trajectories during the RVD sim-
and 4d show a relative motion of the Deputy spacecraft ulation using the TSG starting from 10 different initial
withrespecttothevirtualtarget.Notelessextremepeaks Deputystates:(a)TheLoSconeconstrainth1;(b)thrust
around 80 hours and 240 hours observed in the relative limith2;(c)thrustdirectionlimith3;(d)relativevelocity
position and velocity presented in Figures 4c and 4d constraint h4. Note that the relative velocity constraint
versus Figures 4a and 4b. Note that the two spacecraft activateswhen the Deputy spacecraftis within 10 km of
passtheperi-lunarregionapproximatelyevery160hours, the Chief spacecraft.
corresponding to the reference orbit period. Figures 5b and 5c show the thrust limit h2 and the
Figure 5 illustrates the response of the closed-loop thrust direction limit h3, respectively, and these con-
system with and without TSG for ten initial states of straints are satisfied. Furthermore, Figure 5b shows that
the Deputy spacecraft selected as random perturbations using the TSG leads to less amount of required control
in position and velocity also satisfying constraints at inputovertheRVDmission,givenourproposednominal
the initial time. demonstrates the effectiveness of our controller.
proposed nominalcontroller with the TSG, comparedto Figure 5d shows the time history of the approach
whenusingonlythenominalclosed-loopsystemwithout velocity constrainth4. The nominalcontrolleralone and
TSG. Moreover,the robustnessof our proposednominal thenominalcontrolleraugmentedbytheTSGsatisfythisconstraint. However, the Deputy spacecraft approaches REFERENCES
theChiefspacecraftinadirectionotherthanthedocking
[1] J. Williams, D. E. Lee, R. J. Whitley, K. A. Bokelmann, D. C.
portdirection,leadingtoacollision.Thisfailureisdueto Davis, and C. F. Berry, “Targeting cislunar near rectilinear halo
the LoS constraint being satisfied only during the initial orbits for human space exploration,” in AAS/AIAASpace Flight
Mechanics Meeting, no.JSC-CN-38615,2017.
24 hours, while the Deputy remains more than 10 km
[2] D. Guzzetti, E. M. Zimovan, K. C. Howell, and D. C. Davis,
away from the Chief spacecraft. “Stationkeeping analysis for spacecraft in lunar near rectilinear
(a) 1 10-4 (b) 6 10-3 haloorbits,”in27thAAS/AIAASpaceFlightMechanicsMeeting,
vol. 160. American Astronautical Society SanAntonio, Texas,
4 2017,pp.3199–3218.
0.5
[3] A. Kasiri and F. Fani Saberi, “Coupled position and attitude
2
0 control of a servicer spacecraft in rendezvous with an orbiting
0 target,” Scientific Reports,vol.13,no.1,p.4182,2023.
-0.5 -2 [4] G. Bucchioni and M. Innocenti, “Rendezvous in cis-lunar
space near rectilinear halo orbit: Dynamics and control issues,”
-1 -4 Aerospace,vol.8,no.3,p.68,2021.
0 100 200 300 0 100 200 300
[5] A. Colagrossi and M. Lavagna, “Preliminary results on the
Fig. 6: (a) The time histories of the desired control dynamics of large and flexible space structures in halo orbits,”
ActaAstronautica, vol.134,pp.355–367, 2017.
input, u , expressed in the barycentric frame b. (b) The
d [6] G.-H.Moon,B.-Y.Lee,M.-J.Tahk,andD.H.Shim,“Quaternion
applied control torque histories, expressed in the body- based attitude control and suboptimal rendezvous guidance on
fixed frame B. satelliteproximityoperation,”in2016EuropeanControlConfer-
(a) 1 (b) 2 10-3 ence(ECC). IEEE,2016,pp.2215–2220.
[7] V.Muralidharan,M.R.Makhdoomi,K.R.Barad,L.M.Amaya-
Mej´ıa, K. C. Howell, C. Martinez, and M. Olivares-Mendez,
0.5 1 “Rendezvousincislunarhaloorbits:Hardware-in-the-loop simu-
lationwithcoupledorbitandattitudedynamics,”ActaAstronau-
0 0 tica, vol.211,pp.556–573,2023.
[8] I. Kolmanovsky and J. Sun, “Parameter governors for discrete-
-1 time nonlinear systems with pointwise-in-time state and control
-0.5 constraints,” Automatica,vol.42,no.5,pp.841–848,2006.
0 100 200 300 0 100 200 300
[9] G. R. Frey, C. D. Petersen, F. A. Leve, E. Garone, I. Kol-
Fig. 7: (a) The attitude of the body-fixed frame B ex- manovsky,andA.R.Girard,“Timeshiftgovernorforcoordinated
controloftwospacecraftformations,”InternationalFederationof
pressedinMRPs,relativetothedesiredreferenceattitude Automatic Control-PapersOnLine, vol. 49, no. 18, pp. 296–301,
Rin(12),and(b)componentsofangularvelocityvector 2016.
expressed in the body-fixed frame B. [10] T.Kim,I.Kolmanovsky,andA.R.Girard,“Timeshiftgovernor
for spacecraft proximity operation in elliptic orbits,” in 2024
Figure 6a presents the desired control inputs, which SpaceFlightMechanics Meeting, 2024.
remain near zero after 110hours. Figure 6b presents the [11] T. Kim, K. Liu, I. Kolmanovsky, and A. R. Girard, “Time shift
appliedcontroltorqueexpressedinthebody-fixedframe governor for constraint satisfaction during low-thrust spacecraft
rendezvousinnearrectilinearhaloorbits,”in2023IEEEConfer-
B used to align the spacecraft with the desired thrust ence on Control Technology and Applications (CCTA). IEEE,
direction. 2023.
Figure7 displaysthetrajectoriesoftheDeputyspace- [12] M.Jorba-Cusco´, A.Farre´s,andA`.Jorba,“Twoperiodic models
for the earth-moon system,” Frontiers in Applied Mathematics
craft’s attitude and angular velocity with respect to the
andStatistics, vol.4,p.32,2018.
reference attitude (12). Figure 7a demonstrates that the [13] H.Pollard,Celestial Mechanics. AmericanMathematical Soci-
actual thrust generally aligns with the desired control ety,1976,vol.18.
[14] U. Kalabic, A. Weiss, S. Di Cairano, and I. Kolmanovsky,
input, with minor exceptions. This indicates that the
“Station-keeping and momentum-management on halo orbits
geometric tracking controller in (17) has successfully aroundl2:Linear-quadraticfeedbackandmodelpredictivecontrol
stabilized the spacecraft attitude, enabling the Deputy approaches,” in Proc. AAS Space Flight Mechanics Meeting,
2015,pp.15–307.
spacecraft to track its target with the ALQR controller
[15] T. Lee, M. Leok, and N. H. McClamroch, “Geometric tracking
in (10), as seen in Figures 4c and 4d. control of a quadrotor uav on se (3),” in 49th IEEE conference
ondecisionandcontrol(CDC). IEEE,2010,pp.5420–5425.
VI. CONCLUSIONS
[16] A.Cotorruelo,D.Limon,andE.Garone,“Outputadmissiblesets
We presented a coupled orbit and attitude dynamic
and reference governors: Saturations are not constraints!” IEEE
modelfor a spacecraft in the Bicircular Restricted Four- TransactionsonAutomaticControl,vol.65,no.3,pp.1192–1196,
Body Problem setting. We also proposed a nominal 2019.
[17] Jet Propulsion Laboratory, NASA, “Three-Body Periodic
control system for tracking translational and rotational
Orbits,” Accessed: Mar. 02, 2024. [Online]. Available:
motions. We developed the Time Shift Governor (TSG) zprotectzprotectzunhboxzvoidb@xzhboxthttps://ssd.jpl.nasa.gov/tools/periodic orbits.htmlu
to handle constraints during spacecraft rendezvous and
docking (RVD) missions in a Near Rectilinear Halo
Orbit (NRHO). The TSG has demonstrated its ability
to enforce multiple constraints during RVD simulations,
including the line of sight cone constraint, thrust limit,
thrust direction limit, and relative velocity constraint.
Overtime,thetimeshiftparameteroftheTSGconverges
to zero, aligning the virtual target and the Chief space-
craft.SimulatedmaneuversinanNRHOwithintheSun-
Earth-Moon system have confirmed the effectiveness of
the TSG in addressing the constraints.