Agent-Based Modelling of Older Adult Needs for
Autonomous Mobility-on-Demand: A Case Study
in Winnipeg, Canada
Manon Pr´edhumeau1,2 and Ed Manley1
1*School of Geography, University of Leeds, Leeds, UK.
2UMR 5505, IRIT, Universit´e Toulouse Capitole, Toulouse, France.
Contributing authors: m.predhumeau@leeds.ac.uk;
e.j.manley@leeds.ac.uk;
Abstract
Asthepopulationscontinuetoageacrossmanynations,ensuringaccessibleand
efficienttransportationoptionsforolderadultshasbecomeanincreasinglyimpor-
tant concern. Autonomous Mobility-on-Demand (AMoD) systems have emerged
as a potential solution to address the needs faced by older adults in their daily
mobility. However, estimation of older adult mobility needs, and how they vary
over space and time, is crucial for effective planning and implementation of
such service, and conventional four-step approaches lack the granularity to fully
account for these needs. To address this challenge, we propose an agent-based
modelofolderadultsmobilitydemandinWinnipeg,Canada.Themodelisbuilt
for2022usingprimarilyopendata,andisimplementedintheMulti-AgentTrans-
port Simulation (MATSim) toolkit. After calibration to accurately reproduce
observed travel behaviors, a new AMoD service is tested in simulation and its
potentialadoptionamongWinnipegolderadultsisexplored.Themodelcanhelp
policy makers to estimate the needs of the elderly populations for door-to-door
transportation and can guide the design of AMoD transport systems.
Keywords:ageingpopulation,traveldemand,MATSimsimulation,shared
autonomousvehicle,demand-responsivetransportation,multi-agentsystems
1
4202
tcO
51
]AM.sc[
1v61411.0142:viXra1 Introduction
According to the United Nations, the share of the global population aged 65 years
or over is expected to increase from 9.1% in 2019 to around 11.7 % in 2030 (United
Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2019).
Canada is among the countries with a particularly high proportion of elderly people.
As of 2019, 17.6% of Canada’s population are older adults (i.e., aged 65 or over) and
this proportion is expected to reach 22.8% by 2030 (United Nations, Department of
Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division, 2019). Such demographic trends
posechallengestotheexistingtransportationinfrastructureandservices,asitrequires
ensuring accessible and efficient transport options for the increasing number of older
adults with diverse mobility needs. Indeed, the ageing population is characterised by
diversetransportationaccessandmobilityrequirements,includingsocialengagements,
medical appointments, grocery shopping, and recreational activities (Haustein, 2012).
However, physical limitations, cognitive decline, and reduced access to private vehi-
cles often restrict older adults’ ability to independently travel and participate fully in
society (Luiu and Tight, 2021). Consequently, there is a growing demand for flexible
transportation services that can adapt to the needs of older adults (Faber and van
Lierop, 2020).
To address this challenge, a rising trend is to move towards demand-responsive
transportation with shared electric autonomous vehicles, sometimes referred to as
“shared autonomous vehicles” (shared AV), “demand-responsive transportation”
(DRT) or “autonomous mobility-on-demand” (AMoD). AMoD provides on-demand,
door-to-door service with autonomous vehicles, based on real-time users requests. It
allows for flexible routing, scheduling, and vehicle allocation, enabling more efficient
use of resources. This new mean of transportation could present a sustainable and
affordablealternativetoprivatecarsforolderadults(Kerstingetal.,2021),whilethe
on-demand door-to-door aspect maintains the flexibility and independence provided
byaprivatetransport.However,previousimplementationshaveshownthatDRTcan
be very failure prone; 50% last less than 7 years (Currie and Fournier, 2020). To be
effective an AMoD system must be carefully planned, and fully address the users’
diverseandcomplexneeds.Inparticular,estimatingthepotentialdemandisacritical
step before local transport authorities introduce a new tailored AMoD service.
Manyconventionalapproachestowardsmodellingmobilitydemandarelimitedbya
lackofgranularityatcriticalscales.Traditionalfour-stepapproaches,whichincremen-
tallypredicttripflows,modeuses,androutechoices,workontheaggregatezonalscale.
While it is possible to model sub-populations separately within these model configu-
rations(Schm¨ockeretal.,2005),complexinter-dependenciesthatmightexistbetween
demographic factors, trip generation, and other components (e.g. mode choice) are
lost, and planning is unable to account for spatial and temporal heterogeneity in ser-
vice utility. Both spatial and temporal factors are important to address the need for
flexible and responsive services for users with diverse needs and preferences.
An emerging alternative to traditional transport modelling approaches is agent-
based modelling. These approaches provide greater flexibility by capturing hetero-
geneityanddependencyinandbetweencontextualfactors(e.g.demographics,health,
household structures) and mobility preferences and behaviours. There are several
2agent-basedmodellingplatformsinuseglobally,bothwithgenericandtransportation-
focused design. As a result of this growth in interest (see Bastarianto et al. (2023) for
a recent review), several research works have explored AMoD as a future transporta-
tion mode and its potential adoption by citizens using agent-based modelling (ABM):
in Singapore (Oh et al., 2020), in the United States (Sioux Falls (Wang et al., 2018),
Austin (Fagnant et al., 2016), Wayne County (Kagho et al., 2021) and Birmingham
(Salman et al., 2023)), in Germany (Berlin (Ziemke et al., 2019; Kaddoura et al.,
2020),Munich (Milit˜ao andTirachini,2021), Bremerhaven(Schlu¨ter etal.,2021)and
rural town of Colditz (Viergutz and Schmidt, 2019)), in France (Paris (H¨orl et al.,
2019)), in the UK (Bristol (Franco et al., 2020)), in Austria (Vienna (Mu¨ller et al.,
2021)) and in Switzerland (Zurich (Mu¨ller and Axhausen, 2014; Boesch et al., 2016)).
However, previous demand models have focused on the general population and
commutingmobility.Yetitistheolderpopulationsthathavethemosttobenefitfrom
DRT services (Kovacs et al., 2020; Zandieh and Acheampong, 2021), no research has
sought to explicitly model and supply for the demands of older populations. In this
paper, we propose a precise spatial model that focus on the heterogeneous mobility
needs of older adults, and can serves as a basis to built up an AMoD service for older
adults.
In order to evaluate the older adults needs for AMoD, we focused on Winnipeg, in
Canada. Winnipeg is the capital city of the province of Manitoba, and the sixth most
populous city in Canada. In 2021 Winnipeg had 749,607 inhabitants with 17 % of the
population aged 65 or older (Statistics Canada, 2022a). However, older adults spatial
distributionishighlyheterogeneous.Dependingonthedisseminationareaconsidered,
older adults can represent up to 70 % of the population. The city is connected by
a dense road network, and bus services, overseen by the Winnipeg Transit public
agency. The ageing population in Winnipeg highlights the need for new age-friendly
transportationtoensureahighqualityoflifeforolderadults.Toaddressthisconcern,
localauthoritiesareinterestedinintegratingAMoDservicesdedicatedtoolderadults
in their future transportation planning.
To predict the older adults demand for AMoD in Winnipeg, we build on prior
work and use an ABM approach, given its ability to represent heterogeneous human
behaviours. The model allows to consider the heterogeneity in populations, and to
perform large transport simulations at a very fine spatio-temporal scale.
This work provides the following contributions:
1. We designed an ABM of the elderly population daily mobility in Winnipeg. Using
open data, we generated a 2022 synthetic population, an activity-based model and
a model of the environment including the road network, public transit supply,
buildingsandfacilities.TheentireWinnipegpopulationismodelled-notonlyolder
adults - in order to reproduce interactions between individuals in households and
in the environment. However, the general population is modelled with less details.
We ran simulations with Multi-Agent Transport Simulation (MATSim), an open-
sourceframeworkfortransportsimulations,andcalibratedthemodeltoaccurately
reproduce observed travel behaviours.
32. AnewAMoDservicewasintroducedandadditionalsimulationswererunwiththis
newmobilityoptionforolderadults.AsimpleAMoDsupplyistestedinsimulation
to explore the potential adoption of such a service among Winnipeg older adults.
Thepaperisstructuredasfollows.Section2explainstheABManditsdesignpro-
cess. Section 3 describes the MATSim simulations setup and the model’s calibration.
Section4presentsthemodelvalidationagainstreal-worldobservations.Section5tests
the implementation of an AMoD service in simulation and presents insights from two
demand scenarios and three AMoD fleet sizes. Finally, Section 6 presents the main
conclusions.
2 Agent-based modelling of older adult mobility
In predicting the mobility of older adult populations, factors such as health status,
access to transportation options, and proximity to services are known to play an
importantrole(LuiuandTight,2021;Fatimaetal.,2020).Assuch,anypredictionof
mobility behaviour must consider these factors, as well as inherent interdependencies
betweenfactors,heterogeneityoverthepopulation,andvariationoverspaceandtime.
TheapproachispresentedinFigure1.Toaccountfortheheterogeneityintheseniors
locationsandaccesstoservices,weusedOpenStreetMap(OSM)(OpenStreetMapcon-
tributors, 2017) to model the infrastructure of the city of Winnipeg at a fine spatial
scale.Duetothediversesociodemographicattributesofelderlyindividuals,weuseda
synthetic population of individuals, i.e. the agents, to model Winnipeg 2022 popula-
tion. Finally, in order to capture the variation in their activity and mobility patterns,
we developed an activity-based model that considers individual behaviours at a fine
temporal scale, i.e. the agents’ behaviours. The approach is close to the one adopted
by H¨orl and Balac (2021) to generate a synthetic population and travel demand for
ˆIle-de-France. However, our approach is adapted to Canadian open data and includes
an additional projection step to produce a synthetic population for future years.
Fig. 1:DiagramofthethreemaincomponentsoftheproposedABM:anenvironment
model, a synthetic population, and an activity-based model.
42.1 Environment model
OSM data for Winnipeg was used as a basis to model the road network, the public
transit services, and the buildings and facilities. The environment modelling has been
described in our previous work (Pr´edhumeau and Manley, 2023b) and is summarised
here.
The Winnipeg road network, and public transit network and service have been
modelled using PT2MATSim (Poletti, 2021), a MATSim plugin. PT2MATSim con-
verts OSM roads into a multimodal network of links, representing the road network
and buses lanes, and nodes, representing intersections or connection between links.
Winnipeg’s road network consists of 97,902 links and 47,352 nodes. Flow capacities
for links are assigned from OSM tags and have been checked visually. PT2MATSim
has also been used to convert Winnipeg Transit GTFS feed to a transit schedule and
stop sequences for a typical Tuesday (14th of December 2021). The model consists of
5,345 stops served by 84 bus routes, mapped to the multimodal network (Figure 2a).
(a) (b)
Fig. 2: (a) Model of Winnipeg road network in grey and bus routes on a Tuesday
service in orange. Road width is proportional to the road capacity. (b) Model of Win-
nipeg buildings and facilities. Residential buildings are in red, shops and sustenance
in blue, education and civic amenities in yellow, sport and entertainment facilities in
pink,healthcarebuildingsinlightgreen,industrialandtransportinorange,otherland
use in dark green and mixed land use in grey. Visualisation realised with Simunto.
Buildings and facilities were modelled using three data sources: building polygons
fromMicrosoftBuildingFootprints(MicrosoftandStatisticsCanada,2019),addresses
fromWinnipegopendataportal(Winnipegopendataportal,2022)andfacilitiesfrom
OSM points of interest (OpenStreetMap contributors, 2017).
Polygons with an area inferior to 30 m2 or over 350,000 m2 have been filtered out
inordertokeeponlythebuildingpolygons.Thebuildingpolygonshavebeenspatially
joined with the City of Winnipeg Property Addresses and Coordinates, in order to
filteroutbuildingswithoutaddresses.Finally,OSMbuildingtagsandpointsofinterest
5havebeenspatiallyjoinedwiththebuildingpolygons.Buildingshavebeenassignedat
least one functional type, inferred from the associated OSM data, among industrial,
civic amenity, sport facility, sustenance, education, transport, financial, healthcare,
entertainment, shop, office or other use (Figure 2b). A building may be multi-types,
e.g. a shop on the ground floor and a sport facility on the first floor. Building tagged
as residential or with no tag are considered as residential, and are converted into
residencesbydividingthebuildingareaandlevelsbytheaverageCanadianlivingarea.
2.2 Synthetic population
In order to accurately model the Winnipeg population, we created a 2022 synthetic
population. The synthetic population design process has been described for 2023 for
allCanadabyPr´edhumeauandManley(2023a)andPr´edhumeauandManley(2023b)
and is thus briefly summarised here.
The synthetic population was generated for Manitoba province at the dissemina-
tionarea(DA)levelusinganhybridapproachcalledQuasirandomIntegerSamplingof
Iterative Proportional Fitting (Smith et al., 2017). This approach was applied on the
2016CanadianCensusdata(StatisticsCanada,2016a).EachindividualintheIndivid-
ual Public Use Microdata File (Statistics Canada, 2016c) was assigned a weight such
that the weighted population at the DA level fits socio-demographˆic attributes distri-
butions defined by the Census Profile (Statistics Canada, 2016a). The 2016 Manitoba
synthetic population was then projected to represent the 2022 Manitoba population,
using provincial population projections by age and sex (Statistics Canada, 2018). For
eachagegroupandsex,the2016syntheticpopulationisresampled(i.e.individualsare
duplicated or deleted) to cover the population difference between 2016 and 2022. The
2022 Winnipeg synthetic population was extracted from the 2022 Manitoba synthetic
population by filtering out the DAs outside Winnipeg.
A key influence on the modal behaviour of older adults is the household compo-
sition; living with a partner can enable access to car as a passenger. The synthetic
population therefore includes households. Each 2022 synthetic individual identified as
aprimaryhousehold‘maintainer’wasassignedtotheirownhousehold.Theremaining
non-maintainer individuals are subsequently assigned to households within their DA
tomatchtheirhouseholdsizeattribute.Toformhouseholds,individualsarerandomly
drawn following the distribution of individuals’ age group and sex by primary main-
tainer’s age group and sex inferred from the 2016 Hierarchical Public Use Microdata
File (Statistics Canada, 2016b).
Besides age, sex and household composition,transportation access and health sta-
tus have also been identified as important factors of older adults’ mobility (Luiu and
Tight, 2021). Winnipeg individuals’ attributes have thus been complemented with
additional “health status”, “driving license” and “residential building” attributes as
described by Pr´edhumeau and Manley (2023b). A “health status” attribute has been
probabilistically added to synthetic individuals according to the Canadian Commu-
nity Health Survey 2021 (Statistics Canada, 2022b). Statistics on perceived health
by age group and sex for Manitoba have been used to assign individuals health sta-
tus attribute among {0: poor or fair health; 1: good health; 2: very good or excellent
health}. Similarly, a “driving licence” attribute has been attributed to individuals
6according to 2020 statistics from Manitoba Public Insurance (Manitoba Public Insur-
ance,2020).Probabilitiestoownadrivinglicensebyageandgenderhavebeenderived
from the 2020 Traffic Collision Statistics Report which reports licensed drivers by age
group, gender and driver status for Manitoba. The correlations between these two
new variables and both age and sex are maintained because the new variables are
assigned according to a probability based on age and sex. However, other correlations
(between health and income level, for example) are not explicitly maintained due to
the unavailability of such data. Finally, households have been assigned a residential
building within their DA using the buildings model described in Section 2.1.
Fig. 3: Synthetic population individual attributes.
The final 2022 Winnipeg synthetic population is composed of 768,845 individuals
(127,314 older adults), with a set of attributes regarding their socio-demographics,
household, geolocation, and transportation access (Figure 3).
2.3 Activity-based model
2.3.1 Definition
In activity-based models, travel decisions are not solely based on the characteristics
of the transportation system but are influenced by the purpose and scheduling of
people activities. This type of modelling is used in transportation planning to model
and simulate individual-level travel behaviour by considering various activities people
engageinthroughouttheirdailylives,suchaswork,school,shopping,andrecreational
activities.Anactivity-basedmodelsimulatesindividualactivitiesandtripsoveraday,
at a fine temporal scale e.g. the minute scale, as illustrated on Figure 4.
Fig. 4: Example of activity schedule for one agent.
7To build the activity-based model, Canadian older adults most common out-of-
home activities have been identified from Newbold et al. (2005) as:
• shopping: purchasing consumer goods, products, or service;
• socialising: visiting friends or relatives, communicating;
• eating out: eating or drinking at a restaurant, bar, club;
• entertaining: hobbies or leisure activities like attending cinema, library, museum,
theatre, sporting events, etc.;
• exercising: recreational or competitive sport, walking or hiking;
• medical: health visit;
• working: exercising paid work activities;
• escortingsomeone:accompanyingtoorfromschool,busstop,sports,appointments,
shopping.
• other:volunteering, religiousactivities,administrativeactivities, civicparticipation
As all the population is modelled, and not only older adults, the activity-based
model also includes an activity type “education”, which is an important out-of-home
activity for kids and young adults. Finally, an activity type “home” was added, to
represent agents being at home. Similarly, the 5 main transportation modes of older
adults (Newbold et al., 2005) have been included into the model: car as a driver, car
as a passenger (i.e. ride), public transit, walk and bike.
2.3.2 Statistical matching
In the absence of a national or a recent local travel survey, the activities generation
andschedulinghavebeenguidedbythe2015TimeUseSurvey(TUS)data(Statistics
Canada, 2015). The TUS is a survey on people time use that contains demographics
anddailydiariesof17390Canadians.ItwascollectedfromApril2015toApril2016,as
part of the General Society Survey, and the microdata file containing the respondents
data has been released in November 2017. The data consists of a 24h period report
(rounded to 5 min) of any activity and travel, by one respondent by household, and
some socio-demographic variables such as age group, sex, living arrangement, health
status, etc. The survey excluded individuals aged under 15 years and residents of
institutions.
Activity and trip characteristics correlate with socio-demographic characteristics;
thereforeaunconstrainedstatisticalmatchingapproach(Namazi-Radetal.,2017)has
been applied. The approach matches each individual in the synthetic population with
oneoftheTUSrespondents,basedontheircommonsocio-demographiccharacteristics.
Each synthetic individual was matched to its closest TUS record using a ball-tree
datastructure,i.e.abinarytreefororganisingpointsinamulti-dimensionalspacefor
efficient nearest neighbour search.
Animportantweight(arbitrarilyfixedat100toeasethematchingqualityanalysis)
has been applied to attributes that are key drivers of older adults mobility, in order
to discourage mismatching these attributes. The older adults age ranges have been
assigneda100weightbecausetheyarethefocusofthisstudyandaccuratelymatching
them is more important than the rest of the population. The sex attribute has been
assigneda100weightbecausegenderisoneofthemainfactorinfluencingolderadults
8mobility. Similarly, in case of poor or fair health, a weight of 100 was used as this is
an important obstacle to mobility. The absence of driving license was also assigned
a 100 weight as car access is key for older adults mobility and modal choice. Finally,
the absence of children in the household and the labour force status have been assign
a 100 weight because a mismatch could lead to inconsistent behaviours, e.g. escorting
a child to school while there is no child in the household or spending the day at work
while not in the labour force.
As rural and urban mobility patterns differ significantly, we removed 4071 TUS
respondentslivingoutsidelargeurbanpopulationcentres(CensusMetropolitanAreas
or Census Agglomeration) before the matching. Remaining respondents with at least
one missing activity location (124), trips by plane (56) or boat (33) or with car trips
more than one hour long (1012) have been removed as these trips are not considered
in the model. Similarly, it was found that 17% of the trips might be missing in the
remaining records, as sometimes respondents indicated to be at a location and then
a different location, with no travel activity between. The respondents with identified
missingtrips(3644)havebeenremovedfromthesamplebeforethematching,astravel
characteristics are essential to build the activity-based model. Finally, activity and
mobilitypatternsdifferbetweenweekdaysandweekends,andforasakeofconsistency
the model can not mix week day schedules and weekend schedules. We thus removed
the weekend records (2427) and retained 6023 TUS week days respondents for the
statistical matching.
The attributes of the synthetic population and the TUS respondents have been
aligned in order to perform the matching. At the end of the matching, 2684 different
TUSrespondentsanddailydiarieswerematchedtothe768845agents,with692daily
diaries matched to the 127314 older adult agents. To evaluate the matching quality,
the pairs of matched individuals have been compared.
39.9%ofsyntheticindividualsareperfectlymatchedregardingalltheirattributes.
32.6% of synthetic individuals are matched with a distance of 1 and 24.5% with a
distance between 2 and 5. Finally, 3% are matched with a distance > 5 and 1.5%
with a distance ≥ 100, i.e. a mismatch on an important attribute. When considering
syntheticolderadults,50.8%areperfectlymatched,18.9%arematchedwithadistance
of 1, and 19.7% with a distance between 2 and 5. Finally, 10.6% are matched with a
distance > 5 and 7.5% with a distance ≥ 100.
An analysis of the matching quality at the attribute level in Table 1 shows that
more than 95% of older adults are perfectly matched regarding sex, age range, labour
force status, driving license ownership, and child presence in the household, i.e. the
keyattributesforolderadultsmobilitythatwereassignedanimportantweightforthe
matching. Similarly, 99.93% of older adults are well matched regarding the presence
or absence of poor or fair health status. For the other attributes, the matching is less
precise but still relevant, more than 77% of agents are perfectly matched for each
attribute.Thegeneralpopulationmatchingscoresaresimilartothoseofolderadults.
2.3.3 Schedules generation
EachagentwasassigneditsmatchedTUSandcorrespondingdailyschedule.TheTUS
contains for each respondent a daily schedule as a list of episodes with a start time, a
9Table 1: Statistical matching scores for older adults in bold, and total population in
brackets, for each attribute
Attribute %ofagentsperfectlymatched %ofagentsquasiperfectlymatched
i.e.maximumoneclassshift
Sex 99.79(99.87) -
Agerange 96.57(84.67) 99.34(96.78)
Healthstatus 88.55(87.91) 99.93(99.99)
Incomerange 80.69(84.61) 97.44(98.75)
Labourforcestatus 99.75 to 99.99(99.81to99.99) -
Qualification 84.57(81.06) -
Drivinglicense 99.76(99.86) -
Householdsize 77.87(80.8) 90.72(95.48)
Children’spresence 98.49(99.65) -
Householdtype 82.69(92.1) -
duration,alocationtype(e.g.athome,atplaceofworkorschool,grocerystore,etc.)
and an activity type (e.g. sleeping, eating, paid work, shopping for or buying goods,
exercising, etc.). A trip is a travel from one activity to another and is recorded in the
TUS as an episode with an activity type “travel” and a location type corresponding
to the travel mode (car, ride, walk, bus, bike, etc.).
Foreachagent,episodesareconvertedintoaconsistentschedulealternatingactiv-
itiesandtripsbetweenactivities.Ifthereisnotrip,theagentstaysathome.MATSim
requires agents to start and end the day with the same activity type. If the agent is
not home at the start or end of the day, a “home” activity and the preceding/follow-
ingtripareaddedbeforethefirstactivityofafterthelastactivity.Ifconsecutivetrips
identified, they are merged into one trip.
The schedule generation algorithm is as follows:
1. For each trip episode T, the preceding activity episode A and preceding trip T-
1 are retrieved. A activity type is identified using a combination of the episode
location type and episode activity type.
2. Then a location for A is drawn from Winnipeg facilities and residences. If A type
is “home”, the agent residential location is used. Else, a location where A can
be performed has to be drawn, i.e. a shop or sustenance facility for a “shopping”
activity, a healthcare facility for a “medical” activity, a residence for a “social”
activity,etc.However,theTUSdoesnotreportactivitiesexactlocations.Moreover,
the TUS is not trip oriented and thus does not contain trip distance between
activities. The trip distance of T-1 from one activity A-1 to the next activity A
has to be estimated using the T-1 trip’s mode and duration.
Anaveragespeedhasbeenassignedtoeachmode([car:30km/h,ride:30km/h,
publictransit:25/h,bike:15km/h,walk:4.8km/h])accordingtoWinnipegobserved
speeds by mode () and to the observed general walking speed (Bosina and Weid-
mann, 2017). The walking, biking and driving speeds are assumed to be the same
for all agents, even if this may be a bit too fast for the older people. With more
dataavailablethanjustaveragespeeds,theolderpeoplecouldhavebeenseparated
10from the general population when making a location choice by assuming a reduced
travel speed.
To account for the 5 min rounding in TUS records and for the uncertainty in
travel speeds, a trip distance range is calculated for T-1 rather than a fixed trip
distance, according to:
min trip distance=speed(T-1.mode)×(T-1.duration−2.5)
(1)
max trip distance=speed(T-1.mode)×(T-1.duration+2.5)
with distances in meters, speed in m/min and duration in minutes.
Next, a location for A is picked from the locations of the desired type that
are within [min trip distance; max trip distance] from the previous activity A-
1. Because we assume all agents start their day at home, all activity locations
can be incrementally estimated using this process. The reachable locations are
identified using the agent previous location (A-1 location) and the computed
distance range. However, individuals are traveling on the road network, and com-
puting location-to-location road distances for 320730 residences and facilities is
very computationally expensive. Previous research by- Shahid et al. (2009) found
thatMinkowskidistancewithacoefficientof1.54bestapproximatesroaddistance.
To identify potential locations for A, we thus searched for locations of the desired
typesituatedinaMinkowskidistance(coefficient1.54)betweenmin trip distance
and max trip distance from A-1. One of the potential location is then randomly
drawn and assigned for A.
3. The A activity end time is randomized by +-15 min so that the 5 min rounding
does not appear in the schedules and the agents’ schedules are more varied.
4. The A activity, defined by its end time, type (home, work, education, shopping,
medical, eat out, social, entertain, exercise, escort someone) and location, and the
T trip,definedbyitstransportationmode(car,ride,publictransport,walk,bike),
are added to the agent schedule. When all trips have been added for the agent, its
last activity (i.e. home) is added to terminate the schedule.
At the end of the modelling process, each synthetic individual with individual
characteristics,isanagentwithindividualdailybehaviour,inadigitalWinnipegcity.
3 Simulation and calibration with MATSim
Thesimulationphaseofthestudypredictstheinteractionsandbehavioursoftheindi-
vidualagentsinthecitythroughoutaday.Inourcase,weareinterestedinsimulating
theactivityandmobilityoftheentirepopulation,includingtheviabilityofservicesfor
older adult needs. For the simulation, the Multi-Agent Transport Simulation (MAT-
Sim) framework (Horni et al., 2016) was used (version 15.0). MATSim is a widely
used open-source simulation framework designed to model and simulate large-scale
transportation systems. By simulating the decision-making processes of thousands of
agents, MATSim allows to investigate various transportation scenarios, and can help
to assess the impacts of a new DRT service for older adults.
The agents schedules have been converted to MATSim plans format. In addition
toitsplan,eachagenthasacar availability attributedependingonitsdrivinglicense
11ownership and a subpopulation attribute to indicate if it is a older adult or not. At
each time step, each agent executes its individual schedule, i.e. performs an activity
at a specific location or travels from an activity to its next activity. MATSim uses
an evolutionary algorithm where each agent adapts its behaviour to the transport
environment and maximise the utility of each plan. At each iteration, a proportion of
the agents try a new plan by changing their transportation mode, route, or activity
time. When an iteration ends plans are scored, i.e. each plan utility is calculated. At
the end of the simulation, a traffic equilibrium is reached and it ensures that each
agent uses its highest-scoring plan to produce a realistic demand.
3.1 Simulation configuration
The ABM was simulated for 500 iterations for the system to reach equilibrium, with
25%ofallagentsduetoMATSimhighcomputationalcost.Downscalingisaverycom-
mon practice in MATSim, and Ben-Dor et al. (2021) found that sampled populations
equal to or greater than 25% preserve most urban traffic statistics. Three repetitions
with different random 25% samples have been executed. This corresponds to 192,244
agents with 31,607 older adults in the first version, 192,349 agents with 31,944 older
adults in version 2 and 191,979 with 31,848 older adults in version 3. The road net-
work capacity has been scaled accordingly (flow capacity factor of 0.25 and storage
capacity factor of 0.5 according to MATSim best practices). The public transit ser-
vice on a Tuesday has been used and the access and egress time per person, number
of seats, and bus’ passenger car equivalent have been reduced accordingly.
The simulation core used is Hermes, a high-performance simulator for large-scale
scenarios,thatfunctionsasafasteralternativemimicingmostoftheMATSimdefault
simulator Qsim functionalities (Graur et al., 2021). The model is simulated second
by second for 24h on a weekday (plus 6h to let late travelling agents finish their
activities). The car and ride users are routed on the network, and their travel times
are impacted by congestion. However a “ride” does not increase links loads as it is
supposed to be shared with a “car” trip. Bike and walk trips are teleported, as these
modes travel times are independent from the network congestion. For each bike or
walktrip,ateleportationrouteisgeneratedwhosetraveldistanceis1.3timesthetrip
beeline distance (1.54 has been used for the location choices all modes considered, 1.3
isusuallyusedforwalk/bikeassmallshortcutscanapplyforthesemodes),andwhose
travel time is the distance divided by the mode constant speed. The SwissRailRaptor
router is used for a fast public transit routing, and buses run with a steady speed
according to their timetable (deterministicPT).
At each iteration, 40% of agents select their highest score plan from the previous
iterations for re-execution in the current iteration (BestScore), 20% keep the same
schedule and modes but try a different route (ReRoute), 20% shifts their activity end
timesrandomlywithinarangeof[-30min;+30min](TimeAllocationMutator),and20%
change their mode of transport (SubtourModeChoice). Agent can switch between car,
ride,walk,bikeandpublictransit,consideringtheirdrivinglicenseavailability,i.e.an
agentwithnodrivinglicensecannotuseacarasadriver.Planinnovationisdisabled
for the last 10% iterations, i.e. after 450 iterations the agents will only use plans from
memory.Thispreventsagentsfromusingunrealisticplansinthelastiterationsdueto
12trying a new mode or departure time. Score statistics and mode choice statistics have
been checked and converge by the end of the iterations, showing that the equilibrium
has been reached after 450 iterations.
Allotherparametersarethedefaultones:anA*landmark-basedroutingalgorithm
is used, agents can keep up to 5 plans in memory and the plan with the lowest score
is deleted when the agent’s memory is full, etc.
Simulations were performed using the Linux-based High Performance Computing
facilities from the University of Leeds. Each simulation has been executed on 24 cores
(2.2GHzBroadwellE5-2650v4CPUswithamemorybandwidthof800MHz/core)and
using 120GB RAM. Simulation computing time was 27h, i.e. 3 min 30 per iteration.
3.2 Calibration process
MATSimmodelsrequirecalibrationbyadjustingthemodeutilityparameterstoensure
that the simulated modal split closely align with observed real-world data. Quantita-
tive data on older adults’ trips modal split in Winnipeg is limited, so the modal split
for the global population was used for calibration.
The most recent travel survey for Winnipeg is the 2007 Winnipeg Area Travel
Survey (WATS) (iTRANS Project Team, 2009), representing 4.4% of all households
within Winnipeg. All the daily trips made by the respondent householders (11 years
and older) were recorded. Although the survey relates to travel from 15 years ago, it
provides valuable insights into local travel behaviours. The 2007 WATS reports that
among Winnipeg City households, car trips accounted for 64.8% of the daily trips,
ride for 15.8%, public transit for 8.2%, walk trips for 9.5% and bike trips for 0.7%.
The 2022 ABM modal split before calibration (just after the statistical matching)
is close to the one reported by the 2007 WATS: 68.6% of trips by car (+1.8%), 14.1%
(-1.7%) by ride, 9.5% (+1.3%) by public transit, 7.1% (-2.4%) by walk and 0.8%
(+0.1%) by bike. To get an idea of how realistic are the differences in the modal
split,weanalysedtheevolutionofthemainmodeofcommutinginWinnipegreported
between 2006 census (Statistics Canada) and 2021 census (Statistics Canada, 2022a).
This confirmed that the car mode has been increasingly used (+3.5% from 2006 to
2021),walkhasbeenlessused(-2%from2006to2021)andbikemodalsharehasbeen
constant (+0% from 2006 to 2021). The 2022 ABM modal split before calibration is
thus realistic for car, walk and bike modes. However, while the ABM shows less ride
and more public transit than in the 2007 WATS, the commuting ride modal share
observed was constant (+0.3% from 2006 to 2021), and the commuting public transit
modal share observed decreased (-4.2% from 2006 to 2021). The 2022 ABM modal
split is thus a bit more uncertain regarding ride and public transit modes. The modal
split objective for the calibration was thus fixed as the input modal split with a ±1%
tolerance for each mode (±1.2% for ride and pt modes).
The modal split was calibrated using the first version of the 25% sample model
throughaniterativeprocess.Ateachsimulation,thefinalsimulatedmodalsplit(after
500 iterations) was analysed and the mode choice parameters were adjusted to push
agents onto different modes, until a satisfactory match between the simulated and
observeddatawasachieved.Afirstsimulationwasrunwiththedefaultscoringparam-
eters and teleportation speeds. The mode choice parameters have then been adjusted
13through simulations by altering the mode-specific constant, marginal utilities of dis-
tance and traveling in the scoring parameters, and the bike and walk teleportation
speeds.27calibrationstepswererequiredtoachievearealisticmodalsplit(Figure5).
Fig. 5: Iterative calibration of the simulated modal split for 25% population sample
(v1). The coloured ranges represent the modal share objective for each mode. The
coloured lines represent the evolution of the modal share of each mode through the
calibration steps. The dotted lines show the 2007 WATS modal share for each mode.
After 27 steps, the modal share for each mode falls within the objective range.
The modal split of the calibrated model after 500 iterations, is presented in Table
2, along with the calibrated parameters for each mode. The public transit and ride
modes have been assigned a large disutility in order to achieve realistic modal shares.
Topreventverylongwalkorbiketrips,largernegativeutilitiesoftravellingpermeter
and per hour have been set for these modes and their teleportation speeds have been
reduced. All other scoring parameters (dailyMonetaryConstant, dailyUtilityConstant
and monetaryDistanceRate) have been set to zero. It should be noted that the con-
stantsselectedtoobtainarealisticmodalshareoftheride,publictransit,andbikeare
high, highlighting the economical or behavioral inconvenience of using these modes in
Winnipeg,relativetotheeaseofdrivingacarinthiscontext.Thecalibrationofmodal
constants is a first step in designing a MATSim model. A more refined calibration of
theutilityofdistance,traveling,andcostsisthenperformedtoobtainacompletedeci-
sion model. Alternative approaches involving calibration of a choice model exogenous
to MATSim are feasible, but outside the scope of this exploratory study.
4 Validation
ValidatingtheABMallowsustoassessthereliabilityandaccuracyofthemodel’spre-
dictions and outcomes, ensuring that the simulation adequately represents Winnipeg
population and mobility.
4.1 Synthetic population and environment model validation
Thesyntheticpopulationgenerationprocesshasbeenpreviouslyvalidatedfor2021by
Pr´edhumeau and Manley (2023a) by comparing a synthetic population generated for
14Table 2: Objective modal share, calibrated modal share in the simulated trips, and
calibration parameters for each mode
Scoringparameters
Mode Objective Calibrated constant marg.utility marg.utility Teleportation
(%) share(%) ofdistance oftraveling speed(m/s)
car [67.6,69.6] 68.2 -10 0 -6 -
ride [12.9,15.3] 15.2 -210 0 -6 -
publictransit [8.3,10.7] 9.6 -225 0 -6 -
walk [6.1,8.1] 6.7 0 -0.04 -6 1
bike [0,1.8] 0.3 -50 -0.04 -36 2
2021 to the actual 2021 population reported by the census. A city level validation has
been presented for Winnipeg, with histograms and relative errors for each attribute
and each category. A similar validation for the 2022 synthetic population is presented
inFigure6regardingWinnipegpopulationdistributionofsex,ageandhouseholdsize.
Figure 6 shows that the 2022 synthetic population (in orange) accurately repro-
duces the 2021 census statistics (in blue) at the city level, with a larger population in
the 2022 model compared to what was measured in 2021. The synthetic population
for 2022 also includes the demographic shift due to the population ageing.
Additional validation has been presented in our previous work (Pr´edhumeau and
Manley, 2023b) for 2023, where the Winnipeg synthetic population density and mean
agebyDAhavebeencomparedtothosereportedbythe2021census.Thecomparison
showed that for 90% of the DAs, the absolute difference in density is less than 20%
and the difference in the mean age is less than 4 years. The road network model
completeness, and the residential and facilities counts have been validated as well.
Finally, the synthetic older adult population spatial distribution was validated.
Figure 7 presents a comparison of the 2022 synthetic older adult population with
the 2021 census older adult population at the DA level. The proportions of people
aged 65 to 74, 75 to 84 and 85+ by DA from the census are well reproduced by the
syntheticpopulation.ThemeanabsoluteproportionerroroverallDAsis2.1%forthe
65 to 74 year-old (95% of DAs have an error <6%), 1.6% for the 75 to 84 year-old
(95% of DAs have an error <5%), and 1% for the 85+ year-old (95% of DAs have an
error <3%). As they age, the elderly populations become more prevalent in specific
neighbourhoods:inSt.James-AssiniboiaWest,inAssiniboiaSouth,intheRiverEast
West neighbourhood (north) and in St. Vital along the Red river and Seine river.
4.2 Activity-based model and mobility validation
Various data sources have been used to compare the ABM outputs against real-
worldobservations.Duetolimiteddataregardingolderadults’tripsinWinnipeg,the
adopted approach involved quantitatively validating the global population mobility
before verifying that the mobility trends of older adults compared to the general pop-
ulation were accurately replicated. All the following figures report the mean values
measured on the 3 simulation repetitions and the minimum and maximum values as
black error bars.
15(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 6:Citylevelvalidation:comparisonof2022syntheticpopulation(inorange)and
2021 census population (in blue) for Winnipeg on (a) the population and households
counts,(b)thehouseholdsizedistributionand(c)theagedistribution.Relativeerrors
appear in boxes for each category.
4.2.1 Global population mobility validation
Distributions of simulated trips’ purposes, transportation modes and start times for
the global population are quantitatively compared against distributions reported by
the WATS 2007 (iTRANS Project Team, 2009) in Figure 8.
The trips purposes distribution in simulation reproduces well the 2007 WATS dis-
tribution; the main trip purposes are going back home, work, leisure (i.e. socialising,
eating out, exercising and entertaining), and shopping (Figure 8a). More escort trips
arereportedbytheWATS2007thaninthesimulation.However,thelowrateofescort
trips in the model is coherent with the TUS data in which only 3.3% of the respon-
dents reported time spend accompanying a child, 0.7% accompanying a teenager and
0.8% accompanying an adult. The difference might be linked to differences in the way
the WATS and TUS surveys have been conducted.
The simulated modal split is very close to the WATS modal split and to the
objectivedefinedinSection3,asshowninFigure8b.Thisisexpectedasthesimulated
modal split was adjusted during the calibration step. The model was calibrated using
the first version of the 25% population and the very small error bars in Figure 8b
show that the two other versions are well calibrated using the same parameters. In
16(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 7: Dissemination area level validation for older adults: comparison of the 2022
synthetic older adult population (on the left-hand side) and the 2021 census older
adult population (on the right-hand side) for Winnipeg. Proportions of people aged
(a) 65 to 74, (b) 75 to 84 and (c) 85+ by DA. Grey DAs are not populated or not
directly comparable due to boundaries update since last Census.
Winnipeg, the dominant transportation mode is car as a driver, followed by car as a
passenger, public transit, walk and then bike, which the model accurately replicates.
Thesimulatedtripsdistributionbytimeoftheday(Figure8c)havebeencompared
to the WATS distribution (Figure 8d). Once again the model reproduces very well
themorningandafternoontrafficpeaksobservedinWinnipegwiththehighesttraffic
peak from 4 p.m. to 5 p.m.
Aggregatedtripsstatisticsarewellreproducedbythemodel.Whilethe2007WATS
reports 2.83 daily trips per person on average (for people aged 11 and over), the pro-
posed model has an average of 2.69 daily trips per agent aged 11 and over. The mean
commutingtimereportedbythe2016census(StatisticsCanada,2016a)forWinnipeg
is 24 min while the “work” trips in the model have an average duration of 22 min.
We found no available data on the trip distances in Winnipeg. However, a quarterly
report on national vehicle kilometres travelled metrics for 2021 by Automotive Indus-
tries Association of Canada and StreetLight Data (StreetLight Data, 2021) reported
a national average trip length of 15 km. The average trip length by car (or ride) in
the simulation is close; 13 km.
17(a) (b)
(c) (d)
Fig. 8: Distributions of global population (average over the three 25% population
samples) simulated trips’ (a) purpose, (b) transportation mode, and (c) start time, in
orange, compared to 2007 WATS distributions in blue. (d) Distribution of start times
of trips by time of day, for the City of Winnipeg and the external area separately,
from 2007 WATS (iTRANS Project Team, 2009).
4.2.2 Older adults mobility validation
Aftervalidatingtheglobalpopulationsimulatedmobility,olderadultsmobilitytrends
has been validated comparatively and using national studies. As reported by Li et al.
(2012), older adults travel less as they age. This is well reproduced by the model;
agentsaged11to64perform2.72dailytripsonaverage,agentsaged65to74perform
2.66 daily trips on average and agents aged 75 and over perform 2.42 daily trips on
average.
Compared to the general agent population, simulated older adults have more
“shopping”, “social”, “eat out”, and “medical” trips and less trips related to “work”,
“exercise” or “education” (Figure 9a). These trends have been observed in real older
adult populations by several studies from different countries (Fatima et al., 2020; Li
et al., 2012; Watson et al., 2021; Kouros et al., 2013; O’Hern and Oxley, 2015). After
65, an increasing number of people retire and thus have less commuting trips, educa-
tion trips are mainly performed by children and young adult students, and with age
physical abilities may decline and hamper exercise. Still, in 2015, 19.8% Canadians
aged 65 and older, worked at some point during the year (Statistics Canada, 2017),
which explains the high percentage of trips related to work in this population.
Older adult mobility is heavily dependent on car use (Luiu and Tight, 2021; Li
etal.,2012;O’HernandOxley,2015).Thisiswellreproducedbythemodel;80.7%of
older adults’ trips are by car (Figure 9b). However, observations show that the modal
split is not homogeneous among older adults (Li et al., 2012; O’fallon and Sullivan,
18(a) (b)
(c)
Fig. 9: Distributions of simulated trips’ (a) purpose, (b) transportation mode, and
(c) start time, for the global population (in blue) and seniors population (in orange).
Average values over three simulation repetitions are presented, with min and max
values as error bars.
2009).InCanada,nationalstatisticsonelderlymobilityarereportedbytheCanadian
Longitudinal Study on Aging (CLSA) (Parminder et al., 2018), a study of adult age-
ingon50,000Canadiansaged45to85years,andbytheCanadianCommunityHealth
Survey (CCHS) (Statistics Canada, 2009), an annual cross-sectional survey that col-
lects information related to health status, health system and health determinants for
the Canadian population. These studies report two key observations on older adults
travel: 1) as they age, older people use the car less as a driver and more as a passen-
ger, and 2) older men use the car more as a driver and less as a passenger compared
to older women. These two observations are well reproduced in the model, as shown
in Figure 10. With age, agents use less car as drivers and more as passengers (Figure
10a). Among simulated older adults aged 65 to 74, men (in orange) drive more than
women (in blue) and are less passengers (Figure 10b).
(a) (b)
Fig. 10:Distributionsofsimulatedolderadults’tripsmode(a)byagerange,and(b)
by gender. Average values over three simulation repetitions are presented, with min
and max values as error bars.
19Olderadultshavetemporalmobilitypatternsdifferentfromtheglobalpopulation;
accordingtoO’fallonandSullivan(2009)mostelderlypeoplemaketheirtripsbetween
9:30 a.m. and 3 p.m. This also appears in the model where older adults’ trips do
not show a morning and an afternoon peak as the global population do, but rather
a smooth increase in the morning until midday and a smooth decrease after 4 p.m
(Figure 9c).
Finally,ananalysisoftheTUSdatashowsthat29.9%ofolderrespondentsstayed
at home during their reported week day (15.9% of general population respondents
stayed at home). In the model, 20.8% of older adults agents stay at home (i.e. no trip
andactivityotherthan“home”)forthesimulateddaycomparedto13.5%considering
all simulated agents. This trend is very pronounced for older adults aged 85 and over;
46%of85+agentsstayathomeforthesimulatedday.Amongthe85year-oldandover,
women agents stay more at home than men agents: 55% vs. 30%. Finally, the most
significantly correlated attribute for staying at home is not having a driving license:
75% of non-licensed 85+ agents stay at home vs. 8% for the licensed 85+ agents.
SimilarfindingshavebeenpreviouslyobservedforolderNewZealanders(O’fallonand
Sullivan, 2009).
5 Preliminary testing of an AMoD service in
simulation
Once the model was successfully validated, the focus shifted towards conducting
preliminary testing of an AMoD service in the simulated environment.
5.1 Simulation scenarios
SeveralAMoDscenarioshavebeenexploredinordertobecomparedandtodrawfirst
insights into the potential older adults’ demand:
• Thebaseline scenario isthecalibratedscenarioafter500iterationsrepresentingthe
current Winnipeg mobility, with no AMoD service.
• The AMoD scenarios are scenarios where the demand is the calibrated demand
from the baseline scenario, and an AMoD mode has been added for older adults.
OlderadultagentscanthusswitchfromtheircalibratedmodetoAMoDandifthis
new mode is more convenient, they will use it.
• Finally, Harb et al. (2018) showed that the introduction of a new transportation
service may generate some induced demand by new user groups. Induced demand
refers to the phenomenon where the availability of a service leads to an increase in
demandforthatservice.Peoplewhohavedifficultiesusingacarorpublictransport
couldnowmovemoreeasily,andgooutofhomemoreoften,usingthedoor-to-door
AMoDservice,whichthusmightgeneratenewtrips.Thisnewdemandfromunder-
served populations has been evaluated in previous works with various assumptions.
Harper et al. (2016) assumed that with AVs the non-drivers would travel as much
as drivers from the same age or younger. Brown et al. (2014) assumed that the
population segments aged 16 to 85 would travel as much as the top decile of the
segment. Wadud et al. (2016) estimated that AVs could lead to a share of drivers
20similar to the 35-55 age group across all age groups and that everyone aged 62 and
above would drive as much as those 62 years old. Finally, Hogeveen et al. (2021)
assumed that longer and more frequent trips would be made with AVs, and that
new user groups like children or the elderly would use AVs.
Inspired by these previous approaches, the AMoD induced scenarios explore situa-
tions where the demand is the calibrated demand from the baseline scenario, but
modifiedsothatolderadultswithnocaraccesshavenowthesamemobilitypatterns
as older adults with car access. A new approach has been used; the non-licensed
older adults have been matched again with the TUS records, assuming that they
havealicenseduringthematchingprocess.Theirnewactivityplanshavethenbeen
generatedaccordingtotheprocedurepresentedinSection2.3.3andthe“car”mode
(inaccessible because they do not have a driving license) has been replaced by the
AMoD mode in their plans. The new demand, including the induced demand for
older adults, is used for simulations where an AMoD mode has been added to the
available modes for older adults. All older adult agents can thus switch from their
calibrated mode to AMoD.
Moreover, the fleet size is an important element for the AMoD adoption, as a too
small fleet will not be able to serve all the requests. We thus simulated each AMoD
scenario with 3 different fleet sizes: 100, 250 and 500 vehicles. Each scenario with
AMoD has been run with the default MATSim core (QSim) for 150 iterations, and
hasbeenrepeatedforthethree25%populationsampleversions.150iterationsproved
sufficienttoreachtheequilibriumpoint,withthescoreandmodestatisticsconverging
after100iterations.Allinnovationshavebeenswitchedoffforthelast10%iterations.
All agents can try new modes but MATSim code has been modified so that only
the older adult subpopulation has access to the AMoD mode. Agents activity and
mode scoring are kept as in the baseline scenario, and the AMoD mode is scored by
agents similarly to the car mode.
5.2 Simulated AMoD service
The AMoD service has been simulated using MATSim DRT module (Bischoff et al.,
2017), which allows the simulation of shared rides. For each incoming user request,
it assess all possible insertion points in AMoD vehicles trips and chose the best one
or reject the request. The AMoD vehicles operate in a door2door mode, and are
routed on the road network. The fleet size is composed of 100, 250 or 500 vehicles
dependingonthescenario.Eachvehiclehasacapacityof4passengers.Allvehiclesare
at the Winnipeg Transit bus depot (central location in Winnipeg city) at the start of
the simulation. During the simulation, the default Minimum Cost Flow Rebalancing
strategy is used to efficiently rebalance the vehicles and to take into account the
demand structure of the previous iteration. Idle vehicles return to the nearest of all
start links.
Older users will wait for a maximum of 30 min after they submit their request
(emulating an online or app request system) and each pick up or drop off stop will be
1 min. The waiting times is considered as a hard constraint; the request gets rejected
21if it can not be served on time, and the agent will not perform the trip and attribute
a very low score to this plan.
All other parameters have been kept to the default values; maxTravelTimeAlpha:
1.5, travelTimeEstimationAlpha: 0.05, travelTimeEstimationBeta: 0, targetAlpha:
0.5, targetBeta: 0.5, zonesGeneration: GridFromNetwork, and maxTravelTimeBeta:
maxWaitTime.
The future AMoD service would be provided with autonomous electric vehicles
(EV),sotheAVandEVMATSimmoduleshavebeenused(Bischoffetal.,2019).The
AV module allows to adapt the road capacity in order to reflect the AVs increased
efficiency; two AVs would need only the flow capacity of one ordinary vehicle. The
EV module allows to simulate the electric vehicles battery, add charging stations and
make the vehicles go to stations when their battery is low. The EV configuration has
beenkepttothedefaultconfiguration;vehiclesaresenttochargerswhentheirbattery
is below 20% and they charge up to 80%. Winnipeg charging locations have been
retrieved from the Alternative Fueling Station Locator provided by the Alternative
Fuels Data Center (). It provides the location of the public electric charging stations
in the United States and Canada.
Simulations have been performed on the Linux-based High Performance Comput-
ingfacilitiesfromtheUniversityofLeeds.,with24cores(2.2GHzBroadwellE5-2650v4
CPUswithamemorybandwidthof800MHz/core)and120GBRAM.Simulationcom-
puting time was 32h to 40h for the 100 vehicles fleet, 46h to 53h for the 250 vehicles
fleet and 51h to 63h for the 500 vehicles fleet.
5.3 Results and discussion
We examined the relationship between the fleet size and the number of rides and
rejections in the AMoD system, while also considering the presence or absence of
induced demand (Figure 11). As the fleet size increased, we observed an increase in
AMoD rides due to improved capacity and availability, suggesting that the demand
adapts to the fleet size.
Fig. 11: Number of requests served (dark blue and red) and rejected (light blue and
pink) in the AMoD and AMoD induced scenarios, with 100, 250 and 500 vehicles.
22Therejectionrateishighwith100AMoDvehicles;morerequestsarerejectedthan
accepted (53% to 55% of requests are rejected), and thus many older adult agents do
not switch to AMoD in their final plans. With 250 AMoD vehicles, the number of
requestsincreasesandmoreridesareserved;45%to48%ofrequestsarerejected.More
agents had a successful ride and thus switch to AMoD but the rejection rate is still
high in the final iteration. Finally, with 500 AMoD vehicles more rides are requested
because many agents switched to AMoD and the rejection rate is lower (only 25% to
32%ofrequestsarerejected).Whilethenumberofridesservedincreaseslinearlywith
thefleetsize,thenumberofrejectedrequestsincreaseswith250vehiclesanddecreases
with 500 vehicles. This suggests that 500 vehicles is a minimum fleet size to start to
absorb the demand but is not sufficient to serve all requests. This high rejection rate
is related to long waiting times: 25% of all requests are rejected after a 30 min wait.
Itappearsthatbyincreasingthiswaitingtimelimit,morerequestscouldbesatisfied.
When considering the induced demand, more older adults trips are happening:
2.82 daily trips on average for agents aged 65 to 74 instead of 2.66, and 3.17 daily
trips on average for agents aged 75 and over instead of 2.42. After the induced trips
are considered, the number of daily trips for people above 75 years old increases more
than that of the people between the age of 65 and 74. This result is due to the strong
dependence between the number of daily trips and access to the car. While 65-74
year-oldseniorswithoutcaraccesstendtomaintainactivitiesoutofhomeusingother
transportation modes, seniors above 75 years old mobility is more impacted by the
absence of car access. If an AMoD system can be used as a car, then older seniors
might maintain a high level of mobility.
We noticed a similar number of AMoD rides served with the induced demand
compared to without the induced demand. This is expected as the service is full and
additional requests have to be rejected. This is coherent with the higher number of
rejected requests when the induced demand is considered; the demand is higher with
the induced demand but the fleet size is insufficient to support it.
Regardingthemodalshare,olderadultsswitchedfromallmodestoAMoD(Figure
12a).
(a) (b)
Fig. 12: Older adults trips’ modal share for each scenario: baseline scenarios (blue),
AMoD with 100 vehicles (orange), AMoD with 250 vehicles (green) and AMoD with
500vehicles(red)(a)withoutthe induced demandand(b) withtheinduceddemand.
Average values over the three repetitions are presented, with min and max values as
error bars.
23With 100 vehicles, AMoD represents 35.9% of the trips, while with 250 vehicles
AMoD accounts for 65.4% of the trips, becoming the main transportation mode for
older adults. Surprisingly, the modal split changes very little from 250 vehicles to 500
vehicles. This might indicate that almost all older adults who could switch to AMoD
have already done so with 250 vehicles and that adding more vehicles will absorb the
demand but not generate more demand.
The use of biking, public transit (pt), and walking as transportation modes has
dwindled to marginal shares, with each of these modes representing less than 2% of
the trips. The use of car as a driver or a passenger is reduced from 89.4% to 31%
of trips with 500 AMoD vehicles. Even if the AMoD mode utility is valued as the
car mode, some agents stick to the car mode, due to the additional waiting time and
detour time of the AMoD mode.
Similarobservationsaremadewhenconsideringtheinduceddemand(Figure12b).
However,theAMoDmodalsharecontinuestoincreasewhenthefleetsizeisincreased
from250vehiclesto500vehicles.ThismeansthatthedemandforAMoDishigherand
250vehiclesisnotsufficienttoabsorbthepotentialdemand.Ifmorevehiclesareadded
to the fleet, then more agents will switch to AMoD. This is coherent with the higher
rejection rate observed on the 500 vehicles when the induced demand is considered:
32%comparedto25%withouttheinduceddemand.Largerfleetshavetobeexplored
in order to identify the typing point where no more agents adopt the AMoD mode.
The AMoD users vary depending on the fleet size and on whether the induced
demand is considered or not, as shown in Table 3.
Table 3:AMoDuserscharacteristicscomparedtothegeneralolderadultpopulation,
for each scenario. Proportions higher than the general population are in bold
Olderadult AMoDusers
agentspopulation
Induceddemand No Yes
Fleetsize 100 250 500 100 250 500
%women 55.9 53.5 56.6 56.3 55.5 58 59.5
%licenseowners 77.6 80.5 85.5 85.9 62 66 69
Meanage 74.7 73.7 74 74 75.2 75.5 75.4
Without considering the induced demand, only 53.5% of the first users are women
while they represent 55.9% of the general older adults population. As the fleet size
increases, the users gradually shift towards more women; with 500 vehicles 56.3% of
the AMoD trips are made by women. When the induced demand is considered, the
first users gender distribution is similar to the general older adults population gender
distribution, meaning that more induced demand could come from women than from
men. Again, as the fleet size increases, the users gradually shift towards even more
women; with 100 vehicles, 55.5% of AMoD trips are made by women, and with 500
vehicles 59% of the AMoD trips are made by women. Fewer women than men have
access to a car, particularly in the older age groups, where many women do not go
24out from home. Many women who do not have access to a car may therefore use the
AMoD service to make trips they cannot make without a car.
Without considering the induced demand, the primary users are the one with a
driving license; while 77.6% of older adults are licensed, 80.5% of AMoD trips are
made by licensed older adults with 100 vehicles. When the fleet size increases, more
and more users have a driving license; with 500 vehicles 86% of AMoD trips are made
bylicensedolderadults.Whentheinduceddemandisconsidered,moreprimaryusers
do not have a driving license; with 100 vehicles only 62% of AMoD trips are made by
licensed older adults. Again, when the fleet size increases, more and more of the users
have a driving license. However, even with 500 vehicles only 69% of AMoD trips are
by license owners. This is expected because the induced demand in the model comes
from agents without driving license, which thus represent an important part of the
AMoD users.
These findings indicate that while the first users might be men and non-licensed
older adults, with a larger fleet, women and licensed older adults might switch to
AMoD as well.
Finally, the AMoD users in the non-induced demand scenario are a bit younger
than the general population; their mean age is 74 years while the global older adults
populationmeanageis74.7years.Onthecontrary,whentheinduceddemandiscon-
sidered, the users are a bit older than the general population; AMoD users mean age
is 75.2 years old with 100 vehicles and 75.5 with 500 vehicles. The induced demand
comes from non-licensed older adults, who are more prevalent in the oldest popula-
tions, and use AMoD for their trips. Even when the induced demand is ignored, with
a fleet of 500 vehicles, AMoD becomes the main mode of transportation for all older
adultageranges(Figure13).Whileitisthemostcommonmodeoftransportationfor
63.6% of older adults aged 65 to 74, and for 60.6% of older adults aged 75 to 84, it is
themainmodeoftransportationforupto70.8%oftheoldestsegment(85+).Among
these older adults, 64% of car users, 76% of walkers, 81% of car passengers and 89%
of public transit users switched to AMoD.
Fig. 13: Older adults most common mode of transportation by age group, for the
AMoD 500 vehicle scenario (no induced demand). Average values over the three sim-
ulation repetitions are presented, with minimum and maximum values as error bars.
TheanalysisofAMoDtiming(Figure14)revealsthatwhenthefleetsizeislimited
to 100 vehicles, older adults tend to use AMoD primarily for morning and afternoon
25trips. As the fleet size increases to 250 or 500 vehicles, older adults rely on AMoD for
trips all over the day, since most older adults trips are made with this mode.
(a) (b)
Fig. 14: Distributions of AMoD trips’ start time for each scenario: AMoD with 100
vehicles (in blue), AMoD with 250 vehicles (in orange) and AMoD with 500 vehicles
(in green), (a) without the induced demand, and (b) with the induced demand.
WhentheAMoDserviceoperateswithonly100vehicles,thetripsthatexperience
a shift to AMoD are those occurring in the early morning (before 9a.m.), and in the
afternoon and evening (after 3p.m., and especially after 8p.m.). This might indicate
thatthefirstolderadults’tripsthatswitchedtoAMoDaretheonesthatolderadults
have difficulty to perform, e.g. when there is no public transportation or when the
traffic flow is slow due to congestion.
When the induced demand is considered, similar observations can be made; the
first trips to be shifted to AMoD are those occurring in the early morning, and in the
afternoon and evening. As the fleet size increases, the AMoD trips distribution tends
to be closer to the older adults trips distribution, i.e. smooth increase in the morning
until midday and a smooth decrease after 4p.m.
Regarding the location of the requests (Figure 15), if the number of vehicles is
limited to 100, the requests are concentrated where there is a high density of older
adults; in the city centre, in Westwood and Crestview neighbourhood (in the west),
and in the River east west neighbourhood (in the north of the city). As the fleet size
increasesandmorerequestscanbeserved,olderadultsfromotherzonesprogressively
switch to AMoD. With 500 vehicles, requests are made from all the city. The spatial
distributionsoftherequestsareidenticalforthethreerepetitions,andwhetherornot
induced demand is considered. These findings may guide the AMoD vehicles spatial
distribution in the city for an efficient service.
6 Conclusions
The Canadian population is ageing, and segments of the older population are expe-
riencing difficulties in meeting their transportation needs. An AMoD service could
support their mobility, provided that this new solution is carefully designed in order
to meet older adults specific demand.
This paper attempts to estimate older adults’ mobility needs by creating an ABM
to study older adults demand for an AMoD service in Winnipeg, Canada. This
26(a) (b) (c)
Fig. 15:NumberofrequestsbyAMoDservicezone,with(a)100,(b)250and(c)500
vehicles. Light yellow is for 0 request and dark red is for 150 requests.
approachincorporatesarichandrealisticmodelofWinnipegpopulationanditsmobil-
ity at a fine spatial and temporal scale. The model has been calibrated to obtain a
realisticmodalsplitandhasbeenvalidatedagainstreal-worldobservations.TheABM
hasbeensimulatedinMATSim,whereasimulatedAMoDservicewasaddedasanew
mobility solution for older adults. Our findings indicate that the model can be used
to explore scenarios that can not be explored in real world, such as testing various
designsforanAMoDservicebeforeitsimplementation.Thesimulateddemandadapt
to the AMoD fleet size, as the real-world demand would adapt to the service qual-
ity. The model can thus be used to identify the minimum fleet size needed to absorb
the demand and the fleet size with which all requests could be served. This work
shows that an ABM approach is relevant for assessing the AMoD demand of specific
population groups in large-scale urbanised areas.
The outputs of the proposed model and simulations shed light on the complex
dynamicsofAMoDsystemsandhaveseveralimplicationsfortransportationplanning
and policy. First, while increasing fleet size can initially reduce service rejections and
improve overall accessibility, it is essential to consider the potential effects of induced
demand. The appropriate fleet size and modal share differ between scenarios with
and without induced demand. In this work, we considered the demand resulting from
new user groups, i.e. the non-licensed elderly, and from the elderly switching their
transportationmodetouseAMoD.However,partofthedemandforanAMoDservice
could also result from a change in the frequency of trips (e.g., additional trips that
werenotpreviouslymadebyusers(Harbetal.,2018;Rahmanetal.,2020)),achange
in the trips length (e.g., longer trips (Harb et al., 2018)), shifts in the timing of trips
(e.g., more evening trips (Harb et al., 2018)), or even changes in the locations of
activities(e.g.,useoffacilitiesthatwerenotpreviouslyaccessible).Inthelongerterm,
demand could further evolve as a result of changes in where people live; an AMoD
service making residential areas with poor public transport links more attractive.
TheAMoDimplementationshouldthereforebeconductedinhandwithinfrastruc-
ture planning to avoid encouraging undesired urban sprawl and making older adult
users dependent on the AMoD service. Future research in this area can delve deeper
into understanding the interplay between fleet size, induced demand, and operational
efficiency to maximise the benefits of AMoD services. A limitation of the model is
27that only 25% of the Winnipeg population is simulated and used to study the AMoD
demand. Kagho et al. (2022) recently showed that if a 25% population sample could
be relevant for analysing some AMoD adoption outputs, a larger sample has to be
used to have a complete evaluation of the AMoD design implemented. For example, a
75%populationsampleistheminimumrequiredtoaccuratelystudytheuserswaiting
time, and a 95% sample is required to estimate the average vehicle occupancy. Future
workwillfocusoncalibratingthefullpopulationmodel,validatingthemobilityusing
traffic counts (if available) and explore more AMoD scenarios.
Second,iftheelderlyvaluetheAMoDserviceastheyvaluethecartransportation
mode, then the AMoD adoption could be very important. The use of biking, walking
andpublictransitastransportationmodescouldbereducedtomarginalproportions.
The use of the car could also be greatly reduced, but would remain the second mode
of transport for older adults after the AMoD. Once a certain threshold of AMoD
adoption has been reached, almost 30% of the trips appear to continue to be made by
car,eveniftheAMoDfleetisexpanded.Itisthereforeimportanttoclearlydefinethe
objective when setting up an AMoD service; to replace the car for older adults or to
serve as a complementary mode of transport for disadvantaged older adults. The size
of the fleet and service supply should be defined according to the objective.
Third, when the induced demand is considered, the oldest and female segments of
the population, who particularly depend on ride, walking and public transit, could be
the most demanding users. This has been observed in real world, where older females
with no car access would seem likely to have the greatest number of unmet needs
(Shergold and Wilson, 2016). However, an important limitation of the model is that
it does not include a discrete mode choice model. All simulated older adults value the
AMoD mode in the same way, while in the real-world, some older adults are more
reluctanttousesuchnewservicethanothers,dependingontheirage,gender,income,
andtechnologyacceptance(Kerstingetal.,2021;Hassanetal.,2019;Golbabaeietal.,
2020). Combining the proposed model with a discrete mode choice model that inte-
grates older adults heterogeneous acceptance of AMoD would allow to explore the
demand evolution more in depth.
Finally, the introduction of AMoD services with the intention of reducing trans-
portation inequalities is a promising initiative. However, for AMoD services to be
truly inclusive and fair, their implementation must specifically target the most vul-
nerable populations. Without particular attention to this aspect, there is a risk that
the AMoD service will mainly be adopted by already mobile populations, leaving vul-
nerable individuals still facing difficulties in getting around. This was observed in the
modelwitholderadultsandwomenstartingtousetheAMoDsignificantlymoreonly
after the fleet size has been increased. Older women have shown to be disadvantaged
compared to younger men regarding mobility and might be even more disadvantaged
with technology-dependent mobility (Shergold and Wilson, 2016). To avoid widen-
ing the mobility gender gap, it is essential to establish public policies and incentives
that facilitate access to AMoD for disadvantaged populations, ensuring that pricing
and access to service are tailored to their specific needs. Additionally, training and
awareness programs should be implemented to ensure that less technologically savvy
individuals are not left behind in the mobility transition.
28References
Alternative Fuels Data Center: Alternative Fueling Station Locator. https://afdc.
energy.gov/stations/ Accessed 2023-07-18
Boesch, P.M., Ciari, F., Axhausen, K.W.: Autonomous vehicle fleet sizes required to
servedifferentlevelsofdemand.TransportationResearchRecord2542(1),111–119
(2016) https://doi.org/10.3141/2542-13
Ben-Dor,G.,Ben-Elia,E.,Benenson,I.:Populationdownscalinginmulti-agenttrans-
portation simulations: A review and case study. Simulation Modelling Practice and
Theory 108, 102233 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.simpat.2020.102233
Brown,A.,Gonder,J.,Repac,B.:Ananalysisofpossibleenergyimpactsofautomated
vehicle. Road Vehicle Automation, Lecture Notes in Mobility, 137–153 (2014)
Bastarianto, F.F., Hancock, T.O., Choudhury, C.F., Manley, E.: Agent-based models
inurbantransportation:review,challenges,andopportunities.EuropeanTransport
Research Review 15(1), 1–20 (2023)
Bischoff, J., M´arquez-Fern´andez, F.J., Domingues-Olavarr´ıa, G., Maciejewski, M.,
Nagel, K.: Impacts of vehicle fleet electrification in sweden – a simulation-based
assessment of long-distance trips. In: The 6th International Conference on Models
and Technologies for Intelligent Transportation Systems (MT-ITS), pp. 1–7 (2019).
https://doi.org/10.1109/MTITS.2019.8883384
Bischoff,J.,Maciejewski,M.,Nagel,K.:City-widesharedtaxis:Asimulationstudyin
berlin. In: 2017 IEEE 20th International Conference on Intelligent Transportation
Systems (ITSC), pp. 275–280 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/ITSC.2017.8317926
Bosina, E., Weidmann, U.: Estimating pedestrian speed using aggregated literature
data.PhysicaA:StatisticalMechanicsanditsApplications468,1–29(2017)https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.physa.2016.09.044
Currie, G., Fournier, N.: Why most DRT/Micro-Transits fail – What the survivors
tell us about progress. Research in Transportation Economics 83, 100895 (2020)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2020.100895
Franco, P., Johnston, R., McCormick, E.: Demand responsive transport: Generation
of activity patterns from mobile phone network data to support the operation of
new mobility services. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 131,
244–266 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2019.09.038
Fagnant,D.J.,Kockelman,K.M.,Bansal,P.:Operationsofsharedautonomousvehicle
fleet for Austin, Texas, market. Transportation Research Record 2563(1), 98–106
(2016) https://doi.org/10.3141/2536-12
29Fatima,K.,Moridpour,S.,DeGruyter,C.,Saghapour,T.:Elderlysustainablemobil-
ity: Scientific paper review. Sustainability 12(18), 7319 (2020) https://doi.org/10.
3390/su12187319
Faber,K.,Lierop,D.:Howwillolderadultsuseautomatedvehicles?Assessingtherole
of AVs in overcoming perceived mobility barriers. Transportation Research Part A:
PolicyandPractice133,353–363(2020)https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2020.01.022
Graur, D., Bruno, R., Bischoff, J., Rieser, M., Scherr, W., Hoefler, T., Alonso, G.:
Hermes: Enabling efficient large-scale simulation in matsim. In: The 12th Interna-
tional Conference on Ambient Systems, Networks and Technologies (ANT) / The
4th International Conference on Emerging Data and Industry 4.0 (EDI40) / Affili-
atedWorkshops,vol.184,pp.635–641(2021).https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2021.
03.079 . https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S1877050921007158
Golbabaei, F., Yigitcanlar, T., Paz, A., Bunker, J.: Individual predictors of
autonomous vehicle public acceptance and intention to use: A systematic review of
the literature. Journal of Open Innovation: Technology, Market, and Complexity
6(4), 106 (2020) https://doi.org/10.3390/joitmc6040106
Haustein, S.: Mobility behavior of the elderly: an attitude-based segmentation
approachforaheterogeneoustargetgroup.Transportation39(6),1079–1103(2012)
https://doi.org/10.1007/s11116-011-9380-7 . Accessed 2022-03-07
H¨orl, S., Balac, M.: Synthetic population and travel demand for Paris and ˆIle-de-
France based on open and publicly available data. Transportation Research Part
C: Emerging Technologies 130, 103291 (2021) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2021.
103291
H¨orl, S., Balac, M., Axhausen, K.: Dynamic demand estimation for an AMoD system
in Paris. In: Intelligent Vehicles Symposium 2019, pp. 260–266 (2019). https://doi.
org/10.1109/IVS.2019.8814051
Harper,C.D.,ChrisT.,H.,Sonia,M.,Constantine,S.:Estimatingpotentialincreases
in travel with autonomous vehicles for the non-driving, elderly and people with
travel-restrictive medical conditions. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging
Technologie, 1–9 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.trc.2016.09.003
Hassan, H.M., Ferguson, M.R., Razavi, S., Vrkljan, B.: Factors that influence
older Canadians’ preferences for using autonomous vehicle technology: A struc-
tural equation analysis. Transportation Research Record: Journal of the Trans-
portation Research Board 2673(1), 469–480 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1177/
0361198118822281
Hogeveen, P., Maarten, S., Geert, V., Auke, H.: Quantifying the fleet composi-
tion at full adoption of shared autonomous electric vehicles: An agent-based
approach.TheOpenTransportationJournal,47–60(2021)https://doi.org/10.2174/
301874447802115010047
Horni, A., Nagel, K., Axhausen, K.W.: Introducing MATSim. In: The Multi-agent
Transport Simulation MATSim, pp. 3–7. Ubiquity Press, ??? (2016)
Harb, M., Xiao, Y., Circella, G., Mokhtarian, P.L., Walker, J.L.: Projecting travelers
into a world of self-driving vehicles: Estimating travel behavior implications via a
naturalistic experiment. Transportation, 1671–85 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1007/
s11116-018-9937-9
Project Team: 2007 winnipeg area travel survey results - final report. Technical
report, iTRANS Consulting Inc (2009). https://legacy.winnipeg.ca/publicworks/
transportation/pdf/transportationMasterPlan/WATS-Final-Report-July2007.pdf
Kouros,M.,Behzad,K.,Zahra,P.,Martina,F.:Modelingseniors’activity-traveldata.
Technical report, Illinois Center for Transportation (2013)
Kagho, G.O., Hensle, D., Balac, M., Freedman, J., Twumasi-Boakye, R., Broaddus,
A.,Fishelson,J.,Axhausen,K.W.:DemandresponsivetransitsimulationofWayne
county,Michigan.TransportationResearchRecord2675(12),702–716(2021)https:
//doi.org/10.1177/03611981211031221
Kersting, M., Kallbach, F., Schlu¨ter, J.C.: For the young and old alike – An analysis
of the determinants of seniors’ satisfaction with the true door-to-door DRT system
EcoBusinruralGermany.JournalofTransportGeography96,103173(2021)https:
//doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2021.103173
Kaddoura, I., Leich, G., Nagel, K.: The impact of pricing and service area design
on the modal shift towards demand responsive transit. Procedia Computer Science
170, 807–812 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2020.03.152
Kovacs, F.S., McLeod, S., Curtis, C.: Aged mobility in the era of transportation dis-
ruption: Will autonomous vehicles address impediments to the mobility of ageing
populations? Travel behaviour and society 20, 122–132 (2020)
Kagho,G.O.,Meli,J.,Walser,D.,Balac,M.:Effectsofpopulationsamplingonagent-
basedtransportsimulationofon-demandservices.ProcediaComputerScience201,
305–312 (2022) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2022.03.041
Li, H., Raeside, R., Chen, T., McQuaid, R.W.: Population ageing, gender and the
transportation system. Research in Transportation Economics 34(1), 39–47 (2012)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.retrec.2011.12.007
Luiu, C., Tight, M.: Travel difficulties and barriers during later life: Evidence from
the national travel survey in England. Journal of Transport Geography 91, 102973
(2021) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2021.102973
31Mu¨ller, K., Axhausen, K.W.: Using survey calibration and statistical matching
to reweight and distribute activity schedules. Transportation Research Record
2429(1), 157–167 (2014) https://doi.org/10.3141/2429-17
Manitoba Public Insurance: 2020 Traffic collision statistics report. Available at https:
//www.mpi.mb.ca/Pages/traffic-collision-report.aspx. Accessed: 2022-09 (2020)
Microsoft and Statistics Canada: Canadian Building Footprints. Available at https:
//github.com/Microsoft/CanadianBuildingFootprints. Accessed: 2022-12 (2019)
Mu¨ller, J., Straub, M., Naqvi, A., Richter, G., Peer, S., Rudloff, C.: MATSim model
Vienna: Analyzing the socioeconomic impacts for different fleet sizes and pricing
schemes of shared autonomous electric vehicles. In: Transportation Research Board
100th Annual Meeting 2021 (2021)
Milit˜ao, A.M., Tirachini, A.: Optimal fleet size for a shared demand-responsive trans-
port system with human-driven vs automated vehicles: A total cost minimization
approach. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice 151, 52–80 (2021)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2021.07.004
Namazi-Rad,M.-R.,Tanton,R.,Steel,D.,Mokhtarian,P.,Das,S.:Anunconstrained
statistical matching algorithm for combining individual and household level geo-
specific census and survey data. Computers, Environment and Urban Systems 63,
3–14 (2017) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.compenvurbsys.2016.11.003
Newbold,K.B., Scott, D.M., Spinney, J.E.L.,Kanaroglou, P.,P´aez, A.: Travel behav-
ior within Canada’s older population: a cohort analysis. Journal of Transport
Geography 13(4), 340–351 (2005) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jtrangeo.2004.07.007
O’Hern, S., Oxley, J.: Understanding travel patterns to support safe active transport
forolderadults.JournalofTransport&Health2(1),79–85(2015)https://doi.org/
10.1016/j.jth.2014.09.016
OpenStreetMap contributors: OpenStreetMap. Available at https://www.
openstreetmap.org. Accessed: 2022-05 (2017)
O’fallon, C., Sullivan, C.: Trends in older people’s travel patterns: Analysing changes
in older New Zealanders’ travel patterns using the ongoing New Zealand house-
hold travel survey (research report rr 369). Technical report, NZ Transport Agency
(2009)
Oh, S., Seshadri, R., Azevedo, C.L., Kumar, N., Basak, K., Ben-Akiva, M.: Assessing
the impacts of automated mobility-on-demand through agent-based simulation: A
studyofSingapore.TransportationResearchPartA:PolicyandPractice138,367–
388 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2020.06.004
Parminder,R.,Christina,W.,Susan,K.,Lauren,G.:TheCanadianlongitudinalstudy
32onaging(CLSA)reportonhealthandaginginCanada:Findingsfrombaselinedata
collection2010-2015.Technicalreport,TheCanadianLongitudinalStudyonAging
(2018). https://ifa.ngo/wp-content/uploads/2018/12/clsa report en final web.pdf
Pr´edhumeau, M., Manley, E.: A synthetic population for agent-based modelling in
Canada. Scientific Data 10 (2023) https://doi.org/10.1038/s41597-023-02030-4
Pr´edhumeau, M., Manley, E.: Building an environment for spatial modelling of
Canadian cities using open data: A replicable workflow applied to Winnipeg. In:
The 18th International Conference on Computational Urban Planning and Urban
Management (2023). https://doi.org/10.17605/OSF.IO/6YR5V
Poletti, F.: PT2MATSim v. 22.11. Available at https://github.com/matsim-org/
pt2matsim. Accessed: 2022-10 (2021)
Rahman, M.M., Deb, S., Strawderman, L., Smith, B., Burch, R.: Evaluation of trans-
portationalternativesforagingpopulationintheeraofself-drivingvehicles.IATSS
Research 44(1), 30–35 (2020) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.iatssr.2019.05.004
Shahid, R., Bertazzon, S., Knudtson, M.L., Ghali, W.A.: Comparison of distance
measures in spatial analytical modeling for health service planning. BMC Health
Services Research 9 (2009) https://doi.org/10.1186/1472-6963-9-200
Schlu¨ter, J., Bossert, A., R¨ossy, P., Kersting, M.: Impact assessment of autonomous
demand responsive transport as a link between urban and rural areas. Research
in Transportation Business & Management 39, 100613 (2021) https://doi.org/10.
1016/j.rtbm.2020.100613
Smith, A., Lovelace, R., Birkin, M.: Population Synthesis with Quasirandom Integer
Sampling. Journal of Artificial Societies and Social Simulation 20(4), 14 (2017)
https://doi.org/10.18564/jasss.3550
Schm¨ocker,J.-D.,Quddus,M.A.,Noland,R.B.,Bell,M.G.:Estimatingtripgeneration
of elderly and disabled people: Analysis of London data. Transportation research
record 1924(1), 9–18 (2005)
Salman, F., Sisiopiku, V.P., Khalil, J., Yang, W., Yan, D.: Operational impacts of
on-demandride-poolingserviceoptionsinBirmingham,AL.FutureTransportation
3(2), 519–534 (2023) https://doi.org/10.3390/futuretransp3020030
Statistics Canada: Mode of transportation for the employed labour force 15 Years
and over having a usual place of work , 2006 Census - 20% Sample Data.
https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2006/dp-pd/tbt/Rp-eng.cfm?
TABID=2&LANG=E&APATH=3&DETAIL=0&DIM=0&FL=A&FREE=0&
GC=0&GID=858718&GK=0&GRP=1&PID=90658&PRID=0&PTYPE=88971,
97154&S=0&SHOWALL=0&SUB=763&Temporal=2006&THEME=76&VID=0&
VNAMEE=&VNAMEF=&D1=0&D2=0&D3=0&D4=0&D5=0&D6=0
33Statistics Canada: Canadian Community Health Survey – Healthy Aging - Most
common form of transportation, by sex, marital status, number of chronic condi-
tions, and health perception, seniors aged 65 and older, Canada. Technical report,
Statistics Canada (2009)
Statistics Canada: Time Use Survey (2015). https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/pub/
89-658-x/89-658-x2017001-eng.htm
Statistics Canada: 2016 Census Profile for Canada, provinces, territories, CDs, CSDs
and DAs - Catalogue no. 98-401-X2016044. Available at https://www150.statcan.
gc.ca/n1/en/catalogue/98-316-X2016001. Accessed: 2022-08 (2016)
Statistics Canada: Hierarchical File, 2016 Census of Population – Catalogue
no. 98M0002X. Available at https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/catalogue/
98M0002X. Accessed: 2022-08 (2016)
Statistics Canada: Individuals File, 2016 Census of Population – Catalogue
no. 98M0001X. Available at https://www150.statcan.gc.ca/n1/en/catalogue/
98M0001X. Accessed: 2022-08 (2016)
Statistics Canada: Working seniors in canada. Technical report, Statistics Canada
(2017). https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/2016/as-sa/98-200-x/
2016027/98-200-x2016027-eng.cfm
Statistics Canada: Projected population, by projection scenario, age and sex, as of
July1(x1,000)–Table17-10-0057-01.Availableathttps://www150.statcan.gc.ca/
t1/tbl1/en/tv.action?pid=1710005701. Accessed: 2022-08 (2018)
StatisticsCanada:CensusProfile.2021CensusofPopulation.StatisticsCanadaCata-
loguenumber98-316-X2021001.https://www12.statcan.gc.ca/census-recensement/
2021/dp-pd/prof/index.cfm?Lang=E (2022)
Statistics Canada: Health characteristics, annual estimates – Table 13-10-0096-01.
Available at https://doi.org/10.25318/1310009601-eng. Accessed: 2022-08 (2022).
https://doi.org/10.25318/1310009601-eng
StreetLight Data: Quarterly report: National vehicle kilome-
tres traveled metrics – 2019 to 2021. Technical report,
AIA Canada (2021). https://www.aiacanada.com/product/
national-vehicle-kilometres-traveled-metrics-from-2019-to-2021-q1-and-q2-results/
Shergold, I., Wilson, M.: The mobility of older people, and the future role of
connnected autonomous vehicles. Technical report, Centre for Transport & society,
University of the West of England (2016)
United Nations, Department of Economic and Social Affairs, Population Division:
34World Population Ageing 2019: Highlights (ST/ESA/SER.A/430) (2019)
Viergutz,K.,Schmidt,C.:Demandresponsive-vs.conventionalpublictransportation:
A MATSim study about the rural town of Colditz, Germany. Procedia Computer
Science 151, 69–76 (2019) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2019.04.013
Wadud, Z., Don, M., , Paul, L.: Help or hindrance? the travel, energy and carbon
impacts of highly automated vehicles. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice, 1–18 (2016) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.tra.2015.12.001
Winnipeg traffic report | TomTom Traffic Index. https://www.tomtom.com/
traffic-index/winnipeg-traffic/ Accessed 2023-07-12
Winnipeg open data portal: City of Winnipeg currently active official prop-
erty addresses and associated coordinates. Available at https://data.winnipeg.ca/
City-Planning/Addresses/cam2-ii3u. Accessed: 2022-05 (2022)
Wang,B.,Medina,S.A.O.,Fourie,P.:Simulationofautonomoustransitondemandfor
fleet size and deployment strategy optimization. Procedia Computer Science 130,
797–802 (2018) https://doi.org/10.1016/j.procs.2018.04.138
Watson, K.B., Whitfield, G.P., Bricka, S., Carlson, S.A.: Purpose-based walking trips
by duration, distance, and select characteristics, 2017 national household travel
survey.Journalofphysicalactivity&health,86–93(2021)https://doi.org/10.1123/
jpah.2021-0096
Zandieh, R., Acheampong, R.A.: Mobility and healthy ageing in the city: Explor-
ing opportunities and challenges of autonomous vehicles for older adults’ outdoor
mobility. Cities 112, 103135 (2021)
Ziemke,D.,Kaddoura,I.,Nagel,K.:TheMATSimopenBerlinscenario:Amultimodal
agent-basedtransportsimulationscenariobasedonsyntheticdemandmodelingand
open data. In: Procedia Computer Science, vol. 151, pp. 870–877 (2019)
35