Maximally Forward-Looking Core Inflation
Philippe Goulet Coulombe*
Université du Québec à Montréal
Karin Klieber
Oesterreichische Nationalbank
Christophe Barrette
Université du Québec à Montréal
Maximilian Göbel
Bocconi University
Abstract
Timely monetary policy decision-making requires timely core inflation measures.
We create a new core inflation series that is explicitly designed to succeed at that
goal. Precisely,weintroducetheAssemblageRegression,ageneralizednonnegative
ridge regression problem that optimizes the price index’s subcomponent weights
such that the aggregate is maximally predictive of future headline inflation. Or-
dering subcomponents according to their rank in each period switches the algo-
rithm to be learning supervised trimmed inflation—or, put differently, the maxi-
mallyforward-lookingsummarystatisticoftherealizedpricechangesdistribution.
In an extensive out-of-sample forecasting experiment for the US and the euro area,
we find substantial improvements for signaling medium-term inflation develop-
ments in both the pre- and post-Covid years. Those coming from the supervised
trimmedversionareparticularlystriking,andareattributabletoahighlyasymmet-
ric trimming which contrasts with conventional indicators. We also find that this
metric was indicating first upward pressures on inflation as early as mid-2020 and
quickly captured the turning point in 2022. We also consider extensions, like as-
sembling inflation from geographical regions, trimmed temporal aggregation, and
buildingcoremeasuresspecializedforeitherupsideordownsideinflationrisks.
*Contact: goulet_coulombe.philippe@uqam.ca. For helpful discussions, we thank Elena Bobeica, Max
Esser,FabioRumler,MirjamSalish,DaliborStevanovic,BoyuanZhang,aswellasparticipantsattheIIFMacroFor
seminar,theOeNBFreitagsseminar,internalseminarsattheECB,CDPQ,andUQAM.Forresearchassistance,we
thank Nicolas Harvie. The views expressed in this paper do not necessarily reflect those of the Oesterreichische
NationalbankortheEurosystem. Thisdraft: April9,2024. TheRpackageassemblageisavailablehere.
4202
rpA
8
]ME.noce[
1v90250.4042:viXra1 Introduction
Ideally,monetarypolicyshouldbeforward-looking. However, itcanonlybeasforward-lookingasthe
warninglightsonthedashboard. Giventheextendeddelaybetweenpolicyimpulseandtheeconomy’s
response, the benefits of more timely inflation gauges cannot be understated. Core inflation measures,
which distill noise and amplify signal, are crucial inputs guiding monetary policy making, investment
strategies,andotherconsequentialeconomicdecisions. Butwhatisnoise,whatissignal,andwhatkind
ofsignalareweinterestedin?
Core inflation measures abound, and all answer the above in their own way. The most well-known
arebuiltfromheuristics. Somepermanentlyexcludecomponents(e.g.,foodandenergy)thatareknown
tobesubjecttolarge(mostly)transitoryshocksthatcanobscurefromthedeeperunderlyingtrend(Gor-
don,1975). Othersidentifythecomponentsexperiencingthemostextreme(positiveornegative)growth
in each month, and exclude those before aggregating the remainder (Bryan and Pike, 1991; Bryan and
Cecchetti,1993). Then, thereare moreformalalternativesbasedonfactormodelswherethekeyideais
thatcoreinflationisalatentvariablerelatedtoobservabledatathroughsomeassumedstatisticalstruc-
ture,andcanbeextractedassuch(StockandWatson,2016;Ban´buraandBobeica,2020). Inasubsequent
step,coreinflationseries’empiricalmeritsareassessedaccordingtoavarietyofcriteria. Oneofthemost
desirablepropertiestosupporttimelymonetarypolicydecision-makingisthatthecoreseriesshouldbe
as indicative as possible of future inflation conditions (Clark, 2001; Cogley, 2002). Thus, from this per-
spective,alltheabovequalifyasunsupervisedlearning. Modeldesignandevaluatingforward-looking
qualities are mostly independent affairs. Significant volatility reduction with respect to headline infla-
tioncancomeatthecostoftheresultingproductbeingalaggingindicator. Thispaperproposestofocus
ontheforward-lookingcriterion,andwritesasimplesupervisedlearningalgorithmthatdeliversacore
seriesthatsatisfiesit.
ASSEMBLAGE REGRESSION. We abide by the "train for what you aim" principle. Our first proposition
assemblescomponentssothattheresultingaggregateismaximallypredictiveofthehardindicatorthat
the central bank intends to bring (or keep) at 2%. This is achieved through a generalized nonnegative
ridge regression where the dependent variable is future headline inflation and the regressors inflation
subcomponents. At aggregated levels, where components are scarce and (additional) regularization is
expendable, this is constrained nonnegative least squares. However, regularization is necessary when
consideringhighlydisaggregatedlevels,anenvironmentwhereourpenalizedregressionismostfreeto
discovernon-trivialpredictabilitypatterns. Oursecondofferingextractsthesupervisedsummarystatis-
ticsoftherealizeddistributionofpricegrowthratesthatbestachievethesameobjective. Thisisdoneby
running the assemblage regression and replacing components data by the order statistics time series of
thepricegrowthratesdistribution. Coefficientsthenreflectwhichpartofthedistributiongetstrimmed
out, which is retained, and, in the second case, what are the respective weights. We name the newly
constructed indicator Albacore, for adaptive learning-based core inflation, which summarizes both the
philosophy (the construction should adapt to the objective) and the methodology. As we will see, both
Albacore and Albacore (respectively, weighting in components and rank space) will reaffirm
comps ranks
partsofthecommonwisdomandbringnewstylizedfactstothetable.
1RELATED WORK. Econometrically, assemblage regression’s closest relatives come from the regression-
based forecast combination literature (Wang et al., 2023) and autoregression-based filtering (Hamilton,
2018). InthecaseofAlbacore ,itiscoupledwithelementsoffunctionalregression(Morris,2015).
ranks
First, theproblem yieldingAlbacore shares varioussimilarities with regularizedforecast com-
comps
bination schemes such as that of Diebold and Shin (2019). Namely, we are looking to build an optimal
weighted average incorporating regularization inspired from what the default averaging should be in
the specific application. A key distinction between assemblage regression and combination schemes
following from Granger and Ramanathan (1984) is that, as the name suggests, we are putting parts of
something together. Forecast combination exercises, on the other hand, construct an optimal weighted
average using noisy estimates of the same thing.1 Following from this distinction between supervised
ensemblingandassembling,therearefewdesignchoicesmirroringthedifferentenvironments,likethe
construction of the target and the whole regularization apparatus. Nonetheless, the connection with
forecastcombinationregressionsisusefultolocatewhereAlbacore standsinthevastcoreinflation
comps
measures landscape. Among other things, Granger and Ramanathan (1984)’s regression approach to
forecast combinations constructs an optimal portfolio of forecasts taking into account their covariance
structure,whichsimpler"plug-in"approachesusingBatesandGranger(1969)’sformuladonot.
In the unrealistic yet informative case where inflation components would be uncorrelated, reflect-
ing on the least squares formula for weights offers some intuition. Albacore would downweight
comps
componentswhichdonotcovarysignificantlywithheadlineatapre-specifiedforecastinghorizon,have
high variance, or both. Clearly, this matches the attributes of a component that should be excluded or
downweightedinacoreinflationbuildingcontext: itisnotpersistentandhighlyvolatile. Moreover,ifa
component exhibits negative autocorrelation patterns that, on average, have been self-absorbed within
atimespancorrespondingtotheforecasthorizon,thenthosetransitoryshockswillalsobeleftoutsince
theyhavehardlyanypredictivepoweratthathorizon. Thingsinevitablygetlesstrivialwhencomponents
areheavilycross-correlated,constraintsarebroughtin,andregularizationisbiting. Still,ataconceptual
level, focusing on maximal predictability is not a radical conceptual departure from approaches im-
provingGordon(1975)’spopularsuggestionbyeitherexcludingorreweightingitemsaccordingtotheir
overallvolatility(Dow,1993;Clark,2001;Acosta,2018),theircyclicalvolatility(Dolmasetal.,2009),their
persistence (Bilke and Stracca, 2007), or even their sensitivity to the economic business cycle (Mahedy
et al., 2017; Ehrmann et al., 2018; Stock and Watson, 2020). In a way, Albacore encompasses most
comps
oftheseobjectives,butdoessoinaframeworkthatkeepsaneyeontheprize(forecastingheadline)and
accountingforthefactthatweareaggregatingcorrelatedobjects,whichcomeswithinterestinghedging
possibilitiesifproperlyaccountedfor. Therehavebeenrareinstancesintheliteraturewherepredictabil-
ityforheadlineplayedamoredirectroleininformingtheweightinginthecomponentsspace. However,
theproposedaggregationschemesoverlookedthecovariancestructure(RavazzoloandVahey,2009)or
lacked,amongotherthings,necessarynonnegativityrestrictions(GamberandSmith,2019).
Core inflation estimation can be framed as a signal extraction problem and accordingly, many vari-
1Anexample,whereforecastsarenotthebasematerialyet,thecombinationisbuiltuponestimatesofthesame
concept, is Aruoba et al. (2012), who combine GDP by revenues and GDP by expenses (two noisy estimates of
GDP)toconstructamorereliableGDPindicator.
2antsoffactoranalysishavebeensuggested(Cristadoroetal.,2005;Morana,2007;Khanetal.,2013;Stock
andWatson,2016;Ban´buraandBobeica,2020). Comparedtothosemethods,especiallywhenrelyingon
Principal Component Analysis (PCA), assemblage regression retains necessary shrinkage, but makes
sure, through supervision, that the extracted signal is one we should care about. Obviously, by dis-
carding some noise, one expects the ensuing factors to incorporate relevant signals to forecast headline
inflation. However, it is not optimizing for it. Factors are extracted as the linear combination of com-
ponentsthatbestexplainthevariationinallcomponents. Theresultingproduct’scorrespondencewith
the "true" concept of core inflation inevitably comes from consistency under unverifiable assumptions
embedded in the specification of the model. Therefore, the empirical evaluation is usually conducted
ex-post through the backchannels of its implications for a proper core series (e.g., predictive power for
headlineandassociationwiththestrengthofrealactivity). Albacore andAlbacore surelyfea-
comps ranks
turetheirownsetofassumptions, buttheyenjoythedistinctadvantagethattheoptimizationobjective
andthemeasurablenotionofsuccessperfectlycoincide.
The proposed method is also not entirely unrelated to approaches attempting to uncover trend in-
flation,usuallythroughcompactstate-spacemodels(Chanetal.,2016;Eoetal.,2023)ordynamicfactor
models (Stock and Watson, 2016). The link can be understood through the lenses of Hamilton filtering
(Hamilton,2018). Indeed,asanalternativetoHodrick-Prescottfiltering(asmoothingsplinesproblem),
Hamilton’s suggestion is to use the residuals of direct autoregressive forecasting equation (at a user-
specifiedhorizon,atuningparameter)asthedetrendedseries. Assemblageregressioninthecomponent
spacecanbeseenasaconstrainedmultivariate-to-univariateHamiltonfilter,whereinsteadofregressing
the target on its own lags, we regress the targets on its lagged subcomponents. Furthermore, the target
is the average path between the forecast date and the forecast horizon. The usage of the average path,
typicalinforecastingstudiesandparticularlynaturalforinflation(GouletCoulombeetal.,2021), leads
ittotakeanimplicitmeanovermany"horizontuningparameters",astrategythathasbeendocumented
tobesuccessfulinoutputgapextractionapplications(QuastandWolters,2022). Lastbutnotleast, one
should note that unlike Hamilton (2018) and the ensuing literature, the interest here lies in the analysis
oftheextracted"trend"ratherthandeviationsfromit.
Albacore isourproposalforamaximallyforward-lookingcoreinflationbasedontemporaryex-
ranks
clusion. It comes with its own distinct strand of literature (Bryan and Pike, 1991; Bryan and Cecchetti,
1993; Bryan et al., 1997; Dolmas et al., 2005). Traditionally, this is achieved by systematically ranking
individual price changes from their lowest to highest values at each point in time and excluding the
upperandlowertailofthedistribution(eithersymmetricallyorasymmetrically),withmedianinflation
(Bryan and Pike, 1991) being the extreme case of keeping only the midpoint rank. Trimming methods
have received limited attention in the forecast combination literature (Wang et al., 2023), with most ap-
proacheszoominginonpermanentlyeliminatingtheleastaccuratecontributors(DieboldandShin,2019;
Wangetal.,2022)ortryingafewcuttingpointsconfigurationsforatrimmedmeanestimator(Stockand
Watson,2004).
Albacore featuresgreaterflexibility. Itassignsoptimizedweightstoeachrankratherthansolely
ranks
optimizingtrimmingpoints. Intermsofmechanics,Albacore isaconstrainedfunctionalregression
ranks
(Morris,2015),wherepredictors(i.e.,orderstatisticsseries)areafunctionoftheempiricaldistributionof
3price growth rates. Applications of functional regression analysis and related methods in macroecono-
metricsarestillscarce. RecentonesincludeMeeksandMonti(2023)usingfunctionalPCAtosummarize
the distribution of inflation expectations distribution, and Chaudhuri et al. (2016) who study the au-
toregressive properties of different parts of the inflation distribution. As it was the case for the above
discussionofPCAincomponentsspace,theadvantageofAlbacore overfunctionalPCAandrelated
ranks
methodsis(i)supervision,and(ii)constraintsonthekindsoffeatureswewanttobeextracted.
Finally,therehavebeennumerouspapersforecastinginflationusingmachinelearningmethods(see
Medeiros et al. (2021), Goulet Coulombe (2022), and references therein). Recently, there has been some
attention in coupling those with components-level data (Barkan et al., 2023; Boaretto and Medeiros,
2023; Joseph et al., 2024). We differ from this strand of literature by our objective, to create a core infla-
tion measure with desirable properties. This leads us to consider constrained linear forecasts based on
components,asopposedtoanyfunctionalformchannelinginanydataset.
EMPIRICALRESULTS. Asmainapplications,weconsiderUSandeuroarea(EA)inflation. Wealsostudy
the Canadian case more compactly in the appendix. In all instances, we find that Albacore succeeds in
beinghighlypredictiveoffutureheadlineinflationatvarioushorizons. Itoutperformsbenchmarkmod-
els in terms of predictive accuracy and yields low bias and variance compared to the official headline
inflationrate. Intermsofforecastingresults,Albacore isclearlyourbestperformingmodel. Itsgains
ranks
mounttosizablemargins,especiallywhentakingamedium-tolong-termperspective. Alookattheas-
sembled ranks reveals a highly asymmetric trimming, removing entirely the lower part of the monthly
pricegrowthdistributionandputtingtheemphasisonthe60th to75th percentile(dependingontheap-
plication). Unlike existing trimmed mean measures, it keeps a non-trivial portion of the upper tail by
assigningitamoderateweight. Thisproactiveusageoftheskewnessinthemonthlypricegrowthrates
distributionhelpsinstayingalerttoaccumulatinginflationarypressures,likethosethatwereoccurring
inearly2021. Albacore ’simprovementsareratherconcentratedwithintheevaluationsamplespan-
comps
ning the months following the Covid-19 pandemic. Similarly to its supervised trimming counterpart,
outperformance is more substantial for higher-order forecasts (i.e., 6 and 12 months ahead). The opti-
mized weighting scheme results in low weight assigned to highly volatile components, such as energy
andfood,andhighweightoncomponentsrelatedtotheservicessector,health,andhousing.
For the run-up of inflation, it is well known that developments in goods prices played an out-
sized role in the US. Accordingly, we find high contributions of goods inflation to the aggregate of
Albacore . The officially reported trimmed mean, on the other hand, puts almost no weight on
ranks
goods components, instead it is driven by shelter, a notoriously lagging component (Bils and Klenow,
2004; Cotton and O’Shea, 2023). Given that this pattern manifests around inflation turning points, it
can prove useful to downweight contributions from shelter using an asymmetric trimming scheme, as
is done by Albacore . Alternatively, one can assign a downsized weight to problematic subcompo-
ranks
nents (such as tenant rent) and compensate by upweighting others, an opportunity which is leveraged
by Albacore , thanks to its high-dimensional regression setup. This is less radical than excluding
comps
the shelter component entirely, as in US supercore inflation (i.e., nonhousing core services, see Powell,
2022;Leducetal.,2023). IntheEA,sustainedenergyandfoodpriceshocksplayedalargerrolethanin
4theUS,whichmakestheofficialcoreinflationratealaggingindicator. Albacore andAlbacore
comps ranks
avoidthispredicamentviapositivecontributionsfromfoodgoods. Regardingtheearlyindicationofthe
disinflationaryphase,bothAlbacoreattributeittoeasinggoodspricepressuresfortheUSandtheEA.
We explore a suite of extensions. First, we consider building core measures specialized for either
upside or downside inflation risks by changing the squared error loss in assemblage regression to a
quantileloss. Thesecanbeequivalentlyinterpretedastheoptimalcoreinflationmeasureforananalyst
facing asymmetric forecast error costs. Interestingly, we find more harmony between traditional core
inflation measures and ours when customizing the latter for disinflation risk. Thereby, gains from our
proposedapproacharehighestintheuppertail,especiallysoforourquantileextensionofAlbacore
ranks
post-Covid. Second, we consider forward-looking yearly time-aggregation of headline inflation for the
US.Wefindthattheautoregressioninrankspacedecisivelyoutperformstraditionalautoregressionsfor
this task. It does so by eliminating large negative realizations of the month-over-month growth rate
within the lookback window, and including positive ones with a moderate weight. This suggests that,
insuchsimplemodels,itisamoreeffectivestrategytopayattentiontothepositionofanobservationin
therecentrealizeddistributionratherthantheexactlocationintime,asistypicallythecaseinstandard
autoregresssions. Third,weconsiderassemblingheadlineinflationfromeuroareamemberstatestofore-
cast the aggregate. Albeit these do not necessarily qualify as a traditionally defined core inflation, our
results show that a downweighted average of the 4-5 highest state-level inflation rates at a given point
intimeofferssubstantialforecastingaccuracygains.
OUTLINE. We proceed as follows. In Section 2, we introduce the Assemblage Regression. Section 3
presentsourempiricalapplicationtocoreinflation. Section4focusesonapplicationsofAlbacore to
ranks
otherinflation-relatedaggregationproblems. Section5concludesandproposesvariousavenuesforfu-
tureresearch. AppendixAcontainsadditionalmaterial,likeourmorecondensedCanadianapplication.
2 Assemblage Regression
In this section, we introduce the Assemblage Regression, which, in a nutshell, is a generalized nonneg-
ative ridge regression where the dependent variable is future headline inflation and the regressors are
either inflation subcomponents or transformations of them. Nonnegativeness comes from the desire of
the output being a weighted average and "generalized" comes from the use of altered regularization
schemes. There will be two declinations of our ideas. The first and most conceptually straightforward,
Albacore ,aggregatesandweightsinflationcomponentsdirectly. Inessence,itsearchesthespaceof
comps
basket weights for which consumers’ today inflation is most indicative of the average consumer infla-
tion in the near-future. The second, marginally more sophisticated one performs optimal trimming of
inflation components (i.e., temporary exclusion/weighting). Albacore is the resulting measure – it
ranks
runstheassemblageregressionintherankspaceofthecomponentsdata.
RIDGE REGRESSION PRIMER. A ridge regression solves what is more generally known as a penalized
linearregressionproblem(Hastieetal.,2009). Itisatraditionalleastsquaresproblemplusapenaltyon
5coefficientssotoregularizetheoutcomeofminimization. Ridgeregressioncoefficientsareobtainedvia
T−1
βˆ
Ridge
= argmin ∑ (y t+1−β′ X t)2+λ||β||
2
β t=1
where ||.|| is the l norm. The latter is equivalent to ∑K β2 in summation notation, where K denotes
2 2 k=1 k
the number of components. The penalty term provides regularization by bringing in the mix the a
priori that each coefficient should contribute to the fit, but modestly. In other words, it is shrinking
coefficients towards 0. With a suitable λ > 0, a ridge regression curbs overfitting that plagues OLS
(i.e., λ = 0) when K is large relative to T and the signal-to-noise ratio is low. Everything good comes
at a cost, and here, the cost is bias. βˆ blends information from the data and our prior knowledge
Ridge
on β. Thus, the specification of the penalty must be chosen wisely, as must its strength. λ is typically
tunedviacross-validation,whichis,inessence,apseudo-out-of-sampleevaluationmetric. Theamount
of restrictiveness, which will impact both forecasts and the coefficients (and thus the interpretation of
the model), is chosen so to maximize the model’s predictive accuracy on unseen data. Changing the l
2
normforl makesittheequallywell-knownLASSOproblem. Infact,thereisaconstellationofpossible
1
penaltytermsonecanchoosefromdependingontheapplication,andweshallleveragethatontheway
toourmainmodel(Hastieetal.,2015). Lastly,penalizedregressionproblemsarenotscale-invariant,so
either the predictors have to be scaled to exhibit the same variance, or the penalty should be adjusted
accordingly.
SUPERVISED WEIGHTING. We now provide the details of our first assemblage regression. The perma-
nentexclusionversion,orsupervisedweightingofbasketcomponents,isobtainedvia
T−h
wˆ = argmin ∑ (π −w′Π )2+λ||w−w || st w ≥ 0, w′ ι = 1 (1)
c t+1:t+h t headline 2
w t=1
wherehistheforecastinghorizon,Tisthelasttrainingobservation,π isaverageheadlineinflation
t+1:t+h
betweent+1andt+h,andΠ
isamatrixofcomponenttimeseriesatauser-specifiedlevelofaggrega-
t
tion. λ||w−w || isthepenaltyterm,anditshrinksthesolutiontowardsw ,whichareheadline
headline 2 headline
inflationweightsforthatlevel. Weconstrainweightstobenonnegative(w ≥ 0)andsumto1(w′ι = 1).
Π
areexpressedaspricegrowthratesandinourapplications,itisthe3-months-over-3-monthsgrowth
t
rate. This allows for minimal time-smoothing while retaining timeliness (Ban´bura and Bobeica, 2020),
anddoesnotpreventforthemeasuretorightfullyqualifyascoreinflationnow.
Albacore is defined as π∗ = wˆ′Π and is, as such, a constrained forecast – both in terms
comps comps,t c t
of the information set (only inflation rates) and how it is synthesized. It is the linear aggregation, or
weightedaverage,ofcomponentsthatismostcloselyrelatedtofutureheadlineinflationascapturedby
π . The adaptiveness is tied to the objective, and it is natural to expect core measures to vary in
t+1:t+h
compositionalong h anddependonthelossfunctionitself(seeSections3.4and3.5,respectively). Core
measuresthatinvestmentbankers,monitoringmarketreactionstoinflationnumberreleases,shouldcare
about can be different from those of interest to central bankers dealing with the long lags of monetary
policy. Dependingontheapplication,theusermaychoosetheforecastinghorizons h forthetargetand
6theaggregationlevelofcomponents. Whileweconsidervariousnumbersofhinourempiricalapplica-
tions to showcase the versatility of the approach, the main analysis will focus on h = 12 months which
is widely regarded as the most relevant time frame for the use of core inflation measures in monetary
policydecision-making. FurtherdetailsaregiveninSection3.
Shrinkingto w isintuitive asit representsthe officialstatistical aggregationof thecomponents
headline
and implies under λ → ∞ a random walk forecast (if the moving average length of the target matches
thatofregressors).2 Weresistthetemptationofshrinkingtocoreinflation(ex. foodandenergy)weights,
which surely implies a less volatile "null" model than what we consider, and perhaps better empirical
results. This is motivated from the desire to see, as a basic check, whether Albacore can discover
comps
this everlasting empirical wisdom without assuming half of the discovery first. It is also plausible that
someforward-lookingcoremeasuresatshorterhorizonscouldsignificantlydifferfromthetypicalcore
measures, which have historically been focused on medium- to long-term horizons. Taking on a differ-
entperspective,theassemblageregressioncanbeviewedasanalgorithmsearchingthespaceofbasket
weights for which consumers’ inflation today is most indicative of the average consumer inflation to-
morrow. Although, the resulting assemblage does not explicitly fulfill any requirement to match a rep-
resentative agent per se, it would be surprising if those two were vastly unrelated. Yet, if that were to
proveinsufficientaccordingtopseudo-out-of-sampleperformance,thepenaltyλ||w−w ||2shrinks
headline
coefficientstotheofficialweights(insteadtheusual0).
Lastly, one needs to think about the strength of that regularization, as captured by λ. This can be
setautomatically, butitneedstobedonetherightway. Thetargettimeseriesispersistent, particularly
starting from h > 6, and so are some components. Thereby, choosing λ with standard cross-validation
designedforindependentdatawilldeliveranoverconfidentassessmentofthegeneralizationerrorand
adownwardbiasedλ. AsrecommendedinGouletCoulombeetal.(2023)andothers,weoptforanon-
overlapping blocks approach. We divide the training sample in 10 contiguous segments and use those
in 10 fold cross-validation. The length of blocks thus depends on that of the training sample (e.g., an
estimation sample of 20 years implies blocks of two years). While longer blocks could be desirable for
h = 12 and above, one must remember that too few blocks and lacking randomization likely would
outweighthebenefits.
SUPERVISED TRIMMING. The second, supervised trimmed inflation, needs further thought in order
to be cast within the assemblage regression apparatus described above. After all, trimming implies
componentsjumpinandoutoftheindexeverymonth,implyingakindoftimevariationintheirweights
based on how each component growth rate ranks compared to others in a given month. Surely, going
straight at it in such a fashion would push us away from the "keep it sophisticatedly simple" principle
(Diebold,1998). Theoppositedirection,i.e.,thatofsimplicityattheexpenseofgeneralityandflexibility,
would bring things closer to Bryan et al. (1997)’s trimmed mean PCE inflation. There, components are
2Note that in this context, opting for the traditional ridge penalty λ||w|| would imply shrinking to equal
2
weights. The other two constraints (i.e., nonnegative weights which sum to 1) prevent the fit from collapsing to
0andthus,shrinkwhatislefttoanidenticalvalue. Nonetheless,thisregularizationschememaysufferfromthe
factthatcertainsubcomponentsofanupperlevelaresimplymoregranularandnumerous,andwouldpushthe
modeltofavoritemsthatarehighlynumerousratherthanthosewithhigherconsumptionweights.
7either out (with a weight of 0), or in (with a weight proportional to their basket weight versus that of
othernon-trimmedcomponentsattimet). Thesizeoftrimmedbandsonbothtailscanthenbeoptimized
overtwoparametersusingsomecriterion. Theresultingseriesisarobustweightedaverage. However,
themean(orthemedianforthatmatter),mayormaynotalignwithwhereoureyesshouldbetoextract
leadingsignalsforfutureheadlineinflation.
Instead, one can consider, more generally, retrieving the summary statistics of the current realized
pricegrowthdistributionthatbestfulfillaspecificstatisticalobjective. Orequivalently,componentsget
weights as a function of their location in the empirical distribution at time t. A closer examination of
what such time variation implies reveals that, in fact, we can run a very similar assemblage regression
Π
as described above, but using the empirical order statistics of as regressors. To see this, we can
t
simply walk from the components space to the "rank space", by writing the formula for fitted values in
summationnotation
K
π∗ = ∑ w Π
ranks,t k,t k,t
k=1
K K
= ∑ ∑ w I(rank(Π ) = r)Π
r k,t k,t
k=1r=1
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
w
K K k,t
= ∑ w ∑ I(rank(Π ) = r)Π
r k,t k,t
r=1 k=1
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
K Or,t
∑
= w O
r r,t
r=1
where O is the rth order statistic (i.e., the value attached to rank r) at time t. If K were to be equal to
r,t
100, O would be a set of poor man’s percentiles. The above derivation informs us that this kind
1:100,t
oftimevariationinthecomponentspaceimpliestime-invariantcoefficientsintherankspace(andvice
versa). Wewilllaterusethisdualitytomapbacktheimplicationofw inthecomponentspaceinSection
r
3.3. Thus, ease of implementation can be restored from running the model in rank space, i.e., using
O , which is effectively just sorting the components at each t and stacking them in a matrix. Precisely,
t
O = sort(Π ) ∀t. The switch to rank space-based weighting can also be formalized in our
1:K,t 1:K,t
preferred matrix notation, with O = A Π where A is a T×T allocation matrix where entries are 0s
t t t t
and1sfollowing I(rank(Π ) = r) ∀(r,k). Thus,werun
k,t
T−h
wˆ = argmin ∑ (π −w′ O )2+λ||Dw|| st w ≥ 0, π¯ = π¯∗ (2)
r t+1:t+h t 2 t+1:t+h ranks,t
w t=1
where D is the difference operator and Albacore is defined as π∗ = wˆ′O . Rather than learn-
ranks ranks,t r t
ing which subcomponents to include, the problem will now be learning which ranks (and with which
weight) to include or exclude. ||Dw||
2
(or equivalently ∑ rK =1(w r−w r−1)2 in summation notation) is a
fused ridge penalty (Hastie et al., 2015). It favors a smooth weighting scheme, and in the λ → ∞ limit,
8pushesthemodeltowardsthesamplemeansolutionwhereeachrankgetsaweightof1/K.3 Intheother
limit(λ = 0),thesolutionwillbesparseforreasonswewillcomebacktobelow.
The equality constraint has been changed from w′ι = 1 to π¯ = π¯∗ . In the rank space,
t+1:t+h ranks,t
w′ι = 1wouldimplythattheaverageofallweightsis1/K,whichdoesnotenforcesymmetrictrimming,
butratherwouldimposeequivalentmassesaboveandbelow1/K,andthusblockinghighlyasymmetric
outcomes which we will find to be successful in nearly all our experiments. The π¯ = π¯∗
t+1:t+h ranks,t
constraint brings back discipline by forcing residuals to have mean 0. They could deviate marginally
because the model has no intercept, and to minimize the sum of squared residuals, some bias could be
tradedforvariancereduction. WeblockthispossibilitybyimposingtheconstraintthatAlbacore has
ranks
thesamelong-runmeanasheadlineinflation(overthetrainingsample).
Thisstandsincontrasttomosttrimmingapproaches,whichoptforapreselectedbandwithinwhich
ranksgetassignedtheirofficial(componentsspace)weights,andthoseoutsideofithaveaweightof0.
For instance, the FRB Cleveland trimmed mean CPI sets to 0 the first and last 16% of ranks, and then a
weightedaverageofthecenterbandisreported. Inasimilarvein,theFRBDallas’TrimmedMeanPCE
trims out 24% from the lower tail and 31% from the upper tail (Dolmas et al., 2005). Then, there is the
Cleveland Fed Median CPI, which keeps only one rank, the middle one. Those trimming approaches
can be seen as knife-edge cases of the above, where wˆ is chosen based on heuristics. It is noteworthy
that the fused penalty could be changed to λ||Dw|| (fused lasso) if one wanted to favor a sharp (boxy
1
shaped)trim. Wedonotoptforsuchapossibilitygiventhatourframeworkneedsnotbelimitedtosuch
shapes. Havingthisinmind,itisimportanttonotehowourpropositiondiffersfromwhatiscommonly
donewithtrimmedmeasures. Itdoesnotreweightincludedcomponentsaccordingtosomerulebased
ontheirheadlineinflationweights,nordoesitenforcethatweightssumto1ateverypointintime.
ADDITIONAL METHODOLOGICAL REMARKS. Note that there is no intercept included in our re-
gressions, which has a few implications. First, the fitted values are mechanically pushed (but not
forced unless otherwise specified) towards having the same unconditional mean as π through
t+1:t+h
w = π¯ −π¯∗ = 0, therefore making the fitted values already in headline inflation units by con-
0 t+1:t+h t
struction. Second,itimpliesalatentrandomwalkhypothesis,whichisinsynchronicitywiththeideaof
a core inflation measure being the summary of inflation conditions right now that is most indicative of
futuredevelopmentsinheadlineinflation.
Additionally,excludingtheinterceptw isnecessarytoproperlyidentifytheelementsofwinEqua-
0
tions(1)and(2)atlongerhorizons,like h = 24. As h grows,theunconstrainedregressionsolutionputs
a very small weight on current inflation conditions – and a much larger one on the intercept. This im-
pliesaverylimitedpassthroughofinformationfromπ tow,whichjobistoeffectivelybundlethe
t+1:t+h
ensembleofcomponents/ranks. Thus,withlittlevariancefromthesupervisor π beingcanalized
t+1:t+h
intothelearningofw,itselementscanonlybeestimatedimprecisely,and,goingtowardsthelimitofan
"intercept only" model, are identified by the prior (i.e., the penalties). Evidently, this problem does not
occur when w is predetermined using heuristic rules, like for most traditional core measures. Interest-
ingly, we will find that excluding the intercept also improves the benchmark regressions in most cases
3Notethat,intheλ → ∞limit,solutionsareequivalentincomponentsandrankspace(ι′O = ι′A Π = ι′Π ).
t t t t
9andtimeperiods,butnotnearlyasmuchasforAlbacores.
Thecombinationofvariousconstraintshasimplicationsofitsown. Inbothregressions,theexclusion
of the intercept – implying w = π¯ −π¯∗ = π¯ −π¯∗ ≈ 0 – combined with the nonnegativity
0 t+1:t+h t t t
constraint implies adaptive l regularization. To see this, note that in an attempt to mitigate variance,
1
π¯∗ may fall marginally below π¯ , unless equality is forced as in Albacore , and ergo classifies as an
t t ranks
implicit soft constraint. In other words, we have π¯∗ ≤ π¯ , which can, by definition, be rewritten as
t t
∑K w π¯ ≤ π¯ . Bringinginthenonnegativityconstraintanddenotingγ ≡ π¯ k,t,weget
k=1 k k,t t k π¯t
K
∑
γ |w | ≤ 1 (3)
k k
k
which is the constrained optimization form of an adaptive LASSO constraint with a "budget" of 1 –
technically, a tuning parameter. In the case of Albacore , Equation (3) holds with equality. In that
ranks
of Albacore sum-to-one constraint, the implications are Equation (3) holding with equality with
comps
γ = 1∀k ,aplainLASSOconstraintinadditiontoEquation(3)itself. Thereby,unlessotherconstraints
k
are brought in, the resulting model will likely be sparse. Is this desirable? It depends. In the high-
dimensional Albacore application, this is undesirable given that we expect the forward-looking
comps
core measure to be dense, i.e., based on more than a handful of highly disaggregated components. At
higher levels of aggregation, sparsity becomes reasonable again, but may lead to a measure that is far
from mapping into any realistic consumer, which may impede the successful communication of the
index. In rank space, sparsity can make sense, because order statistics themselves are already dense
combinations of underlying components through the rule underlying the allocation matrix. A well-
known sparse core inflation measure in rank space is the weighted median inflation. If λ = 0 is the
outcome of cross-validation, both Albacore and Albacore can embrace sparsity by letting the
comps ranks
cocktail of constraints act as the single source of (l ) regularization. We will see that most often, dense
1
solutionsarefavored.
IMPLEMENTATION DETAILS. We use the CVXR package in R, which provides fast solutions for linear
convex programming problems. Simplified versions of the above could be implemented via the well-
known glmnet package. However, necessary equality constraints (such as w′ι = 1 in Albacore )
comps
arebeyondtheirfunctionalities, andonecannotsimplyrearrangeregressorsasinOLS.Weprovidethe
R package assemblage, which automatically implements the above given user-provided target and
components. Running estimations implying fewer than 20 components takes about 0.14 seconds on a
MacbookPro (withM2 chip), and afull-patchcross-validation of λ takes5.53 seconds(with a λ gridof
length20and10folds). Largermodelswithabove200componentstake0.26secondsforasinglerunand
7.91secondsforcross-validation. Thesenumbersassumerunningcross-validationinparallel(codedas
an option in the assemblage package) on 11 cores. Using a single core implies the tuning of λ now
takes23.21secondsforthesmallmodel(K = 20)and39.17secondsforthebiggerone(K = 200).
103 Core Inflation Revisited
We construct Albacore for the US, the EA, and Canada with monthly price indices at different levels
of disaggregation. Results and implementation details for the latter are relegated to Appendix A.3.
For the US we focus on the price index for Personal Consumption Expenditure (PCE), which is taken
from the Bureau of Economic Analysis (BEA). We base our core inflation measure on level 2, 3, and
6 including 15, 50, and 215 subcomponents, respectively. For the euro area, we use the Harmonized
Index of Consumer Prices (HICP) from Eurostat amd choose the two-, three-, and four-digit COICOP
level, which comprises a number of 12, 39, and 92 subindices.4 All disaggregated series are seasonally
adjusted5 and expressed as 3-months-over-3-months changes, which balances timeliness (as opposed
to 12 months trailing averages) and noise reduction (versus the month-over-month growth rate). Rank
positions are calculated using month-over-month growth rates (as done for trimmed mean inflation),
andthentheorderstatisticstimeseriesaresmoothedusingthe3monthsmovingaverage.
Constructing Albacore for each level involves predicting the average path of headline inflation for
1, 3, 6, 12, and 24 months ahead (h ∈ {1,3,6,12,24}). Albacore based upon h ∈ {6,12,24}, indicating
medium-term developments, is of interest for policymakers. An index targeting shorter horizons (h ∈
{1,3})canbeusefultohedgefundsperformingreallocationsbasedonanticipationofcentralbanksrate
decisions,especiallyintimeswherethereissizablemonetarypolicyuncertainty.
We choose two out-of-sample test sets spanning periods before the Covid-19 crisis (i.e., 2010m1 to
2019m12) and the post-Covid period (i.e., 2020m1 to 2023m12) and evaluate the point forecasting per-
formancewithrootmeansquarederrors(RMSEs). Thesearetwovastlydifferentregimes,withthefirst
evaluationsamplebeingcharacterizedbystablelowinflationandthesecondbyunstablehighinflation.
Webasetheestimationonarollingwindowof20years,allowingformildstructuralchangesinthecom-
position of the maximally forward-looking inflation series. Note that for the EA this choice inevitably
resultsinanexpandingwindowsinceourdisaggregateddatasetstartsin2003.
We compare the forecasting accuracy to a set of benchmark models. For each country, this set in-
cludes the officially reported core inflation series (i.e., PCE/HICP excluding energy and food, hence-
forth,corePCE/HICPX),trimmedmeaninflation(i.e.,FRBDallas’TrimmedMeanPCEfortheUS,30%
trimmedmeaninflationfortheEA)aswellasestablishedmodel-basedconceptsofunderlyinginflation
measures. Given that the series address the problem from various angles, the information they convey
may differ. Hence, instead of focusing on a single measure of core inflation we enhance our bench-
marksbycombiningthemand,inthisway,performanex-anteweightingofthebestcurrentlyavailable
measures(inthespiritof Cogley,2002).
Similar to our main setup, we include the different series in a nonnegative regression. Our first
benchmark(andnuméraireforallRMSEsinourtables)iscomprisedofheadline,coreaswellastrimmed
mean inflation including an intercept (Xbm), which allows the model to include the long-run average.
t
4We exclude item CP0735 (Combined passenger transport) from level 4 in the EA due to the item’s heavy
irregularitiesduringtheCovid-19pandemic.
5NotethatfortheEAandCanada(unliketheUS)thereisnoseasonallyadjusteddatapublishedbystatistical
institutions. WeprovidedetailsontheseasonaladjustmentforbothapplicationsinAppendixA.5.
11The same set of variables without the intercept (Xbm, (w = 0)) is used as another competitor. The
t 0
formerismoreakintoastandardforecastingregression,whilethelatterismoreintunewithtraditional
usage of core inflation measures and the inherent random walk hypothesis. Accordingly, we expect
Xbm to be a tough benchmark during the stable inflation out-of-sample period, and Xbm, (w = 0) to
t t 0
be more competitive when facing the rapidly evolving inflation conditions of our second test sample.
We also consider a more comprehensive set of benchmarks by combining 7 publicly available inflation
measures for the US, and 8 for the EA (Xbm+).6 Again, we estimate it with and without an intercept
t
(Xbm+,(w = 0)).
t 0
3.1 Results for the United States
First, Table1containstheout-of-sampleforecastingexerciseresults. Next, Figure1showstheresulting
timeseriesaswellastheweightsassignedtoranksandcomponents. Finally,inFigure2,wezoomonto
thepost-2020periodanddecomposeAlbacoreandtwoclassicalcoremeasuresintothemainaggregates.
Thisprovidesanunderstandingoftheirdifferentassessmentsforboththesurgeandtheslowdown.
FORECASTINGPERFORMANCE. FortheUSdata,wefindthatAlbacore ranksisthebestperformingmodel
regardless of the forecasting horizon, level of disaggregation, and evaluation sample. In most cases, it
outperforms benchmarks by an appreciable margin, with the highest gains achieved for higher-order
forecasts. Forthesampleendingbeforethepandemic,Albacore yieldsRMSEswellbelowallbench-
ranks
markswithhighestperformancegainsformedium-termpredictions(h ∈ {12,24})andhighernumbers
of assembled components (K ∈ {50,215}). Lower-dimensional versions fare better post-2020, and the
middle-ground "level 3" option comes out as the most polyvalent. Albacore ’s outperformance is
comps
morelocalthanthatofitssupervisedtrimmingcounterpart. Forthelowinflationera,itdoesnoteclipse
convex combinations of the usual benchmarks. However, its outperformance for the second test set is
notable,particularlyforkeyhorizonssuchas6and12monthsahead.
We also note from Table 1 that dispensing with the intercept is, unsurprisingly so, playing a non-
trivial role in creasing performance for the second out-of-sample. Indeed, both the sparse and more
comprehensive benchmarks deliver better results when excluding it. Albacore and Albacore
ranks comps
surely benefit from being part of the no-intercept family for the post-2020 evaluation period, but they
comfortablydistancethebenchmarks. Ofthew = 0clusterofmodels,onlyAlbacore surpassesthe
0 ranks
performanceofmodelsfeaturinganinterceptduringthelow/stableinflationera.
Interestingly, Albacore also provides appreciable improvements for short-run forecasts (h ∈
ranks
{1,3}), and does so for both test periods at nearly all levels. This is notable given that short-run pre-
dictive accuracy is hard-earned – beating headline itself for these targets is no small feat. Most core
inflation measures are designed with "monetary policy horizons" in mind, and as such, are suboptimal
for such needs. Thus, Albacore can also be of use to institutions interested in monitoring a single
ranks
6FortheUSweusePCEservicesotherthanhousing,FRBDallas’TrimmedMeanPCE,FRBClevelandMedian
CPI, FRB Cleveland 16% Trimmed Mean CPI, the Atlanta Fed Sticky CPI, core PCE (ex. food and energy) and
PCEheadline. ThesetfortheEAincludesHICP,HICPexcludingfoodandenergy,HICPexcludingenergy,HICP
excluding energy and unprocessed food, Supercore, PCCI, PCCI excluding energy and the 30% trimmed mean
inflation.
12Table1: ForecastingPerformanceofAlbacorefortheUS
2010m1-2019m12 2020m1-2023m12
h → 1 3 6 12 24 1 3 6 12 24
Level2(K =15)
Albacore 1.02 1.01 1.08 1.13 1.12 0.90 0.86 0.70 0.63 0.88
comps
Albacore 1.01 0.97 0.99 0.98 0.87 0.84 0.74 0.57 0.59 0.69
ranks
Level3(K =50)
Albacore 0.99 1.02 1.10 1.14 1.06 0.87 0.84 0.80 0.75 1.01
comps
Albacore 0.97 0.92 0.93 0.87 0.73 0.81 0.76 0.61 0.56 0.63
ranks
Level6(K =215)
Albacore 1.06 1.00 1.10 1.19 1.16 0.92 0.88 0.84 0.71 0.99
comps
Albacore 0.98 0.91 0.88 0.84 0.77 0.86 0.82 0.70 0.62 0.67
ranks
Benchmarks
Xbm, (w =0) 1.00 0.99 1.03 1.03 0.96 0.91 0.89 0.79 0.80 0.93
t 0
Xbm+ 1.01 1.04 1.04 1.04 1.02 1.37 1.48 1.18 1.14 1.09
t
Xbm+,(w =0) 1.02 1.04 1.07 1.07 0.97 1.10 1.15 0.86 0.87 0.96
t 0
Notes:Thetablepresentsrootmeansquareerror(RMSE)relativetoXb tm=[PCEtPCEcoretPCEtrimt]withintercept.Theremain-
ingbenchmarksare: Xb tm =[PCEtPCEcoretPCEtrimt]withoutanintercept(i.e.,w0 =0),Xb tm+withandwithoutanintercept.
Numbersinboldindicatethebestmodelforeachlevelandeachhorizonineachoftheout-of-sampleperiods. Numbershigh-
lightedingreenshowthebestmodelperhorizonandout-of-sampleperiodacrosslevels.
inflation series that has an edge in foreseeing headline’s next release (h = 1) or its developments over
thenext3months.
ALOOKATTIMESERIES. Wefocusonh = 12andthemostgranularlevel(i.e.,level6)forAlbacore
comps
and level 3 for Albacore . This choice is based on the importance of medium-term horizons for
ranks
monetary policy decisions and forecasting results discussed above. Acknowledging the remarkable
performance of lower levels of disaggregation, we present deeper insights on Albacore for level 2 in
Appendix A.2. Figure 1 presents Albacore estimated on data through 2019 by plotting the time series
of the aggregate and benchmarks in yearly percentage changes (upper panel) and the weights of sub-
components/ranks in the lower panels. Albacore indicates inflation trends close to the 2% target
ranks
for the periods up to the Great Financial Crisis (GFC). After showing slight upward pressures in 2009,
it falls below target in 2010 and remains low and stable up to 2020. Albacore deviates from both
comps
Albacore and the target already in 2004. It results in elevated inflation until 2008 before signaling
ranks
downwardpressuresduringtheGFC.From2010to2019,allcoreinflationmeasuresmoveinaccordance
before diverging ahead of the Covid-19 pandemic. Indeed, permanent exclusion metrics (i.e., core PCE
andAlbacore )followheadlinedownwardin2019whereasthetrimming-basedapproachesremain
comps
atthetarget.
Thesubsequentperiods,coveringthepandemic-erainflationsurge,demonstrateAlbacore’sremark-
able forecasting performance out-of-sample. We find that Albacore shows upward pressures on
ranks
13Figure1: AlbacorefortheUS
(a)ComparisonofComponentWeights (b)ComparisonofRankWeights
Notes:TheupperpanelshowsAlbacore(level6forAlbacorecompsandlevel3forAlbacoreranks)andbenchmarksinyearlypercentagechanges.Upto2020m1we
plotthein-sampleresultsofAlbacoreandshowout-of-samplepredictionsthereafter,indicatedbythedashedline. Thelowerleftpanelpresentstheweightsin
percentforAlbacorecomps. Toensureanadequaterepresentation,theyareaggregatedtothelowestlevelofdisaggregation(level2)byaveragingoverthecom-
ponents’weightsineachcategory. ThereddotsgivetheofficialPCEweightsin2022determinedbyexpenditureshares. Detailsonthelabelingcanbefoundin
AppendixA.5. InthelowerrightpanelwecomparetheresultingweightsforAlbacorerankswiththeFRBDallas’TrimmedMeanPCE.Thegreenshadedarea
markstheexcludedshareofmonthlypricechangesasissuggestedbytheofficiallyreportedtrimmedmeanbeforereweighting(24%ofthelowertailand31%of
theuppertail).Weshowmodelresultstrainedondatafrom2001m1to2019m12.
inflationasearlyasmid-2020. Albacore ,ontheotherhand,isnotastimelyfortheinitialsurgebut
comps
capturestheturningpointearlier(alreadyafteritspeakin2022m3). Albacore remainsmorepersis-
ranks
tent during 2022 but indicates a faster disinflationary process thereafter. It lands at the lowest level (at
2.6%)comparedtotheothermeasureattheendofoursample.
COMPARING WEIGHTS. The lower panels of Figure 1 reflect the importance of the different subcom-
ponents (left panel) and ranks (right panel) for the aggregate. For the left panel, level 6 estimates have
beenre-aggregatedbacktolevel2foreaseofcommunication. Inlinewiththeofficialcoreinflationrate,
Albacore excludes energy. It assigns lower weight to food goods as well as clothing, housing, and
comps
recreational goods compared to the official headline rate. Unlike core PCE, which completely turns off
foodgoods, Albacore shrinksitbyhalf. AswewillseeinSection3.5, onlyifwewishtospecialize
comps
14Albacore forpredictinglowinflationriskwillitbedesirabletocompletelyexcludefoodgoods.
comps
Services, on the other hand, get at least the weight they would get in the official series, with health
andotherservicesbeingevenmoreimportant. Giventhatpricesofservicestendtoberatherpersistent
and less prone to transitory shocks, they prove valuable in indicating the medium-term developments
in inflation (Bils and Klenow, 2004). Moreover, it is plausible that upweighting these low-volatility
componentscompensatesfortheinclusionofmorevolatileonesbearingleadingsignals,likefoodgoods.
The high-dimensional regression setup allows to investigate the importance of components at the
disaggregated level, which brings to light some eye-catching elements. For better or worse, beer is
the top-weighted component in food goods. In the group of vehicles, we find a significant role of the
secondary market with increased weights for used cars and trucks prices. Personal computers, tablets,
and television gain in importance when it comes to recreational goods. So do medical insurances and
prescriptiondrugsforgoodsandservicesregardinghealth. Downsizinghappensforshoesandfootwear,
garments, gasoline, sporting equipment and air transportation. At first sight these components do not
have much in common. However, analyzing the persistence of each component’s inflation rate reveals
thatupweighteditemstendtoyieldhigherpersistencecoefficientsthandownweightedones.7
Looking at the weights of Albacore reveals a highly asymmetric trim (see lower left panel in
ranks
Figure 1). Compared to the asymmetric trimming solution of the FRB Dallas’ Trimmed Mean PCE (see
green shaded area in Figure 1), Albacore is much more aggressive in removing the lower part of
ranks
the distribution.8 In Table 9 (in the appendix), we see this helps in reducing both volatility and bias.
Theabsenceofthesum-to-oneconstraintinEquation(2)isinstrumentaltothisresult. Byallowingrank
weights to sum to any positive number, Albacore can leverage leading signals from a segment of
ranks
thepricegrowthdistribution(here,centeredaroundthe75thpercentile)whichbyconstruction,growsin
everyperiodatafasterpacethan2%,andmultiplythembyaconstantsmallerthan1tobringbackthe
indextohavingthesamelong-runmeanasheadlineinflation. Notethatthisfocusontheuppertaildoes
not prevent Albacore from flipping sign and entering deflation territory if need be. This, however,
ranks
wouldrequireforapproximately75%ofthelevel6components’pricestocontract.
Thebenefitsofhighlyasymmetrictrimmingcanonlybereapediftheshapeofthepricegrowthdis-
tributionisitselfasymmetricandtime-varying. Otherwise,therecannotbeanycomparativeadvantage
versus simply monitoring (robust) location and scale. The pandemic-era inflation episode affected the
skewnessoftheshort-termdistributionofpricechanges,whichshiftedfromnegativetopositiveskew-
ness. As a results, existing trimming approaches understated (early) trends (Rich et al., 2022), while
Albacore isparticularlywellequippedtocatchthose. Moreover,positivepricechangesaretypically
ranks
more persistent than negative ones. As shown by the extensive literature on price setting behaviors of
firms,pricestendtobeadjustedfasterwhencostsincreasethanwhentheydecrease(see,e.g., Balland
Mankiw, 1994; Nakamura and Steinsson, 2008; Gautier et al., 2023). Thus, Albacore significantly
ranks
upweightsrelativepricechangesthataremorelikelyheretostay.
7WefollowtheliteratureonpersistenceweightedcoreinflationratesanduseanAR(1)modeltoclassifyeach
component(Cutler,2001;BilkeandStracca,2007).
8Note that in commonly used trimming approaches subcomponents are reweighted with their official PCE
weights,whileAlbacore isnot.
ranks
15Figure2: AlbacoreDecompositionfortheUnitedStates
Notes:Wedecomposeeachinflationseriesintoacommonlowerlevelofsixmainaggregates.ForAlbacorecomps(h=12andlevel6)andcorePCEthisisdoneby
aggregatingsubcomponentstoeachgroup,i.e.,energy,food,goods,services,shelter,andother,whereothercomprisestransportationandhealth.Detailscanbe
foundinAppendixA.5.Albacoreranks(h=12andlevel3)andthetrimmedmeanrequireaconversiontocomponentspaceasdiscussedinSection3.3.
ANALYSIS OF THE POST-COVID INFLATION SURGE. We provide an in-depth analysis based on a de-
composition of Albacore, the official core inflation rate and the trimmed mean (Figure 2). We focus on
the contributions of energy, food, goods, services, shelter, and others, where the latter is comprised of
transportation and health. A detailed description of the included categories in each group is given in
AppendixA.5.
In the US, a large bulk of the early acceleration in inflation can be attributed to goods prices. The
pandemic-induceddistortionsinseveralkeysectorscombinedwithstrongaggregatedemandstemming
from shifts in consumer spending, accommodating monetary policy, and fiscal stimulus led to high
inflationandcontributedtoitsexceptionalnature(Balletal.,2022;Guerrierietal.,2022;Blanchardand
Bernanke, 2023; Di Giovanni et al., 2023). Clearly, Albacore benefits from its focus on the upper
ranks
half of the distribution. Contrary to Albacore and core PCE, there is no downward pressure from
comps
goods inflation in 2020. Instead, Albacore already spots signs of upward tendencies in mid-2020
ranks
thatbuildupasmoreandmoresectorsfacenegativeimpactsfromthemixofsupplychaindisruptions
and sustained consumer spending. This stands in contrast to the trimmed mean, which is lagging.
Contributions from goods prices are muted until mid-2022 and remain comparably small throughout
thesample. Instead,itattacheshighweighttoshelter;anotoriouslylaggingindicator(BryanandMeyer,
2010; Cotton and O’Shea, 2023). The stock of rental leases included in the index typically captures new
andexistingrentals,withthelatterbeingsluggishinadjustingtomarketrents. Basedonthesegrounds
but without a priori excluding shelter components, as in US supercore inflation (i.e., nonhousing core
services, see Powell, 2022; Leduc et al., 2023), Albacore benefits from the minimal contribution of
ranks
sheltertotheaggregate,onaccountofitshighlyasymmetrictrimmingscheme.
Although,asubstantialpartofthepandemic-erainflationsurgealsoreflectsshocksinfoodanden-
ergyprices(BlanchardandBernanke,2023;GagliardoneandGertler,2023),theircontributionsinallcore
inflationmeasuresaresmall. ContrarytocorePCE,neitherAlbacore norAlbacore excludefood
comps ranks
orenergypricesapriori,andyet,theybothassignlowweightstocorrespondingcomponents,resulting
16in negligible contributions from energy and small, positive ones from food (given their exceptionally
strongdynamics).
The deceleration of core inflation metrics in 2022 reflects fading supply chain disruption, accompa-
nied by a moderation of goods inflation (Alcedo et al., 2022; Gagliardone and Gertler, 2023). All mea-
sures, except for the FRB Dallas’ Trimmed Mean PCE, peak in 2022m3. Yet, Albacore is the only
comps
measure indicating a clear turning point with goods inflation significantly decreasing thereafter. Core
PCEaswellasAlbacore arepersistentthroughout2022beforetrendingdownwardtowardstheend
ranks
oftheyear. Whilegoodsinflationisdecreasinginimportance,pressuresfromthelabormarketbecome
more dominant (Amiti et al., 2022; Benigno and Eggertsson, 2023; Blanchard and Bernanke, 2023). This
is indicated by the rise of services inflation and its high persistence (since service sectors are typically
labor-intensive), which is mainly observed for Albacore and core PCE. Given that components re-
comps
lated to services are getting higher weights in Albacore , it proves to be a useful indicator for the
comps
secondphaseofthepost-pandemicinflationera(Leducetal.,2023).
ROBUSTNESS TO MOVING AVERAGE CHOICE. Thechoiceof3monthsaveragesismotivatedasbeing
the maximal amount of time series averaging one can indulge in when building a measure of current
conditionsinaforward-lookingmanner. Nonetheless,asarobustnesscheck,wepresentresultsfordif-
ferentmovingaveragetransformationsoftheregressors(frommonth-over-monthtoyear-over-year)in
Tables 6 and 7 in the appendix. As one would expect, overall, we observe that longer trailing averages
perform better during calmer periods and worse during the post-2020 era. However, improvements of
year-over-year averages, when applicable, are rather quaint vis-à-vis the mechanically more timely 3
months average. Interestingly, Albacore yields remarkably stable performance across transforma-
ranks
tions(frommonth-over-monthtoyear-over-year)forbothtestsets,aslongasthelevelofdisaggregation
is deep enough (K ≥ 50). So does Albacore for all cases but the highly volatile month-over-month
comps
transformation for the pre-Covid sample. This suggests that when there is enough leeway for variance
reduction in the "cross-section" of components, additional time-smoothing has limited effects. We see
thisasdesirable,asaveragingoverlongwindowsbynecessity,fromaforward-lookingperspective,errs
ontheincreasedbiassideofthetimeaggregationbias-variancetrade-off. Variationinbenchmarksper-
formanceislimitedbefore2020andlargerthereafter,withageneralpreferenceforlesstimelyaverages.
All in all, we find Albacore and Albacore in their original 3 months average setup to fare well
comps ranks
overall,eveninthepresenceofadelugeofbenchmarksandalternativespecifications.
3.2 Results for the Euro Area
In this section, we construct Albacore for the euro area. Again, we compare the model’s forecasting
performance with that of the most prominent core inflation series (Table 5 in the appendix), provide
shapeandfeaturesoftheproposedmeasure(Figure3)anddelveintotherecentsurge(Figure4).
FORECASTING PERFORMANCE. Similar to our findings for the US, benchmarks are more difficult to
beat in the short run. Table 5 reveals that the convex combination of existing core inflation measures
(Xbm+) features competitive predictive power that either Albacores can match, but struggle to surpass.
t
For medium-term forecasts, we find that Albacore improves upon its competitors and yields the high-
17Figure3: AlbacorefortheEuroArea
(a)ComparisonofComponentWeights (b)ComparisonofRankWeights
Notes:FormoredetailswerefertoFigure1.Country-specificchangescanbesummarizedasfollows:FortheEAwepresentAlbacoreinlevel4.Forthetrimmed
mean,wechoosetheofficiallyreported30%trimmedmeaninflation.Thegreenshadedareamarkstheexcludedshareofmonthlypricechangesasissuggestedby
thetrimmedmeanbeforereweighting(15%ofthelowertailand15%oftheuppertail).DetailsonthelabelingcanbefoundinAppendixA.5.
est predictive accuracy for both evaluation samples. However, it does so by smaller margins than it
didfortheUS,whichisnotsurprisinggiventhatamoresignificantpartofEAheadlineinflationwasat-
tributableto,fromtheperspectiveofthemodel,fundamentallyunpredictableevents. Forshorthorizons,
Albacore topsthelistwiththelowestlevelofdisaggregation(level2). Whenitcomestopredictive
comps
accuracyformedium-termhorizons,wefindlargergainsforAlbacore assemblingahighernumber
ranks
ofcomponents(level4).
COMPARING WEIGHTS. In light of the results discussed so far, our in-depth analysis will be based
on h = 12, the most granular level (i.e., level 4), and the training sample ending in 2019m12. We find
that both Albacore and Albacore show a rather smooth path, moving close to the 2% target.
comps ranks
In response to the two major crises in our sample, the GFC and the sovereign debt crisis, both series
follow a downward trend with Albacore indicating this drift earlier and moving below target for
comps
several years. Albacore remains slightly higher (close to target) for the low inflation era preceding
ranks
18Figure4: AlbacoreDecompositionfortheEuroArea
Notes:Wedecomposeeachinflationseriesintoacommonlowerleveloffourmainaggregates.ForAlbacorecomps(h=12andlevel4)andHICPXthisisdoneby
aggregatingsubcomponentstothefourgroups:energy,food,non-energyindusrialgoods(NEIG),andservices(asissuggestedbyEurostat’s“SpecialAggregates”
inCOICOPclassification,seeAppendixA.5).Albacoreranks(h=12andlevel4)andthetrimmedmeanrequireaconversiontocomponentspaceasdiscussedin
Section3.3.
the Covid-19 crisis. From 2020 onward, Albacore again showcase its quality as a leading indicator.
ranks
It does not give in to the deflationary tendencies at the onset of the pandemic and heeds high inflation
warnings at an early stage. Even though, Albacore follows the common downward trend in 2020,
comps
it catches up quickly and both Albacore series plateau end-2022 (from 2022m12 to 2023m2), providing
timelyindicationoftheslowdown.
Similar to the US, Albacore assigns low weight to energy and only half the weight to food and
comps
alcoholic beverages compared to the official HICP aggregate (see lower left panel in Figure 3). Com-
ponents getting higher weights are found in housing (in particular, rents, services and goods related to
the dwellings), other services, and communication, which all feature persistent behavior. Albacore
ranks
shows an asymmetric trim tilted to the upside of the distribution (see lower right panel in Figure 3).
This prevents Albacore from decreasing in the aftermath of the initial Covid-19 shock and signals
ranks
upwardpressuresbeforeallothercoreinflationmeasuresdo.
ANALYSIS OF THE POST-COVID INFLATION SURGE. WefocusonAlbacoreversusHICPXandthe30%
trimmedmeanandprovidethecontributionsofenergy,food,non-energyindustrialgoods(NEIG),and
servicestotheaggregateinthedecompositionexercise.9 Commodityprices,mostimportantlyfoodand
energy, accounted for the majority of the post-pandemic inflation acceleration in the EA. The standard
argument that large swings in food and energy prices are mainly due to transitory shocks and tend
to be quickly reversed, did not apply for the exceptional periods in 2021/2022. Since many existing
core inflation measuresignore commodity price shocks byconstruction, they captured very little ofthe
sizable and persistent increase in prices that ensued. For both Albacore and Albacore we find
comps ranks
positive contributions of food components throughout the sample (see Figure 4), which aligns with,
e.g.,Peersman(2022),highlightingtheimportanceofglobalfoodcommoditypriceshocksforeuroarea
inflationdynamicsinthemediumterm.
9These groups are based on the “Special Aggregates” as suggested by Eurostat in the COICOP classification.
DetailsaregiveninAppendixA.5.
19However,focusingsolelyonenergyandfoodwouldbetoonarrow(Nickeletal.,2022;Ascarietal.,
2023; Banbura et al., 2023). Soaring goods inflation as a response to constrained supply and excess de-
mand, put sizable upward pressures on inflation. Albacore captures the increase via high weights
comps
onhousing(includingheavilyaffecteddurablegoods)andtransportgoods,whileAlbacore accounts
ranks
fortheupwardpressureduetoitsfocusonthemiddle-upperpartofthepricedistribution. Thedown-
wardtrendindicatedbyAlbacorefrom2023m1onwardsforestallsthatofHICPXandthetrimmedmean.
It is based on the easing of energy price pressures as well as goods inflation. Services inflation, on
the other hand, remains strong for all measures under study, a reflection of mounting domestic price
pressures (Banbura et al., 2023). For Albacore , these persistent pressures mainly stem from rents,
comps
restaurants,andhotelservices,aswellasotherservices(e.g.,insuranceandfinancialservices).
3.3 From One Space to Another
Anaturalworrywithtrimming-basedmeasuresisthatanitemthatwewoulddeemimportantincom-
ponent space, shows up rarely in the trimmed indicator. This can happen if an important component
separatesfromthepack(e.g.,rentinCanadafor2022-2023),potentiallyopeningariftbetweentrimming-
based(ormedian)inflationandheadline. Wehaveseen,fromearlierderivations,that
π∗ = wˆ′ O = wˆ′ A Π andconversely π∗ = wˆ′Π = wˆ′ A−1O
ranks,t r t r t t comps,t c t c t t
(cid:124)(cid:123)(cid:122)(cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
wc,t wr,t
andthereby,wecanstudyAlbacore incomponentsspaceandAlbacore inrankspace–astime-
ranks comps
varyingweightsmodels.
WereportresultsinFigure5. Intheleftpanel,weconductthecomparisonincomponentsspace. This
includes Albacore , the official PCE rate, and Albacore . For the latter, we present w through
comps ranks c,t
its median (bullet) as well as the 16th and 84th quantiles (lines). Overall, we find that in the EA both
Albacoreversionsarebroadlyconsistentregardingweightsassignedtosubcomponents,whileintheUS
thetwomodelsshowahigherdegreeofdisagreement. Mostnotably,Albacore frequentlyexcludes
ranks
elements of health and shelter, likely due to their stickiness and their concentration in the middle of
the distribution (Bils and Klenow, 2004). As pointed out in Section 3.1, this supports forward-looking
qualitiesofAlbacore sinceitdevoteslessattentiontoindicatorswitharearviewperspective.
ranks
Higher weights are assigned to recreation services and other durable goods. Both components ex-
hibithighcyclicalvariation(whereforthelatterthisismainlyattributabletojewelryandwatches)and
therebyprovideearlyindicationofdomesticinflationarypressures(Dolmasetal.,2009;StockandWat-
son, 2020). In the EA, we get similar results with recreational services and goods proving to frequently
showupintheincludedpartofthedistribution. InlinewithfindingsintheUS,theircyclicalsensitivity
isfoundtobestrongandindicatepricechangesbasedondomesticbusinesscyclemovements(Fröhling
andLommatzsch,2011). Inbothregionsenergygetstrimmedoutmostofthetimegivenitstendencyto
belocatedinthetails.
The right panels of Figure 5 present Albacore , Albacore , and the core PCE/HICPX rate in
ranks comps
rank space. This, interestingly, provides a view of the implied trimming of components space-based
20Figure5: Space-to-SpaceResults
(a)US–ComparisoninComponentSpace (b)US–ComparisoninRankSpace
(c)EA–ComparisoninComponentSpace (d)EA–ComparisoninRankSpace
Notes:Allweightsarebasedonmodelstrainedfrom2001m1to2019m12. FortheUS,wepresentlevel6forAlbacorecompsandlevel3forAlbacoreranks. Forthe
EA,bothAlbacoreseriesareinlevel4. Intheleftpanelweaggregatethecomponentweightstothelowestlevelofdisaggregation(level2)foreachmodel. For
Albacoreranksweshowtheaverageweightovertimeforeachcomponentwiththereddotsincludingthedispersionwiththered,solidline.Intherightpanelwe
useaslidingaverageovertworankstosmooththeweightsinrankspace.
estimators. As expected, Albacore and the official core inflation rate cover the whole distribution
comps
of price changes over time, as they are not explicitly designed to remove a particular range of ranks.
Notably, both solutions are left-skewed, with the extent of it being greater for the US. Thus, permanent
exclusion choices from Albacore and core PCE (like the absence of energy) implies a more aggres-
comps
sive downweighing of the lower part of the price growth distribution – and a subtle focus on the 60-70
percentilesregion. FortheEA,Albacore accentuatesthepeakofthedistributionatitsoriginalloca-
ranks
tion, whereas, in the case of US, Albacore provides a concentrated mass located slightly to the left
ranks
ofthecorePCE’shighestweightedrank. Therefore,Albacore seizestheopportunitytosignificantly
ranks
amplifywhatcomponents-spacemeasuresaredoingonlyinamodestfashion.
21Figure6: WeightsCurvefortheUS
(a)Albacore (b)Albacore
comps ranks
Notes:Allweightsarebasedonmodelstrainedfrom2001m1to2019m12.Wepresentlevel6forAlbacorecompsandlevel3forAlbacoreranks.Intheleftpanel,we
showdeviationsofthecomponentweightsacrossvaryingforecastinghorizons.Avalueof100indicatesnodeviation,avalueof0meansacompleteomissionof
thecomponent,andavalueof200indicatesadoublingoftheweightinAlbacorecompsrelativetotheofficialPCEweight.Intherightpanel,weshowtheaggregate
weightsforcertainbucketsoftherankdistributionacrossvariousforecastinghorizons.
3.4 Weights Curves: A Look Across Forecasting Horizons
Thecompositionofthemaximallyforward-lookingcoreinflationmeasurewilldifferdependingonthe
chosen forecasting horizon. In this paper, we have focused on horizons typically of interest for the
conductofmonetarypolicy. Butshorter(orlonger)horizonsareofgreatinteresttomanyinstitutions. In
thissubsection,weinvestigatehowAlbacore andAlbacore definitionsadjustaswevary h. As
comps ranks
wecanseeinTables1and5,assemblageregressionperformswellatvariousforecastinghorizons.
Figure 6 reports weights of Albacore and Albacore as h increases from 1 to 24. In the left
comps ranks
panel, we report Albacore ’s weights (as a function of h) relative to those of headline PCE. First, let
comps
usfocusonenergyandfoodgoods,whichareexcludedfromprototypicalcoremeasures. Weseearapid
declineintheimportanceofenergy. Energycomponentsgetcloseto0weightacrossallhorizons,being
entirely excluded for higher-order forecasts. Food goods get initially upweighted at short horizons,
beforedecreasingsteadilyandconvergingtowards0for h > 18months. Thissuggeststhatfoodgoods,
despitetheirvolatilebehavior,areatleastindicativeofshort-runpricetrends.
The services share of Albacore is ever increasing in h. This is visible for other services, and
comps
also financial services which takes off after h = 12. Some components experience the reverse pattern,
being more critical in the short term and becoming less significant over longer periods. This symmet-
ric lineup change is obviously inevitable by the sum-to-one constraint: if some components come in,
others must go. Among the latter, we have other nondurable goods and transportation, which expe-
rience the largest relative increase for the first few forecasting horizons and then eventually decrease
to the same level as the official rate (other nondurable goods) or below (transportation). The rationale
for the weight curves of transportation and other nondurables can be drawn from their connection to
22commodity prices. Among PCE categories, energy prices mainly influence items related to fuel and
transportation, while higher food commodity prices (e.g., crop) feed through to nondurables based on
their high input shares (Hobijn, 2008; Gao et al., 2014).10 This rather fast passthrough of commodity
pricesmakes transportationand nondurablesbetterpredictors fornear-term developmentsratherthan
longer-term trends. Overall, we trace the slope of the weight curves to the components’ characteristics
with more persistent components being relevant for higher-order forecasts and faster-growing and/or
morevolatileonescontributingtothepredictabilityintheshortrun.
The right panel of Figure 6 presents the evolution of rank weights across horizons for Albacore
ranks
by grouping them into 6 "buckets" for visibility. Results reveal that the lower percentiles are trimmed
out early on, echoing the exclusion of energy in the left panel. The bucket covering the 34th to 50th per-
centilegetssmallpositiveweightforshorthorizonsbeforeapproaching0fromh ≥ 5onwards. Highest
weights throughout are assigned to the 68th to 84th percentiles followed by the 51th to 67th percentiles.
Whilethelatterdecreasesinimportancewithincreasingh,theformershowsanupwardslopingweight
curve. Similarly, therighttailofthedistributiongetspositiveweight, whichgrowsin h andeventually
convergestonearlytwiceitssharefromh = 1. Thiscorroboratestheviewthatitsa-prioriexclusionleads
toasizablelossofinformationaboutlonger-runinflationtrends.
3.5 Building Core Series Specialized for Inflation Tail Risk
Overestimating and underestimating core inflation have different costs. Therefore, it can be of inter-
est to build core measures specialized at foreshadowing either of the two key risks: deflation and high
inflation. We do so by running quantile assemblage regression, which, as the name suggests, now as-
sembles components (or ranks) to minimize a quantile loss.11 Focusing on rare events inevitably leads
to a reduced effective number of training observations. So that this number is not further reduced by
significant overlapping of long averages for the target (e.g., h ∈ {12,24}), we now turn our attention
to 3 and 6 steps ahead forecasts instead. Moreover, we drop the 20 years rolling window in favor of an
expandingwindowfrom1990. Wepredictthe15th quantileforthelowertailrisksandthe85th quantile
fortheuppertailrisks(i.e., τ ∈ {0.15,0.85})forlevel6incaseofQualbacore andlevel3incaseof
comps
Qualbacore . WemodifyEquations(1)and(2),respectively,to
ranks
wˆτ
=argminT ∑−h
ρ (π −w′Π )2+λ||w−w || st w ≥ 0, w′ ι = 1×
Q τ(π t+1:t+h)
(4)
c τ t+1:t+h t headline 2 π¯
w t=1 t+1:t+h
T−h
wˆτ =argmin ∑ ρ (π −w′ O )2+λ||Dw|| st w ≥ 0, π¯∗ = Q (π ) (5)
r τ t+1:t+h t 2 ranks,t τ t+1:t+h
w t=1
10Notethatcropsarenotonlyanimportantinputforfoodgoodsbutalsoforothernondurablessincethelatter
includetobaccoproducts,flowers,pots,andplants(Hobijn,2008).
11Following from a long tradition in financial risk management, it is now widespread to forecast tail risks to
macroeconomicvariables. Adrianetal.(2019)initiatedaliteratureusingquantileregressionmethodsforforecast-
ingtailriskstotherealactivityoutlook(see,e.g., Giglioetal.,2016;Ferraraetal.,2022;DelleMonacheetal.,2023;
Clarketal.,2024). Ofcourse,somehavealsobuildanalogousmodelsforinflation,whichownpaletteofrisksis
of interest to central bankers, investors, governments, and others (see, e.g., Korobilis, 2017; Ghysels et al., 2018;
Pfarrhofer,2022;Lenzaetal.,2023).
23Table2: QuantileForecastingPerformanceofAlbacorefortheUS
2010m1-2019m12 2020m1-2023m12
h =3 h =6 h =3 h =6
τ MSE τ τ MSE τ τ MSE τ τ MSE τ
15 85 15 85 15 85 15 85
Qualbacore 0.97 1.06 1.29 1.10 1.09 1.21 1.24 1.07 0.75 1.23 0.97 0.71
comps
Qualbacore 0.94 0.92 0.95 0.94 0.93 0.86 0.99 0.80 0.36 0.97 0.72 0.40
ranks
Benchmarks
Xbm, (w =0) 0.96 0.99 1.12 0.97 1.01 1.11 1.04 0.96 0.81 1.00 0.94 0.90
t 0
Xbm+ 1.03 1.03 1.13 1.07 1.03 1.11 1.14 1.22 0.81 1.01 1.07 0.83
t
Xbm+,(w =0) 1.02 1.02 1.13 1.07 1.04 1.13 1.14 1.02 0.81 1.01 0.95 0.90
t 0
Notes:Thetablepresentsrootmeansquareerror(RMSE)relativetoXb tm=[PCEtPCEcoretPCEtrimt]withintercept.Theremainingbench-
marksare: Xb tm = [PCEtPCEcoretPCEtrimt]withoutanintercept(i.e.,w0 = 0),Xb tm+ withandwithoutanintercept. Numbersinbold
indicatethebestperformingmodelforeachpairofhorizonandlossfunction.Numbersingreenhighlightsthelossfunctionforwhichthere
isthelargestimprovementwithrespecttothebenchmark,ifapplicable.IntheresultsinSection3.1,wepresentlevel6forQualbacorecomps
(withK = 215)andlevel3forQualbacore (withK = 50). Notethatunlikepreviousresults,weconsideranexpandingwindowfrom
ranks
1990toincreasetheinevitablyscarcenumberofobservationsinthetails.
wherethequantilelossfunctionisgivenbyρ (u) = (τ−1{u ≤ 0})uwith1{u ≤ 0}defininganindica-
τ
torfunction,whichreturnsthevalue1ifu ≤ 0and0otherwiseandudenotingtheerrorterm(Gneiting,
2011). Q (·) calculates the empirical value of the unconditional quantile τ. Some modifications to our
τ
originalequalityconstraintsarenecessary,sincetheyarenotsuitablefortheirquantileextensions. Sum-
mingweightsto1incaseofQualbacore andsettingthelong-runaverageofQualbacore tothat
comps ranks
of headline inflation would prevent the algorithm from upweighting tail observations. Rather, we now
(cid:16) (cid:17)
want those constraints to hold up to a prefixed multiplicative constant
Qτ(πt+1:t+h)
, reflecting the dif-
π¯ t+1:t+h
ference in the long-run level of quantile τ versus the mean. Thus, we modify the equality constraint
for Qualbacore such that weights sum to our target’s respective unconditional empirical quantile
comps
(Q (π )) relative to its sample mean. For Qualbacore , this boils down to its training sample
τ t+1:t+h ranks
average being equal to that of the respective unconditional quantile of headline inflation Q (π )
τ t+1:t+h
insteadofπ¯ asusedinAlbacore .
t+1:t+h ranks
We start our evaluation of Qualbacore by contrasting its forecasting performance to the main set of
benchmarksinTable2. Wepresentresultsforeachquantile(i.e., τ and τ )andinclude, forreference,
15 85
the original loss function (i.e., MSE). Aligned with our main findings in Section 3.1, Qualbacore
ranks
yieldsaremarkableperformanceregardlessoftheforecastinghorizon,quantile,andevaluationsample.
Pre-CovidresultsrevealthatgainsachievedbyQualbacore areratherevenlydistributedacrossthe
ranks
risk spectrum for h = 3 and tilted to the upper tail of h = 6. The post-2020 sample confirms that
large improvements are to be found in the upper tail, while those for deflation or low inflation risk are
negligible. We observe improvements by sizable margins for τ , mounting to over 60% reduction in
85
quantilelossforbothforecastinghorizons.
ThepredictiveaccuracyofQualbacore islower,mostlyinlinewiththebenchmarksforthefirst
comps
evaluation sample. In contrast to Qualbacore , forecasting results of Qualbacore in this period
ranks comps
(aswellasthatoftheremainingbenchmarks)tendtobeinferiorintheuppertail. Thisfindingreverses
24Figure7: QualbacorefortheUS(h = 6)
(a)ComparisonofComponentWeights (b)TimeSeriesComparisonofQualbacore
comps
(c)ComparisonofRankWeights (d)TimeSeriesComparisonofQualbacore
ranks
Notes:Allweightsarebasedonmodelstrainedfrom2001m1to2019m12.Wepresentlevel6forQualbacorecompsandlevel3forQualbacoreranks.Intheupperleft
panelweaggregatethecomponentweightstothelowestlevelofdisaggregation(level2)foreachquantile.
when analyzing our second evaluation sample, which encompasses the pandemic and post-pandemic
periods. Qualbacore and benchmarks perform well for the 85th quantile but fall short in the lower
comps
quantile. This underperformance can be localized to the disinflationary shock in mid-2020 driven by
theCovid-19inducedenergypriceshock. Ingeneral,thetendencyforsubstantialoutperformancetobe
localized in the upper tail is not entirely surprising: key disinflationary events of the last 30 years are
almostalwaysduetounpredictable(andoftenmomentaneous)oilpriceshocks.
Toprobedeeper,Figure7presentstheresultingtimeseriesofQualbacore(rightpanels)aswellasthe
corresponding weights of assembled components and ranks (left panels) for the 6 steps ahead horizon.
Details for the shorter horizon (h = 3) are relegated to the appendix (Figure 8). Studying the results
from Qualbacore ’s upper tail shows that food goods and food services get high weights as well
comps
as components related to transportation and other services. Items assigned lower weights are mostly
related to services and durable goods (including clothing, house goods, and other durable goods). For
the lower tail, the opposite holds true. Shelter, health, and financial services, as well as durable goods
25enter the spotlight while food goods and food services get almost no weight. Energy, comprising the
most volatile items, is excluded from both tails. Given the usual wisdom, one might have expected
a similar outcome for food components. Yet, their assigned weights for the upper tail is nearly that
of headline. As shown in the literature, underestimation of future inflation is often linked to positive
food price shocks (Bowles et al., 2007; Cecchetti and Moessner, 2008). They tend to exhibit stronger
second-round effects than energy price shocks and are more likely to propagate to headline eventually
(De Gregorio, 2012; De Winne and Peersman, 2016). Thus, it is less surprising that upweighting (with
respecttocorePCE)developmentsoffoodpricesintheuppertailcontributestothepredictivepowerof
Qualbacore .
comps
For Qualbacore , the resulting rank weights differ significantly when focusing on either the up-
ranks
per or lower quantile. τ yields a rather sparse solution centered at the upper part of the distribution
85
of monthly price changes while the weights for τ are distributed densely covering most of the dis-
15
tribution except for the lowest part. Hence, when specializing our supervised trimming measure to
disinflation/deflation risk, it is much more aligned with the specification of traditional trimmed mean
inflation, as reflected by the shaded regions in Figure 7c. An even clearer instance of this phenomenon
canbevisualizedinFigure8c,whereQualbacore (τ )isalmostliterallymedianinflation. Thisleads
ranks 15
ustoconcludethattraditionaltrimming-basedcoreinflationmeasures,withasharpfocusonthecenter
of the price growth distribution, are better equipped to foresee low inflation, which was, from 1990 to
2020, seen as the main source of risk. Our methods can capture this equally well, but highlight that
when balancing both types of risks within a single loss function (i.e., the MSE), deviating from putting
theaccentonmidpointranksispreferable.
4 Assemblage Excursions
In this brief section, we explore additional inflation-related applications of the assemblage regression,
withaparticularfocusontherankspacevariant. Wedeviatefromaggregatinginflationsubcomponents.
First, given the widespread use of year-over-year measures, we consider aggregating lags into a super-
vised (trimmed) moving average of 12 months and compare it with the usual headline rate in yearly
growth rates (Year-over-year, YoY). Second, we devise a forward-looking combination of country-level
headlineinflationratesintheeuroarea.
Inbothapplications,wefindthatassemblinginrankspaceismoresuccessfulthanthemorecommon
componentsspaceversion. Thissuggeststhat,whendecidingonheterogeneousaggregationweights,it
canbepreferabletodrawmoreattentiontothelocationofarealizationintheoveralldistributionrather
than its exact position in time or space. This finding is obviously, for now, bounded to an environment
where we are devising easily-interpretable forward-looking linear aggregations. More work is needed
toseeifthisholdsasstronglyelsewhere,e.g.,inmoresophisticateddata-richnonparametricmodelsor
forothertargetsthaninflation.
264.1 Rank Autoregression
Year-over-year measures, or equivalently, 12 months averages of headline inflation are a common way
to visually inspect price pressure metrics. In this section, we answer the following question: if one
wishestoconstructsomeaverageofthelast12monthsofheadlineinflationthatismostpredictiveofthe
next 6, 12, and 24 months, what would such an average look like? Given the focus on time-smoothing
(withtheprefixed12-monthwindow)andtheusageofonlyautoregressiveinformation,theoutcomeis
conceptuallyclosertoatrendinflationextraction,again,byacknowledgingtheconnectiontoHamilton
(2018)’sfiltering.
Wedeployassemblageregressionincomponentsandrankspace. WefocusontheUS,andthe“com-
ponents”arenow12lagsofmonth-over-monthPCEgrowthrates. Ofcourse,incomponentsspace,this
is simply a constrained autoregression (AR). The interest rather lies in the rank version, which, instead
of permanently upweighting or downweighting lags, performs temporary exclusion. Its usage of past
realizations of the time series differs from that of a standard autoregression. The latter orders these
lagged observations based on the distance in time between the observation and the target, and allows
for corresponding heterogeneous weights. Instead, the rank version fixes a lookback window (here, 12
months)andweightspastrealizationsbasedontheirlocationinthewindow’srealizeddistribution. We
thereby shift the focus away from timing with potentially sophisticated dynamics with lag-specific co-
efficients to consider each lag as a draw and ask ourselves which average of such draws should we be
paying attention to. The elements discussed in Section 3.3 apply, implying in this context that the order
statistics-basedautoregressionisatime-varyingautoregressioninlagsspace.
The usage of the term "realized" to describe month-to-month inflation rates here is deliberate, as
whatwearebuildingisasummarystatisticfromhigh(er)-frequencydatadesignedtobeusedasapre-
dictor for a lower frequency target. Thus, there is a natural connection to the construction of realized
volatility (RV) from intra-day data in finance (Andersen et al., 2003; McAleer and Medeiros, 2008). A
key methodological distinction is that here, the nature of the statistic itself is estimated via rank coeffi-
cients rather than being predefined (and proven) to be a consistent estimator for a variance, a quantile
(Dimitriadis and Halbleib, 2022), a mean, or else. The theoretical environment backing RV is that true
volatility is fundamentally latent and can be estimated consistently from high-frequency data under
variousassumptions. Inevitably, wearewithintherealmofunsupervisedlearningbecausethedesired
supervisor’s "true volatility" is unobserved.12 In our rank AR inflation context, there is no quest for
a particular summary statistic13, but rather, a search of any that will fulfill the empirical task of being
closely associated with future headline inflation, as measured by statistical agencies. Validity comes
frompredictivepowerholdingbothin-andout-of-sample.
Table 3 presents the performance of the ranked (AR ) and constrained (AR+ ) autoregression
ranks lags
12Nonetheless, inthespiritofthispaper, itisthinkablethatsuchmeasurescouldbedefinedina"supervised"
fashionbymaximizingusefulnessinpredictinganotherobservedvariable(ormaximizinggeneraleconomicvalue)
withrankweightsbeingshrunktowhatwouldbeimpliedbytraditionalRV.
13Forinstance,ifinflationwerehypotheticallydefinedasayearlyprocess,theintra-yearsquaredobservations
couldnotbeaverageddirectlytobuildavarianceestimatorbecausemonth-to-monthobservationsarenotuncor-
related(McAleerandMedeiros,2008).
27Table3: Forward-Looking12MonthsMovingAverageResults
2010m1-2019m12 2020m1-2023m12
h → 1 3 6 12 24 1 3 6 12 24
AR 0.99 0.99 0.98 0.99 0.95 1.12 1.30 1.29 1.08 0.99
lags
AR+ 0.95 1.00 0.99 0.98 0.99 0.95 0.93 0.96 0.98 0.99
lags
AR 0.99 0.96 0.93 0.85 0.75 0.98 0.95 0.93 0.87 0.94
ranks
YoYinAR(1) 0.99 0.97 0.94 0.94 0.90 1.17 1.34 1.27 1.08 1.00
Notes:ThetablepresentsRMSErelativetoarandomwalkforecastusingyear-over-year(YoY)data.AR indicatesanunconstrainedAR(12),
lags
AR+ denotesanAR(12)withnonnegativecoefficientsandwithoutaninterceptandAR isthecorrespondingAR(12)inrankspace,all
lags ranks
usingmonthlygrowthrates.Numbershighlightedinboldshowthebestmodelperhorizonandout-of-sampleperiod.Theupperrightpanel
showsAR ,AR+ andYoYPCEinflation.Weplotin-sampleresultsupto2020m1andshowout-of-sampleonesthereafter.Inthelower
ranks lags
rightpanel,wecomparethecorrespondingweightsforAR withtheYoYPCEbenchmark(in%).
ranks
compared to a simple AR (12) with monthly growth rates, an AR(1), and a random walk, both using
lags
year-over-year data (the latter as the numéraire). During periods of low and stable inflation, putting
the emphasis on persistence is an established strategy (Clark and Doh, 2014; Stock and Watson, 2016).
Accordingly, AR procures good performance during the pre-2020 sample by leveraging little infor-
ranks
mation. WhatismorestrikingisthatwefinddecisiveimprovementsfromAR overARalternatives
ranks
for medium- and long-run horizons – and for both out-of-sample periods. At horizon 3, AR and
ranks
AR+ report similar performance, with ≈ 5% improvements over the numéraire. Only at h = 1 does
lags
AR+ prevailmarginally,suggestingthatthegainsofpayingattentiontotimingwithlags(asapposed
lags
todistributionalaspectswithAR )arecircumscribedtoveryshorthorizons.
ranks
The successful AR uses a downweighted average of the 6 highest-valued lags, i.e. those 6 out
ranks
of the 12 lags that show the highest month-over-month increase (see lower right panel in Table 3). The
inclusion of several lags equips the measure with adequate smoothness, while the exclusion of lower
realizations allegedly mitigates positive "base effects" following negative price shocks. The resulting
average puts a high bar for the index to show signs of lasting deflation, as it would require that order
statistics corresponding to ranks R and above showcase negative growth, implying that a large num-
5
ber of (nearly) consecutive months witnesses deflation. This is consistent with recent history: we find
episodesofdeflation(2009)orneardeflation(2020)inYoYduetoahandfulofmonthsshowingabnormal
negative shocks, but those quickly reversed. Depending on the precise event itself, one may attribute
thisreversaltotheverynatureofthese(oil)shocksortheexpansionarymonetarypolicyoftentriggered
in the aftermath. Whatever the cause might be, acknowledging that such shocks have little predictive
28power for headline inflation conditions in 6, 12, or 24 months, AR trims them out. Disinflation is
ranks
notasexceptionalofanoutcomeforAR asdeflationis. Iftheupperorderstatisticsshowcaselower
ranks
growththantheyusuallydo(byconstructiontheyaretrendingabovethetarget),thenAR willturn
ranks
inadisinflationforecast,asisthecasefor2014to2021. Thisasymmetricoutcomeisnotamajorsurprise
given our main results in Section 3.1. The prevalence of temporary negative shocks with no predictive
powerforfutureheadlineinflationcanbeidentifiedamongcomponentsatafixedpointintime,oralter-
natively,byobservingrepeatedlyanaggregatewithatime-varyinglevelofexpositiontothosenegative
shocks.
WhileAR doeswellinourpost-2020sampleandisclearlythebestamongthemodelsusingthis
ranks
limitedinformationset,itisnomatchforthoseusingcomponents-leveldata(Table5). 12monthsproves
too long of a lookback window and solely focusing on autoregressive information is insufficient, moti-
vating the usage of the more involved Albacore of Section 2, which fares well in all regimes. Thus,
ranks
we find AR and Albacore to share similarities before 2020, but less so thereafter. Nonetheless,
ranks ranks
givenitsdecisivemeritswithintheclassofdata-poormodels,theautoregressiveinflationmodelinrank
space is a handy tool to keep in one’s arsenal. It may be of even greater interest for countries where
componentleveldataislessreliableornotavailableforanextendedperiod.
4.2 Geographic Assemblage
Although sharing the same currency, and thus a single monetary policy, inflation rates of EA mem-
ber states are far from being homogenous. As a result, the predefined weighted average of HICP rates
forming the EA aggregate may or may not be the most timely indicator for the whole area h months
fromnow. Anaturalcuriositythatarisesthereofiswhetheranalternativeaggregationofmemberstates
inflationratesformsabetterleadingindicatorforHICPthanHICPitself. Toanswerthisquestion,wein-
troduceAlbacoreG,ageographicassemblageofAlbacore,withthetworepresentativesAlbacoreG and
ranks
AlbacoreG . Different from Albacore , which assembled the subcomponents of HICP in the pre-
comps comps
dictormatrix,Π isnowcomposedoftheheadlineinflationnumbersofeachoftheMEAmemberstates:
t
ΠG = (cid:2) HICP1,...,HICPM(cid:3) . Similar to Albacore , the order statistics matrix OG for AlbacoreG , is
t ranks t ranks
thenjusttherankedversionofΠG.
t
The geographic versions of Albacore and Albacore are designed as follows: the weights
comps ranks
of AlbacoreG are shrunk towards the annual expenditure shares for each country.14 Weights are not
comps
constrained to sum to unity, dropping the random walk hypothesis is hardly appropriate when only
combining headlines. Sum-to-one can be restored by interpreting the resulting (lower) sum of weights
as an AR(1) coefficient, which, being smaller than 1, reduces variance. The loosening of this constraint,
whichwasintroducedtodisciplinethemodelwhenassemblingalargenumberofcomponents,prevents
the solution from converging to HICP itself. Furthermore, we demean each country rate and add back
toittheEAaverage(i.e.,acountryfixedeffect). VariancereductioninAlbacoreG isobtainedthrough
ranks
differentchannels,andthus,neitherofthesemodificationstoourbaselineassemblageregressionpropo-
14Expendituresharesarethepercentageoftotalhouseholdfinalmonetaryconsumptionexpenditurebasedon
nationalaccountsdata(see EuropeanUnion,2020). DataistakenfromEurostat(prc_hicp_cow).
29Table4: Forward-LookingEuroAreaAggregation
2010m1-2019m12 2020m1-2023m12
h → 1 3 6 12 24 1 3 6 12 24
AlbacoreG 1.00 1.03 0.96 0.81 0.70 0.99 0.91 0.90 0.96 1.12
comps
AlbacoreG 0.97 0.93 0.86 0.74 0.66 0.94 0.84 0.80 0.87 0.93
ranks
HICP-RW 1.08 1.23 1.31 1.22 1.20 0.99 0.89 0.86 1.03 1.03
HICP-AR(1) 1.00 1.02 1.01 1.01 1.06 1.06 1.07 1.05 1.02 0.98
BestCoreBenchmark 0.98 0.95 0.93 0.87 0.75 0.95 0.89 0.92 0.97 0.99
Notes:Thetablepresentsrootmeansquareerror(RMSE)relativetoXb tm =[PCEtPCEcoretPCEtrimt]withintercept. Theremaining
benchmarksare:HICPRWisarandomwalkmodelofEAheadlineinflation,HICP-AR(1)isthecorrespondingAR(1)model,andthe
lastrowshowsthebestperformingbenchmarkconsideredinthemainanalysis(asinTable5).Numbersinboldshowthebestmodel
perhorizonandout-of-sampleperiod.TheupperleftpanelshowsAlbacoreG ’sallocationofweightstocountries(in%)compared
comps
toofficialcountryweightsprovidedbyEurostat.TheplotsontherightshowAlbacoreGandbenchmarksinyearlypercentagechanges
(top)andthecorrespondingweightsofAlbacoreG (in%)comparedtothe30%trimmedmean(bottom).
ranks
sition is needed. It keeps the fused ridge penalty, while constraining the resulting conditional mean to
matchtheunconditionalmeanofourtarget.
FromTable4,itisapparentthatAlbacoreG trumpsallcompetitorsinbothsubsamplesandacross
ranks
all forecasting horizons, whereas the component version is mostly aligned with the performance of
the best core benchmarks. We show corresponding time series and the weights for AlbacoreG and
comps
AlbacoreG in the panels above. Similar to Figure 3, AlbacoreG anticipates the broiling inflation-
ranks ranks
ary pressures at a much earlier stage than HICPX or the trimmed mean. Furthermore, it calls the peak
andthefollowingdownwardtrendprecisely. AlbacoreG showcasesstrongasymmetrictrimming: the
ranks
threelowerquartilesareentirelydiscarded,andweightisgivenonlytotheveryrighttailofthedistribu-
tion. Whileitmightappearlikearadicaloutcome,wefindreasonableargumentsfrombothastatistical
as well as an economic point of view. From a time series perspective, one should keep in mind that we
aretrimminghighlyaggregatedindices, whichfeaturemuchlessdramaticmovementsinthetailsthan
subcomponents-level series. Empirically, results suggest that higher inflation rates across countries are
30more likely to be contagious and generalize to the whole area. This also means that low inflation will
beexpectedinthe6,12,or24monthsonlyifthehighestinflationratesoverthelast3monthsarelower
thantheytypicallyare. Alternatively,thismaybelinkedtotailsreactingmorequicklytoshocksandan
intensifiedspilloverofinflationduringturbulenttimes,asisfoundintheliterature(AharonandQadan,
2022; Bouri et al., 2023). Thus, regardless of the size of EA member states, their expenditure intensity,
orothercountry-specificcharacteristics,aforward-lookingapproachmaywanttopayattentiontothose
with higher inflation rates at a given point in time. In particular, as a thumb rule, a downweighted
average of the 5 highest headline inflation rates among member states is found to be a good tracker of
forthcomingEA-widepricepressures.
IntermsofRMSE,AlbacoreG outperformstheofficialHICPforlongerhorizons,butnottherank
comps
versiondiscussedabove. Itmovesratherinlockstepwiththeothercoremeasures(HICPXandtrimmed
mean) at the outset of the pandemic-induced recession, and is late to calling the mounting inflationary
pressures. For the turning point, it is close to AlbacoreG and resembles that of a compressed head-
ranks
line. Thisbehaviorcanbetracedbacktotheallocationofcountryweights,whichdeviatessubstantially
from the official ones (see Table 4). AlbacoreG essentially overweights Italy, Finland, Portugal, and
comps
Greece, and keeps France and the Netherlands in the set with close to official weights. While Greece
and the Netherlands experienced the post-pandemic inflationary pressures late, they were among the
first member states to start the disinflationary process. France and Finland, on the other hand, con-
tributetothesmoothnessoftheseriesgiventheircomparablymoderateincreases. Atfirstsight,itmight
seem surprising to see AlbacoreG excluding Germany, which constitutes the biggest EA economy
comps
with most influential trade relations (Auer et al., 2019; Tiwari et al., 2019). However, when taking on
aforward-lookingperspective, inflationratesofsmaller(orperipheral)countriesmayproviderelevant
signals since they are more susceptible to shocks. In our sample, Greece stands out as it was heavily
affected by the GFC, triggering the subsequent sovereign debt crisis. It experienced low (and negative)
inflation before the whole area itself, which likely contributes to its high weights. This is, obviously,
quitecontextualtothetrainingsampleincluding2010s,andhighlightswhyAlbacoreG ,withitstem-
ranks
porary inclusions and exclusions scheme, fares better overall than AlbacoreG , which focuses on a
comps
fixedportfolioofcountries.
5 Concluding Remarks and Directions for Future Research
We introduced the assemblage regression to build a maximally forward-looking measure of core in-
flation. While predictive power for future headline inflation is generally an afterthought for the con-
struction of core inflation measures, our Albacore and Albacore are explicitly optimized to
comps ranks
perform well with respect to this criterion. Both yield favorable forecasting results coupled with eco-
nomic insights of high relevance. The most striking finding is the asymmetric trimming obtained from
Albacore , which is particularly pronounced in the US. This allows Albacore to perform well in
ranks ranks
quieter times and capture early signs of the post-pandemic surge months in advance of trimmed mean
andotheralternatives. Intermsofsupervisedweightingofcomponents,wefindaspecialroleassigned
31to food goods. It is not totally excluded from Albacore (as typically done in core PCE), and when
comps
it comes to upside inflation risks its overall weight even matches that of headline. These results, and
additional insights from our quantile regression extension, suggest that the core inflation measures we
shouldmonitortoflagdisinflation/deflationrisksmaydifferfromwhatisneededtodetecttherisksthat
cametomaterializefrom2021onward.
There are numerous avenues for future research. First, and closest to the analysis conducted in
this paper, there are a few natural extensions to Albacore that one may wish to investigate. While we
focusedonaggregatingcomponentsinasinglespaceatatime,onemaythinkofcombiningcomponents
andrankselectionusingmoreflexiblenonlinearoptimizationandalayeredapproach(e.g.,astructured
neural network). Alternatively, one could consider a "reservoir" approach (Tanaka et al., 2019), which
wouldboildowntoanextremelyhigh-dimensionalridgeregression.
Second, assemblage schemes considered in our work are built to fulfill a set of simple statistical
requirements. One can depart from "forward-looking" objective, or, at least, include a broader set of
objectives. One possibility is using Goulet Coulombe and Göbel (2023)’s algorithm to construct a core
inflation indicator that is maximally reactive to monetary policy and real activity. Combining these
supervised aggregation ideas with the forward-looking criterion could lead to maximizing the overall
coherencyinavectorautoregressivesetting(i.e.,itslikelihood). Inthelattercase,thiswouldimplythat
theassembledserieswouldbebothhighlyreactivetokeyaggregatesandpredictiveofthem. Thiscould
involveassemblingawiderbasketofindicators–likeGDP,whichisseldomlyexposedtosectoralshocks
thatareadistractionfromthegeneralmacroeconomictrend.
Third, the econometric idea of running assemblage regression in rank space to build a maximally
predictive summary statistic can be exported beyond inflation applications. For example, supervised
trimmed forecast combinations might extend trimming methods used in the literature, which only in-
volve choosing the endpoints in a similar vein to trimmed mean inflation (see Wang et al. (2023) for a
survey). Whiletraditionalregressionsinforecastersspaceupweightanddownweightindividualsbased
on their past skills, running it in rank space allows to detect which section of the crowd’s distribution
has more wisdom (whatever its time-varying composition in terms of individuals is). Regressions us-
ing order statistics may also be better equipped to deal with the inevitable entry and exit of forecasters
from the panel. Another, more operationally ambitious avenue, is supervised temporal aggregation of
intraday financial returns data to maximize the economic value derived from the resulting series. Pos-
sibleoutcomes, dependingontheobservabletarget, includesomerealizedvolatilityseries, oneitsmany
refinementsandextensions(McAleerandMedeiros,2008),aquantile,orsomethingelseentirely.
All in all, the supervised aggregation ideas developed in this paper are exportable to a variety of
settings where the official aggregate series (or manual alterations of it) offers room for improvement.
This is, essentially, the foundational idea of deep learning. Rather than manually building predictors
fromdisaggregates,onecanendogenouslyconstructthefeaturesfromtheinputthroughmultiplelayers
which are jointly optimized along with the predictive model using them. In an econometric modeling
environment, there are obvious constraints on such constructions, so that the extracted features make
economic sense. Nonetheless, this paper has shown – within the context of an elementary forecasting
model–thatsuchcohabitationispossible.
32References
Acosta,M.A.(2018). MachineLearningCoreInflation. EconomicsLetters,169:47–50.
Adrian, T., Boyarchenko, N., and Giannone, D. (2019). Vulnerable growth. American Economic Review,
109(4):1263–1289.
Aharon, D.Y.andQadan, M.(2022). Infection, invasion, andinflation: Recentlessons. FinanceResearch
Letters,50:103307.
Alcedo, J., Cavallo, A., Dwyer, B., Mishra, P., and Spilimbergo, A. (2022). E-commerce during covid:
Stylizedfactsfrom47economies. TechnicalReport29729,NationalBureauofEconomicResearch.
Amiti, M., Heise, S., Karahan, F., and Sahin, A. (2022). Pass-Through of Wages and Import Prices Has
Increased in the Post-COVID Period. Liberty Street Economics 20220823, Federal Reserve Bank of
NewYork.
Andersen, T. G., Bollerslev, T., Diebold, F. X., and Labys, P. (2003). Modeling and forecasting realized
volatility. Econometrica,71(2):579–625.
Aruoba, S.B., Diebold, F.X., Nalewaik, J., Schorfheide, F., andSong, D.(2012). Improvingusgdpmea-
surement: Aforecastcombinationperspective. InRecentAdvancesandFutureDirectionsinCausality,
Prediction,andSpecificationAnalysis: EssaysinHonorofHalbertL.WhiteJr,pages1–25.Springer.
Ascari, G., Bonomolo, P., Hoeberichts, M., andTrezzi, R.(2023). Theeuroareagreatinflationsurge. De
NederlandscheBank.
Auer, R. A., Levchenko, A. A., and Sauré, P. (2019). International inflation spillovers through input
linkages. ReviewofEconomicsandStatistics,101(3):507–521.
Ball,L.andMankiw,N.G.(1994).Asymmetricpriceadjustmentandeconomicfluctuations.TheEconomic
Journal,104(423):247–261.
Ball,L.M.,Leigh,D.,andMishra,P.(2022). Understandingusinflationduringthecovidera. Technical
Report30613,NationalBureauofEconomicResearch.
Banbura, M., Bobeica, E., and Hernández, C. M. (2023). What drives core inflation? the role of supply
shocks. ECBWorkingPaper,(2875).
Barkan, O., Benchimol, J., Caspi, I., Cohen, E., Hammer, A., andKoenigstein, N.(2023). Forecastingcpi
inflation components with hierarchical recurrent neural networks. International Journal of Forecast-
ing,39(3):1145–1162.
Bates, J. M. and Granger, C. W. (1969). The combination of forecasts. Journal of the operational research
society,20:451–468.
Ban´bura, M. and Bobeica, E. (2020). PCCI – a Data-Rich Measure of Underlying Inflation in the Euro
Area. ECBStatisticsPaperSeries,(38).
Benigno,P.andEggertsson,G.B.(2023). It’sbaaack: Thesurgeininflationinthe2020sandthereturnof
thenon-linearphillipscurve. TechnicalReport31197,NationalBureauofEconomicResearch.
Bilke, L. and Stracca, L. (2007). A Persistence-Weighted Measure of Core Inflation in the Euro Area.
EconomicModelling,24(6):1032–1047.
Bils, M. and Klenow, P. J. (2004). Some evidence on the importance of sticky prices. Journal of Political
Economy,112(5):947–985.
Blanchard,O.J.andBernanke,B.S.(2023).Whatcausedtheuspandemic-erainflation? TechnicalReport
31417,NationalBureauofEconomicResearch.
33Boaretto,G.andMedeiros,M.C.(2023). Forecastinginflationusingdisaggregatesandmachinelearning.
arXivpreprintarXiv:2308.11173.
Bouri, E., Gabauer, D., Gupta, R., and Kinateder, H. (2023). Global geopolitical risk and inflation
spillovers across european and north american economies. Research in International Business and
Finance,66:102048.
Bowles,C.,Friz,R.,Genre,V.,Kenny,G.,Meyler,A.,andRautanen,T.(2007). Theecbsurveyofprofes-
sionalforecasters(spf)-areviewaftereightyears’experience. ECBOccasionalPaper,(59).
Bryan, M. F. and Cecchetti, S. G. (1993). Measuring Core Inflation. NBER Working Paper No. w4303.
Availableat: https://ssrn.com/abstract=246875.
Bryan, M. F., Cecchetti, S. G., and Wiggins, R. L. (1997). Efficient inflation estimation. NBER Working
PaperNo.6183.
Bryan, M. F. and Meyer, B. (2010). Are some prices in the cpi more forward looking than others? we
thinkso. EconomicCommentary,(2010-02).
Bryan, M. F. and Pike, C. (1991). Median price changes: an alternative approach to measuring current
monetaryinflation. EconomicCommentary,(12/1/1991).
Cecchetti,S.G.andMoessner,R.(2008).Commoditypricesandinflationdynamics.BISQuarterlyReview,
pages55–66.
Chan, J. C., Koop, G., and Potter, S. M. (2016). A bounded model of time variation in trend inflation,
nairuandthephillipscurve. JournalofAppliedEconometrics,31(3):551–565.
Chaudhuri, K., Kim, M., and Shin, Y. (2016). Forecasting distributions of inflation rates: the functional
auto-regressiveapproach.JournaloftheRoyalStatisticalSocietySeriesA:StatisticsinSociety,179(1):65–
102.
Clark, T. E. (2001). Comparing measures of core inflation. Federal Reserve Bank of Kansas City Economic
Review,86(2).
Clark, T. E. and Doh, T. (2014). Evaluating alternative models of trend inflation. International Journal of
Forecasting,30(3):426–448.
Clark, T.E., Huber, F., Koop, G., Marcellino, M., andPfarrhofer, M.(2024). Investigatinggrowth-at-risk
usingamulticountrynon-parametricquantilefactormodel. JournalofBusiness&EconomicStatistics,
(forthcoming).
Cogley, T. (2002). A Simple Adaptive Measure of Core Inflation. Journal of Money, Credit and Banking,
34(1):94–113.
Cotton,C.andO’Shea,J.(2023). Forecastingcpishelterunderfallingmarket-rentgrowth. FederalReserve
BankofBostonResearchPaperSeriesCurrentPolicyPerspectivesPaper,(95664).
Cristadoro, R., Forni, M., Reichlin, L., and Veronese, G. (2005). A core inflation indicator for the euro
area. JournalofMoney,CreditandBanking,37(3):539–560.
Cutler,J.(2001). Coreinflationintheuk. Technicalreport,ExternalMPCUnitDiscussionPaper,No.3.
De Gregorio, J. (2012). Commodity prices, monetary policy, and inflation. IMF Economic Review,
60(4):600–633.
DeWinne, J.andPeersman, G.(2016). Macroeconomiceffectsofdisruptionsinglobalfoodcommodity
markets: Evidencefortheunitedstates. BrookingsPapersonEconomicActivity,2016(2):183–286.
DelleMonache,D.,DePolis,A.,andPetrella,I.(2023). Modelingandforecastingmacroeconomicdown-
siderisk. JournalofBusiness&EconomicStatistics,(forthcoming):1–27.
34Di Giovanni, J., Kalemli-Özcan, S., Silva, A., and Yildirim, M. A. (2023). Quantifying the inflationary
impact of fiscal stimulus under supply constraints. Technical Report 30892, National Bureau of
EconomicResearch.
Diebold,F.X.(1998). Elementsofforecasting. Citeseer.
Diebold, F. X. and Shin, M. (2019). Machine learning for regularized survey forecast combination:
Partially-egalitarianlassoanditsderivatives. InternationalJournalofForecasting,35(4):1679–1691.
Dimitriadis, T. and Halbleib, R. (2022). Realized quantiles. Journal of Business & Economic Statistics,
40(3):1346–1361.
Dolmas,J.etal.(2005). Trimmedmeanpceinflation. FederalReserveBankofDallasWorkingPaper,506.
Dolmas,J.etal.(2009). Excludingitemsfrompersonalconsumptionexpendituresinflation. StaffPapers,
FederalReserveBankofDallas,(2009-07).
Dow,J.P.(1993). Measuringinflationusingmultiplepriceindexes. DepartmentofEconomics,Universityof
California,Riverside.
Ehrmann,M.,Ferrucci,G.,Lenza,M.,O’Brien,D.,etal.(2018). Measuresofunderlyinginflationforthe
euroarea. EconomicBulletinArticles,4.
Eo,Y.,Uzeda,L.,andWong,B.(2023). Understandingtrendinflationthroughthelensofthegoodsand
servicessectors. JournalofAppliedEconometrics,38(1):751–766.
European Union (2020). Commission implementing regulation (EU) 2020/1148 of 31 july 2020 laying
downthemethodologicalandtechnicalspecificationsinaccordancewithregulation(EU)2016/792
of the european parliament and of the council as regards harmonised indices of consumer prices
andthehousepriceindex. OfficialJournalL252,4.8.2020,pp.12-23.
Ferrara,L.,Mogliani,M.,andSahuc,J.-G.(2022). High-frequencymonitoringofgrowthatrisk. Interna-
tionalJournalofForecasting,38(2):582–595.
Fröhling, A. and Lommatzsch, K. (2011). Output sensitivity of inflation in the euro area: Indirect evi-
dencefromdisaggregatedconsumerprices.
Gagliardone,L.andGertler,M.(2023).Oilprices,monetarypolicyandinflationsurges.TechnicalReport
31263,NationalBureauofEconomicResearch.
Gamber, E. N. and Smith, J. K. (2019). Constructing and evaluating core inflation measures from
component-levelinflationdata. JournalofForecasting,38(8):833–852.
Gao,L.,Kim,H.,andSaba,R.(2014). Howdooilpriceshocksaffectconsumerprices? EnergyEconomics,
45:313–323.
Gautier, E., Conflitti, C., Faber, R. P., Fabo, B., Fadejeva, L., Jouvanceau, V., Menz, J.-O., Messner, T.,
Petroulas,P.,Roldan-Blanco,P.,etal.(2023). Newfactsonconsumerpricerigidityintheeuroarea.
AmericanEconomicJournal: Macroeconomics,(forthcoming).
Ghysels, E., Iania, L., and Striaukas, J. (2018). Quantile-based inflation risk models. Technical Report
349.
Giglio,S.,Kelly,B.,andPruitt,S.(2016). Systemicriskandthemacroeconomy: Anempiricalevaluation.
JournalofFinancialEconomics,119(3):457–471.
Gneiting,T.(2011). Makingandevaluatingpointforecasts. JournaloftheAmericanStatisticalAssociation,
106(494):746–762.
Gordon, R. J. (1975). Alternative responses of policy to external supply shocks. Brookings Papers on
EconomicActivity,1975(1):183–206.
35GouletCoulombe,P.(2022). Aneuralphillipscurveandadeepoutputgap. AvailableatSSRN4018079.
GouletCoulombe,P.,Frenette,M.,andKlieber,K.(2023). Fromreactivetoproactivevolatilitymodeling
withhemisphereneuralnetworks. arXivpreprintarXiv:2311.16333.
Goulet Coulombe, P. and Göbel, M. (2023). Maximally machine-learnable portfolios. Available at SSRN
4428178.
GouletCoulombe,P.,Leroux,M.,Stevanovic,D.,andSurprenant,S.(2021). Macroeconomicdatatrans-
formationsmatter. InternationalJournalofForecasting,37(4):1338–1354.
Granger, C. W. and Ramanathan, R. (1984). Improved methods of combining forecasts. Journal of Fore-
casting,3(2):197–204.
Guerrieri,V.,Lorenzoni,G.,Straub,L.,andWerning,I.(2022). Macroeconomicimplicationsofcovid-19:
Cannegativesupplyshockscausedemandshortages? AmericanEconomicReview,112(5):1437–1474.
Hamilton,J.D.(2018). WhyYouShouldNeverUsetheHodrick-PrescottFilter. TheReviewofEconomics
andStatistics,100(5):831–843.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., Friedman, J. H., and Friedman, J. H. (2009). The elements of statistical learning:
datamining,inference,andprediction,volume2. Springer.
Hastie, T., Tibshirani, R., andWainwright, M.(2015). Statisticallearningwithsparsity: thelassoandgener-
alizations. CRCpress.
Hobijn, B. (2008). Commodity price movements and pce inflation. FRB New York: Current Issues in
EconomicsandFinance,14(8).
Joseph, A., Potjagailo, G., Chakraborty, C., and Kapetanios, G. (2024). Forecasting uk inflation bottom
up. InternationalJournalofForecasting,(forthcoming).
Khan,M.,Morel,L.,andSabourin,P.(2013). Thecommoncomponentofcpi: Analternativemeasureof
underlyinginflationforcanada. Technicalreport,BankofCanadaWorkingPaper.
Korobilis, D. (2017). Quantile regression forecasts of inflation under model uncertainty. International
JournalofForecasting,33(1):11–20.
Leduc,S.,Wilson,D.J.,andZhao,C.(2023). Willacoolerlabormarketslowsupercoreinflation? FRBSF
EconomicLetter,2023(18):1–6.
Lenza, M., Moutachaker, I., and Paredes, J. (2023). Density forecasts of inflation: a quantile regression
forestapproach. ECBWorkingPaper,(2830).
MacIsaac, S. (2023). What’s included in canadians’ rent? Economic and Social Reports, Statistics Canada,
3(8).
Mahedy,T.,Shapiro,A.,etal.(2017). What’sdownwithinflation? FRBSFEconomicLetter,35.
McAleer,M.andMedeiros,M.C.(2008). Realizedvolatility: Areview. Econometricreviews,27(1-3):10–45.
Medeiros, M.C., Vasconcelos, G.F., Veiga, Á., andZilberman, E.(2021). Forecastinginflationinadata-
richenvironment: thebenefitsofmachinelearningmethods.JournalofBusiness&EconomicStatistics,
39(1):98–119.
Meeks, R. and Monti, F. (2023). Heterogeneous beliefs and the phillips curve. Journal of Monetary Eco-
nomics,139:41–54.
Morana, C. (2007). A structural common factor approach to core inflation estimation and forecasting.
AppliedEconomicsLetters,14(3):163–169.
36Morris,J.S.(2015). Functionalregression. AnnualReviewofStatisticsandItsApplication,2:321–359.
Nakamura,E.andSteinsson,J.(2008). Fivefactsaboutprices: Areevaluationofmenucostmodels. The
QuarterlyJournalofEconomics,123(4):1415–1464.
Nickel, C., Koester, G., andLis, E.(2022). Inflationdevelopmentsintheeuroareasincetheonsetofthe
pandemic. Intereconomics,57(2):69–75.
Peersman, G. (2022). International food commodity prices and missing (dis) inflation in the euro area.
ReviewofEconomicsandStatistics,104(1):85–100.
Pfarrhofer,M.(2022). Modelingtailrisksofinflationusingunobservedcomponentquantileregressions.
JournalofEconomicDynamicsandControl,143:104493.
Powell,J.H.(2022). Inflationandthelabormarket. SpeechattheHutchinsCenteronFiscalandMone-
taryPolicy,BrookingsInstitution,WashingtonDC.
Quast,J.andWolters,M.H.(2022).Reliablereal-timeoutputgapestimatesbasedonamodifiedhamilton
filter. JournalofBusiness&EconomicStatistics,40(1):152–168.
Ravazzolo, F. and Vahey, S. P. (2009). Measuring Core Inflation in Australia with Disaggregate Ensem-
bles. ProceedingsofRBA2009Conference,pages178–195.
Rich,R.W.,Verbrugge,R.J.,andZaman,S.(2022). Adjustingmedianandtrimmed-meaninflationrates
forbiasbasedonskewness. EconomicCommentary,(2022-05).
Sax, C. and Eddelbuettel, D. (2018). Seasonal adjustment by x-13arima-seats in r. Journal of Statistical
Software,87:1–17.
StatisticCanada(2023). Sometimesrentismorethanjustrent. Availableat: https://www.statcan.
gc.ca/o1/en/plus/4360-sometimes-rent-more-just-rent.
Stock, J.H.andWatson, M.W.(2004). Combinationforecastsofoutputgrowthinaseven-countrydata
set. Journalofforecasting,23(6):405–430.
Stock, J. H. and Watson, M. W. (2016). Core Inflation and Trend Inflation. Review of Economics and
Statistics,98(4):770–784.
Stock,J.H.andWatson,M.W.(2020). Slackandcyclicallysensitiveinflation. JournalofMoney,Creditand
Banking,52(S2):393–428.
Tanaka, G., Yamane, T., Héroux, J. B., Nakane, R., Kanazawa, N., Takeda, S., Numata, H., Nakano, D.,
andHirose,A.(2019). Recentadvancesinphysicalreservoircomputing: Areview. NeuralNetworks,
115:100–123.
Tiwari, A. K., Shahbaz, M., Hasim, H. M., and Elheddad, M. M. (2019). Analysing the spillover of
inflationinselectedeuro-areacountries. JournalofQuantitativeEconomics,17:551–577.
Wang, X., Hyndman, R. J., Li, F., and Kang, Y. (2023). Forecast combinations: an over 50-year review.
InternationalJournalofForecasting,39(4):1518–1547.
Wang, X., Kang, Y., and Li, F. (2022). Another look at forecast trimming for combinations: Robustness,
accuracyanddiversity. arXivpreprintarXiv:2208.00139.
37A Appendix
A.1 Additional Results
Table5: ForecastingPerformanceofAlbacorefortheEuroArea
2010m1-2019m12 2020m1-2023m12
h → 1 3 6 12 24 1 3 6 12 24
Level2(K =12)
Albacore 1.00 0.98 0.94 0.84 0.75 0.96 0.90 0.96 0.99 1.02
comps
Albacore 0.98 0.95 0.90 0.84 0.78 1.02 0.97 0.95 0.94 0.95
ranks
Level3(K =39)
Albacore 0.99 0.98 0.93 0.88 0.81 1.00 1.00 1.01 1.00 1.07
comps
Albacore 1.00 0.98 0.90 0.85 0.85 1.02 0.98 0.97 0.95 0.94
ranks
Level4(K =92)
Albacore 1.00 1.03 0.96 1.00 0.85 0.99 0.96 1.06 0.97 1.04
comps
Albacore 1.02 1.00 0.92 0.87 0.87 0.95 0.94 0.93 0.93 0.91
ranks
Benchmarks
Xbm, (w =0) 1.00 0.98 0.95 0.90 0.78 0.97 0.96 0.98 1.02 1.09
t 0
Xbm+ 0.98 0.95 0.92 0.98 1.00 0.95 0.90 0.93 0.97 1.00
t
Xbm+,(w =0) 0.99 0.97 0.91 0.86 0.80 0.98 1.00 1.02 0.98 1.05
t 0
Notes: Thetablepresentsrootmeansquareerror(RMSE)relativetoXb tm = [HICPtHICPXtHICPtrimt]withintercept. There-
mainingbenchmarksare: Xb tm =[HICPtHICPXtHICPtrimt]withoutanintercept(i.e.,w0 =0),Xb tm+withandwithoutanin-
tercept.Numbersinboldindicatethebestmodelforeachlevelandeachhorizonineachoftheout-of-sampleperiods.Numbers
highlightedingreenshowthebestmodelperhorizonandout-of-sampleperiodacrosslevels.
38Figure8: QualbacorefortheUS(h = 3)
(a)ComparisonofComponentWeights (b)TimeSeriesComparisonofQualbacore
comps
(c)ComparisonofRankWeights (d)TimeSeriesComparisonofQualbacore
ranks
Notes:Allweightsarebasedonmodelstrainedfrom2001m1to2019m12.Wepresentlevel6forQualbacorecompsandlevel3forQualbacoreranks.Intheupperleft
panelweaggregatethecomponentweightstothelowestlevelofdisaggregation(level2)foreachquantile.
39Table6: ForecastingPerformanceofAlbacorefortheUSwithDifferentMovingAverages
2010m1-2019m12 2020m1-2023m12
h → 1 3 6 12 24 1 3 6 12 24
Albacore Level2(K =15)
comps
MoM 1.06 1.13 1.23 1.36 1.38 0.92 0.97 0.82 0.74 0.96
QoQ 1.02 1.02 1.08 1.13 1.12 0.94 0.89 0.85 0.63 0.88
6Mo6M 1.06 1.09 1.12 1.12 1.05 0.95 0.94 0.85 0.58 0.87
YoY 1.05 1.02 1.08 1.08 0.97 1.01 1.03 0.91 0.73 1.01
Albacore Level3(K =50)
comps
MoM 1.03 1.07 1.25 1.25 1.30 0.91 0.92 0.81 0.75 0.91
QoQ 1.02 1.05 1.15 1.14 1.06 0.91 0.87 0.78 0.75 1.01
6Mo6M 1.06 1.07 1.08 1.14 1.03 0.89 0.91 0.88 0.77 1.10
YoY 1.05 1.03 1.05 1.05 0.85 1.01 1.05 0.94 0.88 1.15
Albacore Level6(K =215)
comps
MoM 1.06 1.21 1.36 1.26 1.26 0.94 0.96 0.90 0.72 0.92
QoQ 1.09 1.03 1.15 1.19 1.16 0.96 0.91 0.82 0.71 0.99
6Mo6M 1.05 1.02 1.14 1.26 1.14 0.97 0.97 0.68 0.74 1.04
YoY 1.05 1.01 1.17 1.10 1.00 0.90 0.96 0.97 0.88 1.19
Albacore Level2(K =15)
ranks
MoM 1.03 1.01 1.07 1.08 1.03 0.87 0.80 0.61 0.56 0.71
QoQ 1.01 0.97 0.99 0.98 0.87 0.84 0.74 0.57 0.59 0.69
6Mo6M 1.02 1.00 0.99 0.93 0.83 0.83 0.71 0.67 0.64 0.74
YoY 1.02 0.99 0.95 0.83 0.73 0.87 0.81 0.70 0.68 0.81
Albacore Level3(K =50)
ranks
MoM 0.98 0.93 0.95 0.91 0.80 0.85 0.78 0.63 0.58 0.65
QoQ 0.97 0.92 0.93 0.87 0.73 0.81 0.76 0.61 0.56 0.63
6Mo6M 1.00 0.96 0.94 0.85 0.72 0.86 0.78 0.65 0.60 0.64
YoY 1.01 0.96 0.90 0.76 0.66 0.88 0.81 0.65 0.61 0.71
Albacore Level6(K =215)
ranks
MoM 1.01 0.92 0.88 0.85 0.80 0.80 0.81 0.70 0.62 0.68
QoQ 0.98 0.91 0.88 0.84 0.77 0.86 0.82 0.70 0.62 0.67
6Mo6M 0.99 0.93 0.93 0.85 0.75 0.88 0.86 0.73 0.62 0.65
YoY 1.00 0.96 0.93 0.85 0.70 0.94 0.90 0.75 0.66 0.63
Notes:Thetablepresentsrootmeansquareerror(RMSE)relativetoXb tm =[PCEtPCEcoretPCEtrimt]withintercept.Thetransforma-
tionsoftheregressorsare:month-over-month(MoM),quarter-over-quarter(QoQ),6-months-over-6-months(6Mo6M),year-over-year
(YoY).Numbersinboldindicatethebestmodelforeachlevelandeachhorizonineachoftheout-of-sampleperiods. Numbershigh-
lightedingreenshowthebestmodelperhorizonandout-of-sampleperiodacrosslevels.
40Table7: ForecastingPerformanceofBenchmarksfortheUSwithDifferentMovingAverages
2010m1-2019m12 2020m1-2023m12
h → 1 3 6 12 24 1 3 6 12 24
Xbm
t
MoM 0.96 0.97 0.97 0.98 1.00 0.94 1.12 1.07 0.99 1.03
QoQ 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
6Mo6M 1.03 1.02 1.02 1.01 0.98 0.97 1.01 1.00 1.01 1.00
YoY 1.03 1.01 1.01 0.98 0.97 1.05 1.19 1.13 0.96 1.03
Xbm, (w =0)
t 0
MoM 0.97 1.00 1.04 1.09 1.03 0.87 0.95 0.86 0.84 0.94
QoQ 1.00 0.99 1.03 1.03 0.96 0.91 0.89 0.79 0.80 0.93
6Mo6M 1.04 1.02 1.02 1.01 0.90 0.86 0.84 0.81 0.80 0.93
YoY 1.02 0.99 0.99 0.93 0.82 0.92 0.96 0.90 0.86 0.99
Xbm+
t
MoM 0.96 0.97 0.98 0.99 1.01 0.94 1.18 1.11 1.01 1.05
QoQ 1.01 1.04 1.04 1.04 1.02 1.37 1.48 1.18 1.14 1.09
6Mo6M 1.05 1.06 1.07 1.09 1.01 1.13 1.19 1.08 1.03 1.08
YoY 0.98 0.96 0.97 1.02 1.00 0.89 0.86 0.84 0.98 1.05
Xbm+,(w =0)
t 0
MoM 0.97 1.00 1.05 1.09 1.03 0.87 1.01 0.88 0.86 0.95
QoQ 1.02 1.04 1.07 1.07 0.97 1.10 1.15 0.86 0.87 0.96
6Mo6M 1.07 1.06 1.07 1.05 0.91 0.95 0.88 0.78 0.79 0.95
YoY 0.99 0.96 0.97 0.97 0.85 0.83 0.79 0.69 0.74 0.88
Notes: Thetablepresentsrootmeansquareerror(RMSE)relativetoXb tm = [PCEtPCEcoretPCEtrimt]withintercept. Theremainingbench-
marksare: Xb tm = [PCEtPCEcoretPCEtrimt]withoutanintercept(i.e.,w0 =0),Xb tm+withandwithoutanintercept. Thetransformationsof
theregressorsare:month-over-month(MoM),quarter-over-quarter(QoQ),6-months-over-6-months(6Mo6M),year-over-year(YoY).Numbers
inboldindicatethebestmodelforeachlevelandeachhorizonineachoftheout-of-sampleperiods.Numbershighlightedingreenshowthebest
modelperhorizonandout-of-sampleperiodacrosslevels.
41A.2 Embracing Sparsity?
The main analysis focuses on the most disaggregated level as it often yields the best prediction results,
anditisthishigh-dimensionalspaceinwhichourpenalizedregressionencountersthelargestsandboxto
explorenon-trivialpredictabilitypatterns(i.e.,itemsarenotforcedintogroupsex-ante). However,Sec-
tion3.1’sforecastingresultsshowthathighlyaggregatedregressionscanalsoprovideimpressiveresults,
especiallyfortheperiodscoveringtheinflationsurge(seeTable1). Thisisachievedwithouttheneedto
thinkdeeplyabouttheregularizationschemeanditsstrength. Thegroupingitselfcanbeinterpretedas
regularization in the form of constraining the weights of all the subcomponent to equal the weight of a
higher-level component, respectively shrink them towards the official PCE weights in lockstep. While
theperformanceandpracticalityofsuchregressionsisdesirable,theallocationofcomponentstheypro-
vide,canmapintoratherunrealisticconsumptionweights. Still,theirsurprisingperformancewarrants
aninvestigation.
Figure9: Albacore forAggregatedComponents
comps
(a)ComparisonofComponentWeights (b)TimeSeriesComparison
Notes:WeshowAlbacorecompsinlevel2andAlbacoreranksinlevel3.Resultsarebasedonmodelstrainedfrom2001m1to2019m12.
AscanbeseeninFigure9(rightpanel),whenassemblingcomponentsattheirhighestlevelofaggre-
gation (level 2), Albacore features high predictive qualities. In line with Albacore , it provides
comps ranks
early signs of the inflation surge following the outbreak of the Covid-19 pandemic. In contrast to offi-
cially reported inflation measures, Albacore shows a rather small and short-lived dip in 2020m4,
comps
which turns into a fast and strong run-up thereafter. It peaks in 2022m2, indicating the onset of the
disinflationary process early. While other core inflation measures remain elevated throughout 2022,
Albacore inlevel2declinesratherfastandlandsat2.5%in2023m12.
comps
The left panel reveals that Albacore gives a rather sparse solution in this case. Most weight
comps
gets assigned to items related to health (40%), followed by food services, and other nondurable goods.
7 out of 15 components are entirely excluded from the aggregate. Those include volatile items such
as food goods and energy, as well as lagging indicators such as shelter, and slow-growing ones such
as durable goods and clothing. Clearly, the resulting consumption basket is hardly representative of a
42plausible consumer. Moreover, relying on a few components makes Albacore highly dependent
comps
on developments in certain sectors and sector-specific shocks may thus overly influence its dynamics,
raisingconcernsaboutthegeneralizationofsuchanallocation. Nonetheless,itsforecastingperformance
isundeniable,andassuch,isapricepressureindicatorworthkeepinganeyeon.
A.3 Albacore for Canada
In addition to the analysis on the US and the EA, we introduce Albacore for Canada. Following our
main procedure, we present its forecasting performance in Table 8, and provide detailed insights on
the proposed measure in Figure 10. The main challenge with the Canadian data is its variable quality,
especially when looking at intra-year disaggregated price series. We use CPI data taken from Statistics
Canada in level 3, 4, and 5, implying a combination of 19, 49, and 87 components, respectively. We
remove 11 components in level 4 and 26 components in level 5 from the Canadian price data based
on the fact that these items experience a substantial number of zero monthly growth rates, which may
lead to model instabilites and includes little information to learn from. Competitors for the Canadian
Albacore are the officially reported CPI rate, CPI excluding energy and food (i.e., core CPI), CPI-trim,
CPI-medianandCPIx8.
Consistent with the findings in Section 3, convex combinations of existing core inflation measures
demonstratecompetitivepredictiveperformances. Yet,Albacoreiseitherbroadlyinlinewiththebench-
marks(forpre-Covidobservations)orsuperior(forthepost-Covidsample),withincreasingaccuracyfor
higher-orderforecasts. IntheCanadiancase,wefindthattheinclusionofaninterceptinthepre-Covid
sample is crucial, making it difficult for alternative models to yield improvements. When abstract-
ing from benchmarks with intercept, we find consistent gains of Albacore over the benchmarks, with
Albacore toppingthelistforallhorizons. Notably,thesefindingsreverseforthepost-pandemicera.
ranks
Modelswithinterceptgiveinferiorresults,andAlbacore emergesasthebestperformer. Itdisplays
comps
superior predictive accuracy across all horizons with highest gains for the medium term (h ∈ {6,12})
andlevel4.
Based on these results, our detailed analysis focuses on h = 12 and level 4 (estimated using data
up to December 2019). In-sample, all core inflation measures show similar trends, closely tracking the
2%target. DeviationsofAlbacore andcoreCPIfromtrimming-basedapproachescanbeobserved
comps
during the GFC, with the former downward trending already in 2008 followed by the trimmed mean
and Albacore in early-/mid-2009. Moreover, our proposed measures exhibit smooth trajectories
ranks
compared to their well-established counterparts. Out-of-sample, both Albacore and Albacore
ranks comps
demonstrateforward-lookingqualities. Albacore takestheleadinshowingrobustinflationaryten-
comps
dencies (already in 2020m7), as well as in indicating an easing of the strong upward pressures at the
beginning of 2022. While benchmarks remain elevated until the end of 2022, Albacore reaches the
comps
turning point in 2022m7 and starts descending thereafter. Notably, Albacore for Canada is less es-
ranks
tranged with trimmed mean inflation than in the US. Yet, it moves above target in the course of 2020,
when officially reported series are still well below. We attribute these dynamics to Albacore ’s fa-
ranks
43Table8: ForecastingPerformanceofAlbacoreforCanada
2010m1-2019m12 2020m1-2023m12
h → 1 3 6 12 24 1 3 6 12 24
Level3(K =19)
Albacore 1.02 1.04 1.05 1.13 1.37 0.83 0.73 0.68 0.63 0.85
comps
Albacore 1.01 1.01 1.05 1.13 1.15 0.84 0.78 0.74 0.74 0.78
ranks
Level4(K =49)
Albacore 1.05 1.10 1.12 1.23 1.24 0.82 0.69 0.54 0.47 0.72
comps
Albacore 1.00 1.00 1.07 1.15 1.18 0.89 0.82 0.68 0.67 0.76
ranks
Level5(K =87)
Albacore 1.02 1.09 1.10 1.22 1.24 0.82 0.73 0.69 0.55 0.71
comps
Albacore 1.00 1.01 1.05 1.12 1.27 0.90 0.83 0.76 0.71 0.74
ranks
Benchmarks
Xbm, (w =0) 1.03 1.06 1.10 1.34 1.51 0.83 0.77 0.72 0.78 0.86
t 0
Xbm+ 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00 1.00
t
Xbm+,(w =0) 1.01 1.04 1.08 1.24 1.35 0.84 0.77 0.74 0.80 0.85
t 0
Notes:Thetablepresentsrootmeansquareerror(RMSE)relativetoXb tm =[CPItCPIcoretCPItrimt]withinter-
cept. Theremainingbenchmarksare: Xb tm =[CPItCPIcoretCPItrimt]withoutanintercept(i.e.,w0 =0),Xb tm+
withandwithoutanintercept. Numbersinboldindicatethebestmodelforeachlevelandeachhorizonineach
oftheout-of-sampleperiods.Numbershighlightedingreenshowthebestmodelperhorizonandout-of-sample
periodacrosslevels.
miliar asymmetric trimming. As shown in Figure 10b, it gives a rather sparse solution favoring the
60th percentile, similar to our European results. After continuing its upward trajectory until mid-2022,
Albacore decreasesfrom2022m10onwards.
ranks
At the end of the horizon, all measures point toward a slowdown of the disinflationary process.
While rebounds for headline CPI are mainly attributable to positive base effects in gasoline prices, the
main driver for core is shelter prices. Similarly, Albacore is affected by strong upward pressures
comps
from rents as it allocates a sizable amount of weight to the corresponding component (see Figure 10a).
UnlikeintheUS,shelterpricesinCanadaaremoretimelyintrackinginflationdynamics. Rentalprop-
erties typically come with amenities like parking, appliances, heating, and air conditioning. As such,
rent is influenced by a broad range of factors, including energy costs as well as the prevailing inter-
est rate environment, and offers a comprehensive measure of household needs (Statistic Canada, 2023;
MacIsaac, 2023). Since Albacore assigns negligible weight to food and energy components, up-
comps
weighting rent helps to buffer against the high volatility associated with utility costs without entirely
eliminatingtheirinfluence. Lastly,thetransformedseriesforrent(aftertheapplicationofvarioustreat-
ments,seeAppendixA.5)isparticularlysmooth,closetoitsbehaviorbeforethemethodologicalchange
of2019. GiventhelevelofnoiseintheCanadiandata,rentsmaycaptureareliablelow-frequencymove-
ment that is obscured in other series. Given this and many other challenges with the Canadian data,
cautionshouldbeexertedindrawingmoresweepingeconomicconclusions.
44Figure10: AlbacoreforCanada
(a)ComparisoninComponentWeights (b)ComparisoninRankWeights
Notes:FormoredetailswerefertoFigure1.Country-specificchangescanbesummarizedasfollows:ForCanada,wepresentAlbacoreinlevel4.Forthetrimmed
mean,wechoosetheCPI-trim.Thegreenshadedareamarkstheexcludedshareofmonthlypricechangesasissuggestedbythetrimmedmeanbeforereweighting
(20%ofthelowertailand20%oftheuppertail).DetailsonthelabelingcanbefoundinAppendixA.5.
45A.4 Properties
Table9: PropertiesofUnderlyingInflationMeasuresfortheUS
Inflationseries Bias Volatility Coefficientofvariation Lead/lagcorrelation
Full-sample Pre-Covid Full-sample Pre-Covid Full-sample Pre-Covid Full-sample Pre-Covid
3Mo3M
CorePCE -0.12 -0.09 0.57 0.36 0.59 0.39 0 0
TrimmedMean(FedDallas) 0.02 0.14 0.42 0.29 0.41 0.27 -8 0
Coreexcl.housing 2.35 2.37 5.45 1.83 2.52 0.80 1 2
MedianCPI(FedCleveland) 0.59 0.59 0.61 0.38 0.46 0.29 -8 -9
TrimmedMean(FedCleveland) 0.33 0.31 0.63 0.40 0.53 0.34 0 0
StickyCore(FedAtlanta) 0.51 0.56 0.57 0.37 0.45 0.28 -9 -11
Albacoreranks -0.03 0.03 0.40 0.22 0.40 0.21 0 0
Albacorecomps -0.08 0.00 0.48 0.34 0.49 0.34 0 0
YoY
CorePCE -0.13 -0.11 0.69 0.39 0.49 0.22 0 0
TrimmedMean(FedDallas) 0.01 0.13 0.56 0.46 0.37 0.23 -7 -9
Coreexcl.housing 2.42 2.43 2.93 2.03 0.91 0.46 2 3
MedianCPI(FedCleveland) 0.55 0.56 0.82 0.61 0.43 0.25 -8 -11
TrimmedMean(FedCleveland) 0.30 0.29 0.82 0.55 0.47 0.25 -4 -6
StickyCore(FedAtlanta) 0.48 0.53 0.74 0.59 0.40 0.24 -8 -12
Albacoreranks -0.04 0.01 0.54 0.28 0.36 0.15 0 -1
Albacorecomps -0.09 0.00 0.60 0.50 0.41 0.26 0 2
Notes:Cellsshadedingreenindicatethethreebestperformingmodelsforeachcriterion.Theevaluationisbasedonthesamplerangingfrom2000m1to2023m12forthefullsample
andfrom2000m1to2019m12forthepre-Covidcase.Biasisdeterminedasthedifferencebetweenthelong-runaverageoftherespectiveseriesandPCEheadline.Volatilityrefers
tothestandarddeviationofeachseriesrelativetothestandarddeviationofheadline.Coefficientofvariationistheratiobetweenstandarddeviationandlong-runaverageofeach
measure.Positive(negative)numbersforthelead/lagcorrelationrefertoleads(lags)withthehighestcross-correlationbetweeneachmeasureandPCEheadline.
Table10: PropertiesofUnderlyingInflationMeasuresfortheEuroArea
Inflationseries Bias Volatility Coefficientofvariation Lead/lagcorrelation
Full-sample Pre-Covid Full-sample Pre-Covid Full-sample Pre-Covid Full-sample Pre-Covid
PoP
HICPX -0.46 -0.29 0.51 0.40 0.70 0.40 -6 0
TrimmedMean30% -0.21 -0.07 0.65 0.55 0.77 0.48 0 0
HICPexcl.energy -0.19 -0.11 0.67 0.49 0.78 0.44 -6 0
HICPexcl.energy&unprfood -0.25 -0.15 0.64 0.44 0.77 0.40 -6 0
Supercore -0.24 -0.10 0.55 0.36 0.68 0.33 -6 -2
PCCIexcl.energy 5.29 4.89 1.44 1.00 0.43 0.21 -5 -1
PCCI 5.92 5.43 1.68 1.24 0.47 0.24 -1 0
Albacoreranks -0.17 -0.01 0.46 0.26 0.56 0.23 -2 -1
Albacorecomps -0.26 -0.06 0.49 0.42 0.62 0.38 0 0
YoY
HICPX -0.48 -0.29 0.55 0.46 0.63 0.31 -5 -6
TrimmedMean30% -0.23 -0.07 0.70 0.66 0.70 0.39 -3 -3
HICPexcl.energy -0.22 -0.13 0.73 0.59 0.73 0.36 -4 -2
HICPexcl.energy&unprfood -0.26 -0.15 0.70 0.56 0.71 0.34 -4 -2
Supercore -0.27 -0.11 0.61 0.46 0.64 0.29 -4 -5
PCCIexcl.energy -0.25 -0.04 0.44 0.36 0.44 0.21 0 0
PCCI -0.09 0.10 0.51 0.45 0.48 0.24 2 2
Albacoreranks -0.18 -0.01 0.52 0.34 0.53 0.21 -3 -5
Albacorecomps -0.28 -0.06 0.54 0.53 0.58 0.33 -3 1
Notes:FormoredetailswerefertoTable9.ValuesarerelativetoHICP.
46A.5 Data Wrangling and Labeling of Subcomponents
We employ the Census X-13ARIMA-SEATS Seasonal Adjustement Program provided in the R package
seasonal (Sax and Eddelbuettel, 2018) to extract seasonal variation present in the EA and Canadian
componentsdata. FortheCanadianpricedata,weincludeanoutlierdetectionstepafterremovingsea-
sonal patterns to account for sudden, one-time price changes that might obscure the underlying trend.
Theseoutliersmayarisefromvariousfactors,suchaschangesintaxes(e.g.,thetobaccotaxinCanada),
methodologicalshifts,andvariationsinsamplingmethods;particularlyStatisticsCanada’seffortstoup-
dateitssamplingprocessinrecentyears. Thelatterleadstohighvolatilityinthoseseriesthatswitched
from being updated yearly (or infrequently) to monthly, and structural breaks in others (e.g., observed
for rent in 201915). For cases of heavy irregularities, we substitute the erratic high-level component
withitslower-levelcounterpart. Thismainlyconcernsserieswithasignificantnumberofzeromonthly
growth rates. For example, we find more than 17 components at level 4 exhibiting more than 5 cu-
mulative years of zero monthly growth rates between 2000 and 2019. Services related to household
furnishings and equipment show 14.75 years of cumulative zeros over a 20 year span. As a result, we
remove11componentsatlevel4,and26componentsatlevel5.
Table11: LabelingofSubcomponentsintheUS(Level2)
Abbreviation Code Label Aggregate
Vehicles DMOTRG Motorvehiclesandparts Goods
House.G DFDHRG Furnishingsanddurablehouseholdequipment Goods
Rec.G DREQRG Recreationalgoodsandvehicles Goods
O.dur.G DODGRG Otherdurablegoods Goods
Food.G DFXARG Foodandbeveragespurchasedforoff-premisesconsumption Food
Cothing DCLORG Clothingandfootwear Goods
Energy DGOERG Gasolineandotherenergygoods Energy
O.ndur.G DONGRG Othernondurablegoods Goods
Shelter DHUTRG Housingandutilities Shelter
Health DHLCRG Healthcare Other
Transpo DTRSRG Transportationservices Other
Rec.S DRCARG Recreationservices Services
Food.S DFSARG Foodservicesandaccommodations Services
Fin.S DIFSRG Financialservicesandinsurance Services
Other.S DOTSRG Otherservices Services
Notes:LabelingandgroupingisbasedontheBEA’sNationalIncomeandProductsAccount(NIPA)table2.4.4(PriceIndexesforPer-
sonalConsumptionExpendituresbyTypeofProduct). Weightstoaggregatelowertohigherlevelsofaggregationaretakenfromthe
NIPAtable2.4.6(RealPersonalConsumptionExpendituresbyTypeofProduct).
15DetailsonthenewapproachtoestimatetheCPI’srentcomponentcanbefoundhere.
47Table12: LabelingofSubcomponentsintheEA(Level2)
Abbreviation Code Label Aggregate
Food CP01 Foodandnon-alcoholicbeverages Food
Alcohol CP02 Alcoholicbeverages,tobaccoandnarcotics Food
Clothing CP03 Clothingandfootwear NEIG/Services
Housing CP04(ex. CP045) Housingandwater NEIG/Services
Furnishings CP05 Furnishings,householdequipment NEIG/Services
androutinehouseholdmaintenance
Health CP06 Health NEIG/Services
Transpo CP07(ex. CP0722) Transport NEIG/Services
Comm. CP08 Communication NEIG/Services
Recrea. CP09 Recreationandculture NEIG/Services
Education CP10 Education Services
Restaurants CP11 Restaurantsandhotels Services
Other CP12 Miscellaneousgoodsandservices NEIG/Services
Energy CP045,CP0722 Energy Energy
Notes: LabelingisbasedontheCOICOPclassifciationtakenfromEurostat. Level2referstothemaindivisions,i.e.,two-digits
level.TheaggregatesareclassifiedasissuggestedbyEurostat’s“SpecialAggregates”,i.e.,Energy,NEIG-Non-EnergyIndustrial
Goods,Services,Food(includingalcoholandtobacco).Theexactallocationofdisaggregatedcomponentsandfurtherdetailsare
availableinRAMON(http://ec.europa.eu/eurostat/ramon). Weightstoaggregatelowertohigherlevelsofaggrega-
tionarebasedonexpendituresharesandtakenfromEurostat(prc_hicp_inw).
Table13: LabelingofSubcomponentsinCanada(Level3)
Abbreviation Code Label
Food v41690975 Foodpurchasedfromstores
Restaurants v41691046 Foodpurchasedfromrestaurants
Rent v41691051 Rentedaccommodation
Property v41691055 Ownedaccommodation
Utilities v41691062 Water,fuelandelectricity
Housing v41691068 Householdoperations
Furnishing v41691087 Householdfurnishingsandequipment
Clothing v41691109 Clothing
Footwear v41691113 Footwear
Adornments v41691118 Clothingaccessories,watchesandjewellery
Textiles v41691123 Clothingmaterial,notionsandservices
Privatetrans v41691129 Privatetransportation
Publictrans v41691146 Publictransportation
Health v41691154 Healthcare
Grooming v41691163 Personalcare
Recreation v41691171 Recreation
Education v41691197 Educationandreading
Alcohol v41691207 Alcoholicbeverages
Tobacco v41691216 Tobaccoproductsandsmokers’supplies
Notes: LabelingisbasedontheConsumerPriceIndexsurveyclassifciationtakenfromStatis-
ticCanada. Level3referstothemaindivisions,i.e.,majorgroup. Weexcludedv1043024072,
Recreational cannabis (201812=100), since the component was introduced in December 2018
(i.e., legalisation of cannabis). The exact allocation of disaggregated components and fur-
therdetailsareavailableatStatisticCanada’swebsite(Basket weights of the Consumer
Price Index).
48