GENERICCOLORIZEDJOURNAL,VOL.XX,NO.XX,XXXX2017 1
Opinion Dynamics for Utility Maximizing Agents: Exploring the
Impact of Resource Penalty
Prashil Wankhede1, Nirabhra Mandal2, Sonia Mart´ınez2 and Pavankumar Tallapragada1
Abstract—We propose a continuous-time nonlinear stubbornness and social influencing capabilities of an agent
model of opinion dynamics with utility-maximizing agents also depend on its relative resources within the social group.
connected via a social influence network. A distinguish-
LiteratureReview: The earliest models of opinion dynamics
ing feature of the proposed model is the inclusion of an
are the French-DeGroot (FD) [1], [2] and Abelson [3] mod-
opinion-dependent resource-penalty term in the utilities,
whichlimitstheagentsfromholdingopinionsoflargemag- els, which are consensus dynamics. Taylor’s model [4] and
nitude.Theproposedutilityfunctionsalsoaccountforhow the Friedkin-Johnsen (FJ) model [5] expand upon consensus
the relative resources within the social group affect both dynamicsbyintroducingstubborn/prejudicedagentstocapture
an agent’s stubbornness and social influence. Each agent the opinion cleavage phenomenon. These models assume that
myopicallyseekstomaximizeitsutilitybyrevisingitsopin-
the topology of the social network is constant. In contrast,
ion in the gradient ascent direction of its utility function,
thus leading to the proposed opinion dynamics. We show the Hegselmann-Krause (HK) model [6] considers a variable
that,foranyarbitrarysocialinfluencenetwork,opinionsare social network topology, where an agent’s opinion is influ-
ultimately bounded. For networks with weak antagonistic enced only by those within a certain confidence bound. The
relations,weshowthatthereexistsagloballyexponentially
Altafini model [7] explores different opinion behaviors in the
stable equilibrium using contraction theory. We establish
presenceofantagonisticrelationsbetweenagents,usingsigned
conditionsfortheexistenceofconsensusequilibriumand
analyzetherelativedominanceoftheagentsatconsensus. graphs. Gossip-based models, such as the Deffuant-Weisbuch
Wealsoconductagame-theoreticanalysisoftheunderly- (DW) model [8], introduce asynchronous interactions, where
ing opinion formation game, including on Nash equilibria a random pair of agents update opinions at each time step.
and on prices of anarchy in terms of satisfaction ratios.
For an in-depth summary of the above models, we refer the
Additionally, we also investigate the oscillatory behavior
readers to [9]–[11]. These fundamental models serve as the
of opinions in a two-agent scenario. Finally, simulations
illustrateourfindings. foundationformanyothersintheliterature.Someexamplesof
recentmodelsincludethediscrete-timeversionsoftheAltafini
Index Terms—Opinion dynamics, Multi-agent systems,
model with time-varying signed networks [12], [13]. The
Utilitymaximization,Gametheory.
work [14] proposes the affine boomerang opinion dynamics
model with asynchronous opinion updating, incorporating the
phenomenon of the boomerang effect into the dynamics.
I. INTRODUCTION
Unlike [7], [12], [13], in this model [14], the opinions do not
OPINION dynamics deals with the modeling and math- converge to zero if the network does not satisfy a structural
ematical analysis of how beliefs and ideas evolve and balance property, but rather exhibits bounded fluctuations.
spread within social groups or networks over time. As collec- Reference [15] proposes the expressed-private-opinion model
tive opinions have far-reaching implications in diverse sectors in which every agent’s private opinion is influenced by the
suchaspolicy,publichealth,sociology,financeoreconomics, expressed opinions of its neighbors. The concept of social
it is paramount to understand their drivers and consequences. power was first introduced in [1] in order to identify the
Even for smaller groups, comprehending opinion forming is most influential agent in the social network. The DeGroot-
a necessary first step toward the management of mixed multi- Friedkin (DF) model [16] integrates the opinion formation
agent groups, their decision making and subsequent dynamic process with social power evolution through a reflected self-
interactions. While many simpler opinion dynamic models appraisal mechanism. A generalized DF model was proposed
have been developed, modeling and analysis of networked in [17] and an extension of the DF model to stubborn agents
rational agents who react to neighbors’ influence remains was proposed in [18].
limited.Inthiswork,wepayparticularattentiontothesetting The modeling of opinion dynamics through a game-
where the expressed opinions are limited by the (economic, theoreticorautilitymaximizationapproachisstillinitsearly
social or time) resources of an agent within a group. We stages, with only a limited number of works published thus
capture this in our model by including a resource penalty far. One such model with stubborn agents, presented in [19],
term in the utility functions. In the proposed utility functions, usesabestresponsedynamicsframeworkinwhicheveryagent
seeks to minimize a cost function. A game theoretic analysis
1Prashil Wankhede and Pavankumar Tallapragada are with the of the FJ-model was carried out in [20]. In a recent study
Department of Electrical Engineering, Indian Institute of Science. [21], a dynamic influence maximization game is explored,
{{prashilw, pavant}@iisc.ac.in}
whereasetofcompetingplayersallocatetheirfixedresources
2Nirabhra Mandal and Sonia Mart´ınez are with the Department of
over certain individuals (who hold opinions about players)
Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering, University of California, San
Diego.{{nmandal, soniamd}@ucsd.edu} to maximize their utilities in the long term. Reference [22]
4202
rpA
7
]YS.ssee[
1v21940.4042:viXra2 GENERICCOLORIZEDJOURNAL,VOL.XX,NO.XX,XXXX2017
performs a game-theoretical analysis of the asynchronous HK boring agents with whom it has antagonistic relationships. A
model. The work [23] captures the co-evolution of opinions special case of weak antagonistic relationships is one where
and actions taken by the agents, where these employ best antagonistic relationships are absent in the social network.
response dynamics to choose their actions. The work [24] 5) In the case where antagonistic relationships are absent,
utilizes a continuous-time non-linear opinion dynamics model we bound the Price of Anarchy in terms of the satisfaction
totunethemutualcooperativebehaviorofagentsinarepeated ratios to quantify the inefficiency of the unique Nash equi-
game. Within this framework, agents make strategic decisions librium. The satisfaction ratio of an agent at a given opinion
relying upon rationality and reciprocity. Another approach, profile of all agents is the ratio of the utility received by the
detailed in [25], introduces a discrete-time opinion dynamics agent at this opinion profile to the maximum possible utility;
model with a game-theoretic structure where the agents incur thusquantifyinghow“satisfied”thatagentiswiththatopinion
a combination of conformity and manipulation costs based on profile. Using these bounds, we show that if agents opinions
the opinions. The aim of each agent is to minimize this cost. converge to a consensus then it is a socially optimal outcome.
Exploration of how agents’ resources impact their opinions 6) We analyze oscillatory and periodic opinion behavior.
and social influencing capabilities is currently an open ques- We show that it is necessary for an agent to be contrarian
tion in the opinion dynamics literature. Motivated by this, in enoughforthetwo-agentdynamicstohaveperiodicsolutions.
the current work we adopt a utility maximization and game- We also provide sufficient conditions for a Hopf bifurcation
theoreticframeworktoinvestigatethediverseeffectsofagents’ to exist for the two-agent dynamics.
resources on the evolution of their opinions. A preliminary
Notation: Throughout the paper, we use non-bold letters for
version of this work appeared in [26], where we assumed
denoting scalars, bold lowercase letters for denoting vectors,
the underlying social influence network to be complete. The
and bold uppercase letters for denoting matrices. The sets of
current work extends [26] to the case of any general social
naturalnumbers,realnumbers,non-negativerealnumbersand
network topologies and also allows for pairwise antagonistic positive real numbers are denoted by N,R, R and R ,
≥0 >0
relationships among the agents. We also investigate several respectively. Let 1∈Rn and 0∈Rn denote a vector with all
new questions, such as exponential stability of the equilibria,
elements equal to one and zero, respectively. For any vector
price of anarchy and periodic evolution of opinions. z ∈ Rn, z⊤ denotes its transpose. For any scalar a ∈ R,
Contributions: The main contributions of this work are: |a| denotes its absolute value. For a set S, Sn denotes the
1) Wedefineagent’sutilityfunctiontocapturethetradeoffs
Cartesian product of S with itself n times. The empty set is
of internal opinion preferences, attachment (or stubbornness) denoted by ∅. We denote the difference of any two sets S
1
toward its own opinion, conformity or non-conformity and (cid:0) (cid:1)
andS byS \S .LetG:= V,L beadirectedgraph,where
2 1 2
lastly a resource penalty term. Each of the terms in the
V is the set of nodes and L is the set of directed arcs. In a
utility function is affected by the agent’s resources, which is
directed graph G, a directed walk from a node i ∈V to any
1
a representation of the agent’s wealth, time etc. We propose
node i ∈V is a sequence of nodes i (cid:55)→i (cid:55)→...(cid:55)→i such
l 1 2 l
a novel opinion dynamics model from the utility functions
that (i ,i )∈L, ∀s∈{1,2,...,l−1}.
s s+1
based upon the assumption that every agent myopically seeks
Organizationofthepaper: Therestofthepaperisorganized
to maximize its own utility. The opinion formation process
as follows. Section II introduces essential preliminaries for
can be viewed as a one-shot non-cooperative game played by
subsequent analysis. Section III presents the model for utility
the agents which we refer to as the opinion formation game.
functions, and the opinion dynamics, as well as outlines the
2) Unlike the existing works which consider stubborn
objectives of the paper. Section IV includes the asymptotic
agents, under the proposed dynamics agents can reach con-
analysisofthemodel.SectionVanalyzesconsensusequilibria,
sensus even if their internal preferences are different. If the
Nash equilibria and price of anarchy of the opinion formation
agents’ opinions reach a consensus equilibrium, we can use
game.SectionVIdealswithoscillatorybehavioroftwo-agent
the consensus dominance weights of the agents to deduce the
opinion dynamics. Section VII includes simulations demon-
relative dominance of each agent. The consensus dominance
strating our results. Finally, we conclude in Section VIII. We
weights depend on the resources of the agents.
have included some of the longer proofs in the appendix.
3) We conduct a game-theoretic analysis of the opinion
formation game. Our Nash equilibrium conditions hold even
whenthenetworkconsistsofantagonisticrelationshipswhere
II. PRELIMINARIES
opinions of some agents negatively influence the opinions of
others. We provide a relation between the set of local Nash Here, we recall some useful concepts from contraction
equilibria NE l, set of Nash equilibria NE of the opinion theory. For a comprehensive description and a compilation of
formation game and the set of equilibrium points E of the results on contracting dynamical systems, we refer the reader
opiniondynamics.Specifically,weshowthatNE ⊆NE l ⊆E. to [27]. First, we define the induced logarithmic norm of a
Further, we give a condition for these sets to coincide. matrix and give an interpretation of the same.
4) In the case of weak antagonistic relationships, we show
Definition 2.1: (Logarithmicnormofamatrix[27])Given
that the game exhibits a unique Nash equilibrium and the
an induced matrix norm ∥.∥ the induced log-norm of a matrix
agents’ opinions converge to it under the proposed dynamics A∈Rn×n is given by
starting from any arbitrary initial opinion profile. An agent is
saidtohaveweakantagonisticrelationshipsifitsstubbornness ∥I +hA∥−1
µ(A):= lim n ∈R.
is greater than the collective influence weights of the neigh- h→0+ hAUTHORetal.:OPINIONDYNAMICS:IMPACTOFRESOURCEPENALTY 3
Ifweusetheinduced∞−matrixnormintheabovedefinition, where z ∈ R and p ∈ R are the expressed opinion and
i i
then we get the induced ∞−log norm of A as internalpreferenceonthetopicofagenti∈V.Theparameter
(cid:16) (cid:88) (cid:17) w i ∈ R >0 is the importance that agent i ∈ V attaches to
µ ∞(A)=max a ii+ |a ij| . • its internal preference on the topic, while r ∈ R is the
i∈V i >0
j∈V\{i} resource available to agent i ∈ V and a ∈ R is the weight
Thelog-normcanbeinterpretedasthedirectionalderivativeof ik
of the influence of agent k ∈V on agent i∈V. We make the
thematrixnorminthedirectionofAevaluatedattheidentity
following standing assumption about the parameters in (1).
matrix I . It should be noted that the induced log-norm of a
n (SA1) (Parameters’ signs). For each agent i ∈ V, p ∈ R,
matrix is not a matrix norm and can even be negative. This i
w ∈R , r ∈R and a ∈R, ∀k ∈V. •
induced log-norm helps us in getting bounds on the norm i >0 i >0 ik
of the solutions of a continuous time system. For example, Note that we allow for heterogeneous agents where each
consideracontinuous-timehomogeneousLTIsystemx˙ =Ax. agent can have different parameters in their utility function.
Using Coppel’s inequalities [28], it can be shown that, Moreover, in this paper, we assume that an agent’s utility
is affected by others via a directed social influence graph
∥x(t)∥≤eµ(A)t∥x(0)∥. (cid:0) (cid:1)
G := V,L,A . The elements of the adjacency matrix A
Ifµ(A)<0thentheaboveinequalityimpliesthatthesolution aredenotedbya ij ∈R.Ifa ik ̸=0thenthereexistsadirected
x(t) converges to zero exponentially. We can also extend this linkfromnodek ∈V tonodei∈V withlinkweighta ik.This
idea to nonlinear systems. With this motivation, we define a denotes that agent k’s opinion influences the opinion of agent
strongly contracting vector field. i. The sign of a ik denotes the type of influence relationship
Definition 2.2: (Stronglycontractingvectorfield[27])Let and its magnitude denotes the degree of influence. Using this
C ⊂ Rn be convex. Let f : C → Rn be differentiable and let idea, we give the following definition.
J(z) denote its Jacobian. Then the vector field f is said to be Definition 3.1: (Neighborsetsofanagent).Foreachagent
strongly infinitesimally contracting on C with rate α>0 if i ∈ V, the set N ie := {k ∈ V \{i}|a ik < 0} denotes the
set of its enemies and the set Nf :={k ∈V \{i}|a >0}
µ(J(z))<−α, ∀z∈C. • i ik
denotes the set of its friends. Further,
Finally, we recall a result that ensures the existence and
uniqueness of an exponentially stable equilibrium for a N :=Ne∪Nf ={k ∈V \{i}|a ̸=0},
i i i ik
stronglycontractingsystem.Theproofofthistheoremisbased
denotes the set of neighbors of agent i∈V. •
on the Banach contraction theorem [27].
Note that the self loop weights a , for any i ∈ V, do not
Theorem 2.3: (Equilibrium of a strongly contracting sys- ii
tem [27]) Suppose C ⊂ Rn is convex, closed and positive affect the utility of the agents. We may assume them to be
f-invariant. If f : C → Rn is strongly infinitesimally con- zerowithoutlossofgenerality.Theselfinfluenceoftheagents
is captured by the preference term in the utility function. In
tracting on C with rate α > 0 then, f has a unique globally
exponentially stable equilibrium z∗ ∈C. • our model, opinions are limited by agents’ resources. Each
agent i ∈ V possesses static (in time) resource r ∈ R ,
i >0
III. MODELING AND PROBLEM SETUP which can represent quantities such as wealth, time, social
influence or combinations of them. The parameter r can be
Consider a set V :={1,...,n} of n agents, with heteroge- i
more precisely interpreted as the rate at which agent i ∈ V
neous resources, that form opinions on a single topic. We aim
“uses” the resources or exerts influence on other agents. The
tostudytheevolutionoftheseopinionsastheseagentsinteract
total resources available to the collection of agents is B :=
with each other over a social network. We start by defining
(cid:80)
r and hence (r /B) ∈ (0,1) represents the resources
utility functions for each agent, that depend on its preferred k∈V k i
available to agent i ∈ V relative to the entire social group.
opinion, the influence exerted by its neighbors and a resource
This could be a measure of agent i’s social influence.
penalty. Then, we derive the proposed opinion dynamics from
the utility functions, assuming that each agent myopically Remark 3.2: (Motivationfortheutilityfunction).Aseach
seeks to maximize its utility. Thus, the coupling in the utility agent i∈V myopically seeks to maximize its utility function
functions creates the coupling in the opinion dynamics. U , the three terms in (1) represent penalties on agent i’s
i
Opinions,UtilityFunctionanditsParameters: We denote the expressed opinion z arising from three factors. The first term
i
expressed opinion of agent i ∈ V at time t on the topic as penalizestheopinionfordeviatingfromitsinternalpreference
z i(t) ∈ R. For brevity, we omit the time argument wherever p i. This penalty is directly proportional to the importance
there is no confusion. The vector z := [z 1,··· ,z n]⊤ ∈ Rn weight w
i
as well as the relative resources (r i/B) available
representsthestackedopinionsz i ofallagentsi∈V.Wefirst to agent i. The second set of terms penalizes the agent’s
presenttheutilityfunctionofagenti,thendescribethevarious opinion for being far away from or close to its neighbors’
parameters and provide motivation for the chosen structure. opinions depending upon the type of influence relationships,
The complete opinion profile z∈Rn determines the utility i.e., on the sign of a ’s. The first term can be given a
ik
for each agent i∈V as follows similarinterpretationasthesecondsetoftermsbyinterpreting
U i(z,p i)= − 2w Bir i(cid:0) z i−p i(cid:1)2 − 21(cid:18) (cid:88) a i Bkr k (z k−z i)2(cid:19) i ot pia ns iop nen oa flty a ft uo lla yge stn ut bbi of ro nr vd ie rv tuia at lin ag gei nts t wop hi on sio en opfr io nm ionth ie s
k∈V always anchored to p . The importance weight w can then be
i i
1
− z4, (1) thought of as the weight of influence of this virtual agent on
4r i i i.Thethirdterm(calledtheresourcepenalty)restrictsagenti4 GENERICCOLORIZEDJOURNAL,VOL.XX,NO.XX,XXXX2017
from holding opinions of larger magnitude due to the limited wherever there is no confusion. Moreover, by considering
resourcesavailabletoit.Inparticular,thegreatertheresources S (0) and S (p ), we can verify that 0 ≤ |m | ≤ |p | and
i i i i i
thatagentihas,thelargerthemagnitudeoftheopinionsitcan m p ≥ 0. m ∈ R can be interpreted as the opinion that
i i i
hold. Similarly, we see that the greater the relative resources agent i would attain under (2) if it were socially closed from
(r /B) of agent i, the greater is its influence on the opinions the influence of other agents, i.e. a =0, ∀k ∈V.
i ik
and utility function of other agents k ∈ V. We choose a OpinionDynamicsinAbsenceofAntagonisticRelations: An
quartic term for the resource penalty so as to model the effect important special case is one where there are no antagonistic
of limited resources on holding opinions of large magnitude. relations,whichweformallystateinthefollowingassumption.
Such a model is useful in situations where the opinions are (A3) (No antagonistic relations). For each agent i ∈ V,
about quantities such as prices or the amount of resources Ne =∅. •
i
an agent is willing to spend on something. Mathematically, a
Under Assumption (A3), opinion dynamics (3a) reduces to
quartic penalty term dominates the other quadratic terms for
largeenoughz i andhenceactsasasoftconstraintonresource z˙ i =f i(z,p i):=S i(z i)+C i+(z), ∀i∈V, (4)
usage. The coefficient of the first term, w (r /B), quantifies
i i
thelevelofstubbornnessoftheagent.Factoringthecoefficient where
of the first term as w i(r i/B) allows us to separate the agent’s  0 ; if N =∅,
 i
importance (or bias) towards its internal preference from the C+(z)= (cid:80) a r (5)
agent’s ability, due to the relative resources available to it, to i  j∈V
B
ij j (cid:2) z¯ i−z i(cid:3) ; otherwise
choose an opinion closer to its preference. •
The following is a standing assumption in this paper. z¯ i := (cid:88) (cid:16) a ikr k (cid:17)z k. (6)
(cid:80)
a r
(SA2) (Preferences are fixed parameters). For each agent k∈V j∈V ij j
i∈V, p i ∈R is a fixed parameter. • Note that, under Assumption (A3), for any i∈V, if N ̸=∅
i
The results can easily be extended for the case where p i = thenz¯ i in(6)iswelldefined.Moreover,noticethatthisz¯ i isa
z i(0),foreachagenti∈V.Forexample,wecanletp=z(0) convex combination of the opinions z
k
of agent i’s neighbors.
and consider (z,p) as the state variables with p˙ = 0. Since So in (4), it suffices ∀i∈V to know only z¯ and be unaware
i
this provides little additional value, we choose to think of p ofotherindividualagents’opinions.Finally,notethat∀i∈V,
as a fixed parameter. In the case where p = z(0), we can
 
study the dependence of the opinion evolution on the initial >0, z
i
<m
i
>0, z
i
<z¯
i
opinions z(0) by carrying out a parametric study. S (z ) =0, z =m , C+(z) =0, z =z¯ (7)
i i i i i i i
Opinion Dynamics: We assume that at each time instant, <0,
z >m
<0,
z >z¯.
i i i i
agent i ∈ V revises its opinion by doing a gradient ascent of
its utility function U i, given in (1), with respect to its own Objectives: The overall objective of this work is to capture
opinion z . Thus, for each i∈V, we have the effect of limited resources available to the agents on
i
z˙ i =− w Bir i[z i−p i]+(cid:20) (cid:88) a i Bkr k[z k−z i](cid:21) − z ri3 . (2) t rh ege ae rv do inlu gti to hn eoo pf ino ip oi nni do yn ns. amTh ice si (m 2)po thr ata tn wt ean sa tuly dt yic ia nl tq hu ises pt aio pn es r
k∈V i include
We can rewrite (2) equivalently as • asymptotic properties
• existence of a consensus equilibrium and its properties
z˙ =f (z,p ):=S (z ,p )+C (z), ∀i∈V, (3a)
i i i i i i i • characterization of Nash equilibria and their relation to
w r z3 the equilibria of the dynamics (2)
S (z ,p ):=− i i [z −p ]− i , (3b)
i i i B i i r i • bounds on price of anarchy
C (z):= (cid:88) a ikr k[z −z ]. (3c) • oscillatory behavior of opinions in the two agent case.
i B k i We also study these questions for the cases outlined in
k∈V
Assumption (A4) and (A3) to provide stronger results.
Note that ∀i ∈ V, the self function S (·,·) depends only on
i
i’s own opinion, its preference p and other parameters. On
i
the other hand, ∀i ∈ V, the crowd function C (·) depends on IV. ASYMPTOTIC BEHAVIOR OF OPINIONS
i
the deviations of i’s opinion z i from its neighbors’ opinions In this section, we study the asymptotic behavior of opin-
z k’s.Ifa ik >0(<0)theni∈V wantstoagree(disgree)with ions. We show ultimate boundedness of opinions and provide
agent k and hence the term in C i(·) corresponding to agent k conditions that guarantee existence and uniqueness of a glob-
drives z i towards (away from) the opinion of k ∈V. ally exponentially stable equilibrium point. We denote the set
Now, we make some observations about the self func- of equilibrium points of (2) as a function of preferences p as
tion S (·,p ), which hold ∀i ∈ V. S (·,p ) is continuous
i i i i
and strictly decreasing with lim S (z ,p ) = ∞ and E(p):={z∈Rn|z˙ =f(z,p)=0}. (8)
i i i
zi→−∞
lim S i(z i,p i) = −∞. Thus, S i(·,p i) has exactly one real Hereafter, we drop the preference argument in E(p) wherever
rz oi→ ot+ f∞
oreveryfixedvalueofp ∈R.Letusdenotetherealroot there is no confusion. We first guarantee that, under the
i
of S (·,p ) as m (p )∈R, i.e., S (m (p ),p )=0. Hereafter, dynamics (2), irrespective of the initial opinion profile, the
i i i i i i i i
wewillexcludethepreferenceargumentinS (·,p )andm (·) opinions never grow unbounded and are in fact, ultimately
i i iAUTHORetal.:OPINIONDYNAMICS:IMPACTOFRESOURCEPENALTY 5
bounded. The ultimate boundedness of opinions is a conse- (A4) (Weak antagonistic relations). For each agent i∈V,
quence of the resource penalty term in (1), which heavily
penalizesanyagentforholdingopinionsofgreatermagnitude. w ir i > (cid:88) 2|a ik|r k,
B B
Theorem 4.1: (Ultimate boundedness of opinions). Let k∈Ne
i
z(t) be the solution to (2) from the initial condition z(0). where recall that Ne is the set of enemies of agent i∈V. •
Then ∃ η ≥0 (independent of z(0)) and ∃ T(z(0))≥0 such i
NoticethatunderAssumption(SA1),w >0andr >0for
that |z (t)|≤η, ∀i∈V, ∀t≥T. i i
i each agent i ∈ V. Thus, the case of no antagonistic relations
Proof: Consider the following radially unbounded positive
stated in Assumption (A3) is a special case of Assump-
definite Lyapunov-like function V := V(z) = 0.5z⊤z. The
tion (A4). All the results which hold under Assumption (A4)
time derivative of V along the trajectories of (2) is
also hold under Assumption (A3). Now, we present the main
V˙ =(cid:88) z i(cid:104) − w Bir i[z i−p i](cid:105) −(cid:88) z i(cid:20) (cid:88) a i Bkr k [z i−z k](cid:21) res Tu hlt eo of ret mhis 4s .3e :cti (o En x. isIt ts enp cr eoo af ni ds i un nt ih qe uea np ep se snd oi fx. equilibrium
i∈V i∈V k∈V points). Consider the dynamics given by (2). Suppose As-
−(cid:88)z i4 ≤(cid:88)(cid:2) α |z |+β |z |2−γ |z |4(cid:3) (9) sumption (A4) holds. Then, there exists a unique globally
r i i i i i i exponentially stable equilibrium point z∗ ∈E. •
i
i∈V i∈V Remark 4.4: (Ontheweakantagonisticrelationshipscon-
for some positive constants {α ,β ,γ } . As the fourth- dition). The condition of Assumption (A4) means that the
i i i i∈V
degreetermsdominatethelinearandquadratictermsforlarge willingnessofeveryagenti∈V toholdanopinionclosetoits
enoughz,weseethat∃ζ ≥0suchthatV˙ <0,∀z∈Rn\Ω , internalpreferenceisgreaterthantwicetheaggregateinfluence
ζ
where Ω := {z ∈ Rn | V(z) ≤ ζ}. Hence, the set Ω weight of its enemies. Under this assumption, Theorem 4.3
ζ ζ
is positively invariant under the dynamics (2) and the solution shows that the opinions converge to a unique equilibrium. •
withanyinitialconditionz(0)∈Rn entersthesetΩ infinite Based on Lemma 4.2 and Theorem 4.3, we can give a
ζ
time T¯(z(0)). Positive-definiteness and radial unboundedness stronger result for ultimate boundedness and on the location
of V then implies the result. ■ of the unique equilibrium in case there are no antagonistic
relations among agents. We deal with this case next.
Note that one can explicitly find an ultimate bound η but
we skip it for brevity. Also note that Theorem 4.1 holds for Convergence of opinions in the absence of antagonistic re-
allvaluesoftheparametersandhencedoesnotdependonthe lations: In the absence of antagonistic relationships among
agents, it is possible to give an ultimate bound that is more
typeofinteractionsamongagentsorthestructureofthesocial
intuitive and easier to compute using the unique roots of the
network. From the proof of Theorem 4.1, also note that for
self functions (m such that S (m )=0, i∈V). We can also
any initial condition, the solution is uniformly bounded over i i i
say that the unique equilibrium in this case is in a specific set
alltime.ThenthelocalLipschitznessofthevectorfieldin(2)
defined by m ’s, for i∈V. Let,
can be used to show existence and uniqueness of solutions i
of (2) for all time. Next, we characterize the conditions under m (p):=min{m } , m (p):=max{m } , (11)
min i i∈V max i i∈V
whichtheopinionsconvergetoanequilibrium.Recallthatfor
each i ∈ V, S (·) has a unique root at m , i.e. S (m ) = 0. and the corresponding interval
i i i i
Usingthis,weshowthattheopinionofasociallyclosedagent
M(p):=[m (p),m (p)]. (12)
min max
(if one exists) converges to its corresponding m .
i
Lemma 4.2: (Convergence of opinions of socially closed For brevity, we will exclude the preference argument in (11)
agents).Considerthedynamicsgivenby(3a).Letz(t)denote and (12) wherever there is no confusion. We are now ready to
the solution of (2) from an initial condition z(0). Then, show that the opinions converge to Mn (proof in Appendix).
lim z (t)=m ; ∀i∈V , where V is the set of socially Proposition 4.5: (Convergence to the set Mn in absence
t→∞ i i cl cl
closed agents, i.e., of antagonistic relations). Consider the opinion dynamics
given by (2). Suppose Assumption (A3) holds. Let m ,
min
V :={i∈V | N =∅}⊆V. (10) m andMbeasdefinedin(11)and(12)respectively.Then,
cl i max
Proof: If V = ∅, then there is nothing to prove. So let Mnispositivelyinvariantundertheopiniondynamics(2).Let
cl
V ̸= ∅ and consider an arbitrary but fixed i ∈ V . Then z(t)bethesolutionto(2)fromaninitialconditionz(0)∈Rn.
cl cl
from (3) and the definition of V cl, it is clear that z˙ i =S i(z i) Thenz(t)convergestoMn.Further,defineV max :={i∈V |
is decoupled from the opinions of other agents. From (7), it m i = m max} and V min := {i ∈ V | m i = m min}. Suppose
is clear that this scalar differential equation has a globally m min <m max. Then the following statements are equivalent.
asymptotically stable equilibrium point at m i. ■ (i) The unique equilibrium z∗ ∈ E lies in the interior of
Wenextaddressthegeneralcase,wheretheremaybesome Mn and ∃T(z(0))≥0 such that z(t)∈Mn, ∀t≥T(z(0)).
socially closed agents and some agents influenced by others. (ii) ∀i ∈ V , ∃ a directed walk in G starting from j ∈
max
In this case, the parameters, such as importance weights, V \V to i and ∀i∈V , ∃ a directed walk in G starting
max min
resources and inter-agent influence weights, all play a role from j ∈V \V to i. •
min
in determining whether there is an equilibrium point, its UnderAssumption(A3),Proposition4.5guaranteesthatthe
uniqueness and its stability. Using Theorem 2.3, we present a set Mn is positively invariant. Moreover, the unique globally
sufficientconditionfor(2)tohaveauniquegloballyexponen- exponentially stable equilibrium point z∗ that Theorem 4.3
tially stable equilibrium. We begin by stating an assumption. guarantees lies in Mn. Thus, we can immediately guarantee6 GENERICCOLORIZEDJOURNAL,VOL.XX,NO.XX,XXXX2017
thatz(t)convergestoMn,possiblyasymptotically.Ifm < thedynamicsandtheagentsalwaysachieveconsensusstarting
min
m then only agents belonging to sets V and V can from any initial opinion vector. •
max max min
have equilibrium opinions at the boundary of the set M. For When the agents attain a consensus equilibrium, we can
the unique equilibrium to be in the interior of Mn, it is both measurehowmuchinfluenceanagenthasonthewholegroup
necessary and sufficient that every agent in the sets V and by measuring the deviation of the consensus value from its
max
V isdirectlyorindirectlyinfluencedbyatleastoneagentin preference. More specifically, if ξ ∈R is the consensus value
min
setsV\V andV\V ,respectively.Notethatthiscondition at equilibrium, we compute for each i∈V,
max min
is satisfied if the social network G is strongly connected.
∆ (ξ):=|p −ξ|, (13)
Finally, if the unique equilibrium z∗ lies in the interior of i i
Mn then solutions converge to Mn in finite time. In this as a measure of its influence. Note that if p = 0, for some
i
case,theultimateboundMn hasanadditionaladvantagethat i∈V, then m =0 and hence the only consensus equilibrium
i
it depends only on the m ’s (whose interpretation is provided possible(ifitexists)isneutral.Soweconsiderp ̸=0,∀i∈V
i i
in Section III) and hence can be computed easily using the to give the next result on dominance and discuss it in the
parameters w ,p and r . Finally, note that if m = m remark following it.
i i i max min
thentheopinionsofagentsinabsenceofantagonisticrelations Proposition 5.3: (Consensus deviation from preference).
always converge to a unique consensus equilibrium. Consider the dynamics (2) or equivalently (3a). Suppose that
p ̸=0,∀i∈V.Foreachagenti∈V,letusdefineσ :=w r2
i i i i
andlet∆ (ξ)beasin(13).Supposeξ1∈E,withξ ∈R.Then
V. CONSENSUS AND NASH EQUILIBRIA i
σ ∆ (ξ)=σ ∆ (ξ), ∀i,j ∈V. In particular
i i j j
In this section, we analyze consensus equilibrium points
σ >σ ⇐⇒ ∆ (ξ)<∆ (ξ).
of the opinion dynamics (2) and Nash equilibria of the i j i j
Proof: Since p ̸= 0, ∀i ∈ V, we also have 0 < |m | <
underlying game. We also explore the relation between the i i
|p | ∀i ∈ V. Then by Theorem 5.1, ξ ̸= 0. Further, from
Nash equilibrium set of the underlying game and the set of i
Theorem5.1,wegetr S (ξ)=0, ∀i∈V,whichthenimplies
equilibriaoftheopiniondynamics(2).Finally,wealsoanalyze i i
the price of anarchy. σ (p −ξ)=ξ3 =σ (p −ξ), ∀i,j ∈V.
i i j j
Since σ >0, ∀i∈V, the result now follows. ■
i
A. ConsensusEquilibria Remark 5.4: (Dominance in consensus). Let us call ∀i∈
V, the scalar σ as the consensus dominance weight of the
First, we deal with the consensus equilibria of the model, i
agent i. Suppose all agents have a non-neutral preference and
i.e., equilibria of the form ξ1, with ξ ∈ R. We refer to the
they attain consensus at ξ ∈ R. Then, Proposition 5.3 states
case of ξ =0 as a neutral consensus since all the agents have
thatifanagenti∈V hashigherconsensusdominanceweight
neutral opinions (equal to 0) in this case. On the other hand,
than agent j ∈ V, then ξ is closer to i’s preference than that
we refer to the case of ξ ̸= 0 as a non-neutral consensus. In
of j. Note that the consensus dominance weight is directly
the following lemma, we present conditions for (2) to have a
proportional to the importance weight an agent assigns to
consensus equilibrium. We use the form of the dynamics in
its preference and the square of the resources available to
(3a) and the functions in (3) to justify our claims.
it. Thus, an agent with very high resources can exert more
Theorem 5.1: (Necessary and sufficient conditions for
influenceevenifitgiveslessimportanceweighttoitsinternal
existenceofaconsensusequilibrium).Considerthedynamics
preference.Ontheotherhand,ifanagenthaslowerresources,
(2) (equivalently (3a)). For each i ∈ V, let m ∈ R be the
i then it has to have much higher importance weight to have
unique point such that S (m )=0. Then, ξ1∈E if and only
i i more influence in the group. •
if m =ξ, ∀i∈V.
i Next,westudytherelationbetweenequilibriaoftheopinion
Proof: Ifz =ξ,∀i∈V,forsomeξ ∈RthenC (ξ1)=0,
i i dynamics (2) and Nash equilibria of the underlying game.
∀i∈V.Hence,from(3a),ξ1∈E iffS (ξ)=0,∀i∈V.Since
i
m is the unique root of S (.), the claim follows. ■
i i B. NashEquilibria
Remark 5.2: (Consensusformationamongagents).Theo-
rem5.1statesthatitisbothnecessaryandsufficientforallthe Here we carry out a Nash Equilibrium analysis of the
m ’s to be the same for the opinion dynamics model to have opinion formation game. Recall that every agent is interested
i
a consensus equilibrium. It is evident that if the agents are in maximizing its utility U i given in (1) by suitably choosing
to arrive at a consensus equilibrium, then all their preferences its opinion z i. Thus, this gives a strategic form game G =
p i’s must be of the same sign. When p
i
=0, ∀i∈V, then the ⟨V,(R) i∈V,(U i) i∈V⟩ among the set of agents V, with the
only possible consensus equilibrium is the neutral consensus, strategy of agent i ∈ V being its opinion z i ∈ R and its
i.e., every agent reaches a neutral opinion on the topic. If utility function being U i(·). For the sake of convenience, we
the preferences of the agents have different signs, then the let z −i denote the opinions of all agents other than i. Then,
opinions of agents can never reach an exact consensus in the set of Nash equilibria of the game G is
equilibrium.However,otherequilibriathatarearbitrarilyclose NE(p):={z∗ ∈Rn | ∀i∈V,
to consensus may still exist.
U (z∗,z∗ ,p )≥U (z ,z∗ ,p ),∀z ∈R}. (14)
Now, if the weak antagonistic relationships condition given i i −i i i i −i i i
in Assumption (A4) holds and there exists a consensus equi- Note that for a Nash equilibrium z∗, z∗ is agent i’s best
i
librium, then, from Theorem 4.3, it is the only equilibrium of response over all opinions z ∈ R to z∗ , the opinion profile
i −iAUTHORetal.:OPINIONDYNAMICS:IMPACTOFRESOURCEPENALTY 7
of all the other agents. However, in the dynamics (2), each is intuitive since no equilibrium point of (2) can exist beyond
agent updates its opinion according to the gradient ascent of any ultimate bound (which always exists).
its utility with respect to its opinion while assuming that the Corollary 5.8: (Non-existence of local Nash equilibria).
otheragentsdonotchangetheiropinions.Hence,theagentsat Suppose η > 0 is an ultimate bound on z for any i ∈ V
i i
eachtimeinstantrevisetheiropiniononlytowardsthe“local” under (2). If there exists i ∈ V such that τ > η2, with τ
i i i
best response. This motivates the next definition. defined in (15), then NE =∅. ■
l
Definition 5.5: (Local Nash equilibrium). A strategy pro- Finally, to end this subsection, we provide a sufficient
filez∗ ∈Rn issaidtobealocalNashequilibriumifandonly condition under which the different equilibria sets (E, NE
if ∀i∈V, ∃ ρ ∈R such that and NE ) are equal. Additionally, we also give a sufficient
i >0 l
condition under which the opinion formation game has a
U (z∗,z∗ ,p )≥U (z ,z∗ ,p ), ∀z s.t. |z∗−z |≤ρ .
i i −i i i i −i i i i i i uniqueNashequilibrium.Westatethisinthefollowingresult.
The set of local Nash equilibria of G is denoted by NE (p).• Theorem 5.9: (Equality of equilibria sets and uniqueness
l
of Nash equilibrium). Consider the dynamics in (3a) and the
For simplicity, we will exclude the preference arguments in
NE(p)andNE (p)whereverthereisnoconfusion.Itiseasy set of equilibrium points E in (8). Suppose for each agent
l
i ∈ V, τ ≤ 0. Then, NE = NE = E. Moreover, if
toseethataNashequilibriumisalsoalocalNashequilibrium i l
and hence NE ⊆NE . In the next result, we show that every Assumption (A4) holds then it is a singleton set.
l
Proof: Suppose that τ ≤ 0, ∀i ∈ V. First, it is obvious
local Nash equilibrium is an equilibrium point of (2). i
that NE ⊆NE and Lemma 5.6 implies that NE ⊆E. Next,
Lemma 5.6: (LocalNashequilibriumisanequilibriumof l l
the opinion dynamics). If an opinion profile z∗ is such that we show that E ⊆ NE l. Consider an equilibrium z∗ ∈ E. It
z∗ ∈NE
l
then z∗ ∈E. can be easily verified that for each i∈V, U i(·,z∗ −i) is strictly
Proof: Since z∗ ∈ NE , it implies that ∀i ∈ V, z∗ locally concave in z i. Since z∈E, the first order necessary condition
m resa px eim ctiz te os zU i( e· v, az l∗ − ui a) t. edTh al u ts, (zth ∗e ,zp ∗art )ia il sde zr ei rv oa .ti Tve heof cU lai i i( m·)w thi eth
n
f eo ar chap i.o Hin et nto ceb ,e za ∗l ∈oc Nal Em l.ax Fi im naiz lle yr ,o wf eU si h(· o, wz∗ − ti h) atis Nsa Eti lsfi ⊆ed Nf Eor
.
follows immi ediately from (2)i and−i (8). ■ Since ∀i ∈ V, U i(·,z∗ −i) is a strictly concave function for
each z∗ , the implication follows directly from the definitions
Lemma 5.6 states that every local Nash equilibrium of G is −i
of NE and NE . This completes the proof of the first part
also an equilibrium point of dynamics (2). But the converse l
of the claim. Now suppose that Assumption (A4) holds. Then
need not be true. In the following result, we give conditions
for an opinion profile z∗ ∈Rn that is an equilibrium point of again τ i < 0, ∀i ∈ V. Uniqueness of Nash equilibrium now
follows from Theorem 4.3 and first part of the claim. ■
the opinion dynamics model to be a local Nash equilibrium
Remark 5.10: Recall the interpretation of w as the weight
of the opinion formation game. i
of influence of a fully stubborn virtual agent on agent i
Theorem 5.7: (Conditions for an equilibrium point of (2)
providedinRemark3.2.Usingthisinterpretation,letusdefine
to be a local Nash equilibrium). Consider the dynamics
(2) and the set of equilibrium points E in (8). Let z∗ = theweighted (cid:104)in-degreeforeachagent (cid:105)j ∈V insocialnetwork
(cid:0) z i∗,z∗ −i(cid:1) ∈E. Then, z∗ ∈NE
l
only if for each i∈V, G as di jn := w Bjrj +(cid:80)
k∈V\{j}
aj Bkrk . Then for each j ∈V,
  τ j =−r jdi jn/3 and τ j <0(=0) if and only if di jn >0(=0).
(z i∗)2 ≥τ i := r 3i  (cid:88) |a i Bk|r k − (cid:88) a i Bkr k − w Bir i . T Foh re ec ao cn hdi ati go en ntdi j in ∈> V0 ,, ∀ thj e∈ agV grc ea gn atb ee inin flt uer ep nr ce ete wd ea is ghfo tl olo fw its s:
k∈N ie k∈N if friends (including the virtual fully stubborn agent since w
i
>
(15)
0)isgreaterthantheaggregateinfluenceweightofitsenemies.
Moreover, if inequality (15) is strict ∀i∈V, then z∗ ∈NE . IfthisholdstruethenTheorem5.9statesthateachequilibrium
l
Proof: Let the hypothesis be true. From Definition 5.5 we point of the dynamics is also a Nash equilibrium of the game.
know that z∗ = (cid:0) z i∗,z∗ −i(cid:1) is a local Nash equilibrium if and Next, if Assumption (A4) holds then for each j ∈V, di jn >0
only if ∀i ∈ V, z i∗ locally maximizes U i(·,z∗ −i). Now since and hence τ j < 0. In other words, the opinion formation
z∗ ∈ E, by the definitions in (2) and (8), it is clear that for gamehasauniqueNashequilibriumifthewillingnessofeach
eachi∈V,z∗ satisfiesthefirst-ordernecessaryconditionsfor agent is more than twice the aggregate influence weight of its
i
it to be a local maximizer of U (·,z∗ ). enemies. Moreover, thanks to Theorem 4.3, we can say that
i −i
Now, suppose that z∗ ∈NE . Then, we have that the opinions under (2) always converge to this unique Nash
l
equilibrium, starting from any initial condition. •
∂∂ z2 2U i(z i,z∗ −i)(cid:12) (cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12)
= r3 (cid:2) τ i−(z i∗)2(cid:3) ≤0, ∀i∈V. (16)
i z∗ i C. PriceofAnarchy
i
This proves the necessary condition in (15). Finally, note that Next,weanalyzethepriceofanarchyofthegameunderly-
if (16) is a strict inequality for a z∗ ∈ E, then by the second ingtheopiniondynamics(2).Intheentiretyofthissubsection,
ordersufficiencyconditionforapointtobealocalmaximizer, we will use cost minimization perspective rather than utility
z∗ is a local maximizer of U (·,z∗ ) for each i∈V. ■ maximization. We let the cost incurred by agent i ∈ V for
i i −i
The statement of the previous result can be combined with opinion profile z be χ (z,p):=−U (z,p), where U (z,p) is
i i i
the result in Theorem 4.1 to provide a condition for which given by (1). In order to ensure non-negativity of the prices
the opinion formation game does not have any local Nash of anarchy defined below, we need χ (z,p) ≥ 0; ∀z ∈ Rn.
i
equilibrium. We state this in the next result, proof of which Hence, in this subsection we will assume that all inter-agent8 GENERICCOLORIZEDJOURNAL,VOL.XX,NO.XX,XXXX2017
relations are non-antagonistic, i.e., Assumption (A3) holds. Theorem 5.14: (Bounds on prices of anarchy). Consider
We consider price of anarchy for two most commonly used the dynamics (2). Suppose Assumptions (A3) and (A5) hold.
objective functions in the game theory literature, namely, the Let us denote the unique Nash equilibrium of the game
egalitarian and the utilitarian costs underlying the opinion dynamics (2) by z∗ ∈NE. Then,
(cid:88)
C (z,p):=maxχ (z,p)=max−U (z,p), (17) 1≤π ≤max SR (z∗) , 1≤π ≤ SR (z∗) , (21)
E i i e i u i
i∈V i∈V i∈V
(cid:88) (cid:88) i∈V
C (z,p):= χ (z,p)=− U (z,p), (18)
U i i with π and π as defined in Definition 5.11. •
e u
i∈V i∈V
A consequence of this result is that, for the special case
to measure the inefficiency of Nash equilibria of the game wheretheuniqueNashequilibriumisaconsensusequilibrium,
underlying the opinion dynamics (2). Hereafter, we will again π = π = 1, i.e., consensus equilibrium (if it exists) is
e u
exclude the preference arguments in χ i(·,·), C E(·,·) and socially optimal. We formally state and prove this next.
C U(·,·) for brevity. In the following definitions of price of Corollary 5.15: (PoAisunityforanon-neutralconsensus
anarchy, we will assume p ̸= 0 to ensure the positivity of equilibrium). Consider the dynamics (2). Suppose Assump-
C E(z) and C U(z) at any z ∈ Rn. This ensures that prices tions (A3) and (A5) hold. Suppose the unique z∗ ∈NE =E
of anarchy (19) are well defined. We discuss the case when isanon-neutralconsensusequilibrium,i.e.,z∗ =m1forsome
p=0 in a later remark. m̸=0. Then, π =π =1.
e u
Definition 5.11: (Price of anarchy). Consider the opinion Proof: From Theorem 5.1, Lemma 5.13 and Definition 5.12,
formation game G corresponding to the opiniondynamics (2), it follows that, SR (m1) = 1, ∀i ∈ V. From (21), we thus
i
and NE, the set of its Nash equilibria. Suppose Assump- have π =1. From the proof of Theorem 5.14 for the bound
e
tion (A3) holds and p̸=0. The egalitarian and the utilitarian on π , we have
u
prices of anarchy, π e and π u, respectively are defined as (cid:80) χ (m1)
1≤π ≤ i∈V i =1,
max C E(z) max C U(z) u (cid:80) χ (m1)
π := z∈NE ≥1; π := z∈NE ≥1. (19) i∈V i
e zm ∈Rin nC E(z) u zm ∈Rin nC U(z) since z∗ =m1 and m
i
=m, ∀i∈V. ■
Note that neutral and non-neutral consensus equilibrium
•
exists only if p=0 and Assumption (A5) holds, respectively.
In Definition 5.11, π compares the cost incurred by the
e Consensus equilibrium cannot exist if ∃i,j ∈ V with p = 0
worst performing agent at the worst Nash equilibrium to the i
and p ̸= 0. Corollary 5.15 states that non-neutral consensus
minimum possible cost C . Similarly, π compares the total j
E u is socially optimal. In the next remark, we argue that neutral
costincurredbyallagentsattheworstNashequilibriumtothe
consensus is also socially optimal.
minimum possible cost C . The closer the value of the prices
U Remark 5.16: (Neutral consensus is socially optimal).
of anarchy (19) is to unity, the better the quality of the Nash
Suppose Assumption (A3) holds and p = 0. From Theo-
equilibrium. We now define the satisfaction ratio at opinion
rems 5.1, 4.3 and 5.9, we know that the unique equilibrium
profile z for every agent i ∈ V in order to compare the cost
point z∗ = 0 ∈ E = NE. Now, from Lemma 5.13 we know
incurredbyagentiatzandtheminimumpossiblecostitcould
that0isaminimizerofχ (z),C (z)andC (z).Thusprices
incur. Using these ratios, we can give some upper bounds on i E U
of anarchy (19) and satisfaction ratios (20) are not defined
the prices of anarchy (19). In order to keep the satisfaction
ratios well defined, we need positivity of χ (z) everywhere.
in this case. But since C E(z∗) = min z∈RnC E(z) = 0 =
Hence we assume the following,
i C U(z∗) = min z∈RnC U(z), neutral consensus equilibrium is
also socially optimal. •
(A5) (Non-zero preferences). ∀i∈V, p ̸=0. •
i
Definition 5.12: (Satisfaction ratio). Consider the cost VI. OSCILLATORY BEHAVIOR OF OPINIONS
function χ (z) of each agent i ∈ V. Suppose Assump-
i In[26],westudiedaspecialcaseofthedynamicsproposed
tions (A3) and (A5) hold. The satisfaction ratio SR for any
i in the current paper. We showed through numerical simula-
agent i∈V at any z∈Rn is defined as,
tions that in certain scenarios, the opinions exhibit oscillatory
SR (z):=
χ i(z)
≥1. (20)
behavior.Inthissection,weanalyzesuchbehaviorinthecase
i min z∈Rnχ i(z) of a pair of agents V = {1,2}. For a general social network
Thenextresultshowsthatiftherearenoantagonisticrelations with n agents, the analysis is significantly more complicated
among the agents, then for each agent i∈V, χ (·) is convex. due to the higher dimension of the state space but also due to
i
Notethatthisresultsaysχ (z)isconvexinzandnotjustwith thecomplexityaddedbythesocialnetwork.Thus,theanalysis
i
respect to z . Proof of the following result is in the appendix. in the general case of a social network with n agents would
i
Lemma 5.13: (Convexity of cost function). Suppose that have to be a separate research work in itself and is out of the
Assumption (A3) holds. Then for each i∈V, χ (·) is convex scope of this paper.
i
with m 1 as one of its minimizer. • The opinion dynamics (2) for two agents is,
i
Now, from Theorem 4.3 and Theorem 5.9, we know that in (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:2) (cid:3)
z˙ =S (z )+ c r /B z −z
1 1 1 1 2 2 1
the absence of antagonistic relations, the game has a unique (cid:2) (cid:3)(cid:2) (cid:3) (22)
z˙ =S (z )− c r /B z −z .
Nash equilibrium z∗ ∈ NE. In the next result, whose proof 2 2 2 2 1 2 1
is in the Appendix, we use the satisfaction ratios to give an We call an agent i ∈ V a contrarian (non-contrarian) if
upper bound on π and π . its conformity weight c < 0 (≥ 0). For the two-agent
e u iAUTHORetal.:OPINIONDYNAMICS:IMPACTOFRESOURCEPENALTY 9
dynamics (22), it can be easily verified that if the opinions to agent i and we use ≈(=) signs for indicating approximate
z (t)andz (t)exhibitoscillatorybehaviorthentheywillhave (exact) values of the provided data.
1 2
the same fundamental period of oscillations. We state this in In the first set of simulations, we consider a group of 6
the following result (proof in Appendix). agents forming opinions according to (2). We assume that the
Lemma 6.1: (Equal period of oscillations) Consider the agents are connected via an influence network that is shown
two-agentdynamics(22).Supposetheopinionsz (t)andz (t) inFigure1.ThematrixofinfluenceweightsAisequaltothe
1 2
exhibitoscillationswithfundamentalperiodsT >0andT > adjacencymatrixassociatedwiththegraphshowninFigure1.
1 2
0, respectively. Then, T =T . • In Figure 2a, we illustrate the case where the opinions of
1 2
Note that periodic orbits can exist for (22) only if at least
one of the agents is a contrarian as otherwise Theorem 4.3 5.9
4.8
g
f
inru oa Amra pn pat
n
ee nye ds
a
ixc
rb
)o ,in
t
wrv ae err yg ge
ii
vn
n
ec ite
i
aao
l
nf eco
co
ep
n
si dn
si
ai to
i ro
yn ns
c.
oto
I nn
dth
it
the
ie
ou nn
n
fi eq oxu rte
tr
hee esq uu
el
xi tl ii s(b
p
tr eri nou com
ef 3.5
1
4.2
2 1. .3
6
9.3 6 0.9
7.3
2
8.6
of periodic orbits for (22).
odL icem som lua tio6 n.2 s:
)
C(N oe nc se idss ea rr ty heco twnd oi -t ai go en ntfo dr yne ax mis it ce snc (2e 2o ).f Op pe ir ni -- 1.2 0.6
2.5
1.4
3 3.5 4 3.8 5
ions z 1(t) and z 2(t) exhibit periodic behavior only if all the 6.7
following hold: (i) c < 0 or c < 0, (ii) c c ̸= 0, and (iii)
1 2 1 2
(c r +w r +w r +c r )<0. • Fig.1: A social network consisting of 6 agents. The direction
2 1 1 1 2 2 1 2
Remark 6.3: (Geometric and other interpretations of the of any link denotes the direction of influence and the number
conditions for the existence of periodic opinions). The con- near arrowhead of any directed link (k,i) represents the
dition given in Lemma 6.2 ensures existence of the following corresponding link weight a ik.
ellipse in the phase plane,
all 6 agents reach a non-neutral consensus equilibrium, with
z2 z2 (w r +w r +c r +c r )
1 + 2 =− 1 1 2 2 1 2 2 1 =:υ >0. (23) consensus value equal to 40. The model parameters used to
r r 3B
1 2 simulatethiscaseareasfollows.Thevectorsofinitialopinions
From the proof of Lemma 6.2, we see that the div(f(z)) is z (0), importance weights w , resources r , agents’ internal
i i i
equal to zero on the ellipse and positive (negative) inside preferences p of all six agents are
i
(outside) the ellipse. Thus, any periodic orbit of (22) in the (cid:2) (cid:3)
z ≈ 43.90 36.34 49.00 30.69 38.77 37.63 ,
phase plane should necessarily intersect the above ellipse. 0
(cid:2) (cid:3)
The oscillatory behavior of opinions appear only when at w≈ 13.42 14.30 12.84 8.38 7.82 16.32 ,
(cid:2) (cid:3)
least one of the agents is a contrarian. This is similar to the r≈ 317.43 814.54 789.07 852.26 505.64 635.66 ,
so-called boomerang effect [29], where at least one of the (cid:2) (cid:3)
p≈ 225.22 66.40 71.33 81.16 165.39 77.99 ,
agents has an antagonist influence on another agent. As a
result, the agent on whom there is an antagonist influence respectively. For these parameters, m i = 40, ∀i ∈ V, which
shiftsitsopinionawayfromtheotheragent.Insuchsituations, is equal to the consensus value. Thus, this simulation verifies
the opinions of the agents could converge to a disagreement Theorem 5.1. For each agent i∈V, let z∞ denote its asymp-
i
equilibriumorcouldpossiblykeeponoscillatingforevernever totic opinion value. The vector whose each element is the
converging to an equilibrium. • absolutedifferencebetweenanagent’sfinalconsensusopinion
Now that we have dealt with necessary conditions for a and its preference opinion (|z i∞ − p i|) and the consensus
periodic solution of (22) to exist, we conclude this section by dominance weights σ i are
giving sufficient conditions for the agents to exhibit periodic (cid:2) (cid:3)
d≈ 185.22 26.40 31.33 41.16 125.39 37.99
opinion profiles. More specifically, we give sufficient condi-
tions on the conformity weights c , c for a Hopf bifurcation σ ≈(cid:2) 1.35 9.49 7.99 6.09 2 6.59(cid:3) ×106.
1 2
to exist (proof in Appendix).
From this data, we can verify that the dominance claim in
Theorem 6.4: (Existence of Hopf bifurcation) Consider
Proposition 5.3 is satisfied in this case.
two-agent dynamics (22) with c ∈ R as the bifurcation
2 Figure 2b depicts the scenario where the opinions of the
parameter. Let g := r /B > 0, d := (c r )/B ∈ R and
κ mi ∈:= R(cid:104) w aB nir di +
(cid:2)
d(3 κm ri2 i −(cid:105) > κ1 )0 −,i κ∈ 2(cid:3){1 >,2 0} .. TS hu ep np1 o ths2 e erm
e
i1 s=
a
fm am2 il=
y
6 a pg ar ra e ag e me mn et e ts en rt sw e ii nqth u ti hln i ib so r cia u an m st eag aino ren ,ti hst eic core mla pt aio ctns sec to Mnve nr .ge Thto e ma od dis e- l
2 1 1
of periodic orbits of (22) that bifurcates from the consensus (cid:2) (cid:3)
z ≈ −69.02 −28.03 −46.22 24.01 −23.92 38.38
equilibrium z∗ =m1 at c =c∗ :=−(κ +κ +d)/g. • 0
2 2 1 2 (cid:2) (cid:3)
w≈ 2.76 16.73 2.77 11.76 7.32 16.14
(cid:2) (cid:3)
VII. SIMULATIONS r≈ 503.78 489.59 877.05 353.14 449.44 963.53
(cid:2) (cid:3)
Inthissection,wepresentsomesimulationstodemonstrate p≈ −18.31 18.92 −12.43 6.68 3.46 7.00 .
ouranalyticalresults.Allthesimulationresultsweregenerated
The agents do not achieve consensus because
usingMATLABandtheODE45solver.Throughoutthissec-
tion, the ith element of any parameter data vector corresponds m≈(cid:2) −11.13 15.53 −10.47 6.12 3.36 6.92(cid:3) ,
9.8
7.210 GENERICCOLORIZEDJOURNAL,VOL.XX,NO.XX,XXXX2017
50 50 ofaconsensusequilibriumandquantifiedsocialdominanceat
consensus. Further, we showed that the set of Nash equilibria
0 of the opinion formation game is a subset of the set of
40
equilibrium points of the dynamics and provided conditions
-50 for these two sets to coincide. In the absence of antagonistic
30
relations, we gave stronger results. We quantified the quality
0 1 2 3 0 5 10
of the Nash equilibria with respect to two commonly used
prices of anarchy (PoA), provided bounds on these PoA’s in
termsofthesatisfactionratiosandprovedthatconvergingtoa
(a) (b)
consensus equilibrium is a socially optimal outcome. Finally,
Fig. 2: Convergence of opinions. (a) Consensus equilibrium. we analyzed the periodic behavior of opinions exhibited by
(b) Disagreement equilibrium within Mn. the proposed dynamics for the case of two agents. We pro-
vided necessary conditions for periodic solutions to exist and
sufficient conditions for a Hopf bifurcation to occur at the
which violates the necessary condition for consensus given in consensus equilibrium.
Theorem5.1.FromFigure2b,itcanbeseenthateveryagent’s Future research directions include extensions of the model
opinion converges to a value in the set M≈[−11.13,15.53] to a multi-topic scenario, analysis of periodic behavior exhib-
which verifies the results of Theorem 4.3 and Proposition 4.5. ited by opinions in the presence of antagonistic relations for a
Figure3ademonstratestheoscillatorybehaviorexhibitedby general n-agent case, and exploration of a more general class
opinions of two agents under (22). The model parameters for of utility functions and resource penalty functions.
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
this case are, z ≈ −0.0349 −0.0039 , c= −20 4.99 ,
0
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
w = 3 4 , p = 0 0 and r = 10 5 . Consider (22) APPENDIX
with the above parameter values and let c be the bifurcation
2 A. ProofofTheorem4.3
parameter. Notice that since p = p = 0, neutral consensus
1 2
z∗ = 0 ∈ E , ∀c ∈ R. These values satisfy the assumptions To prove this, we show that the dynamics (2) is strongly
2 (cid:104) (cid:105)
of Theorem 6.4 ensuring the existence a Hopf bifurcation contracting. Let J(z) := ∂f(z) denote the Jacobian matrix
∂z
at c∗ 2 = 5. The eigenvalues of the Jacobian J(z∗,c∗ 2) are of (2). The (i,j)th element of J(z) is
±0.0667j. As a result, a family of periodic orbits bifurcates
  
so ou lt uo tif ot nhe sn he ou wt nral ic non Fs ie gn us ru es 3e aqui il sib ariu mm ea mt bc e∗ 2 ran od
f
t th he ispe fr ai mod ili yc −w ir i − (cid:88) a ikr k − 3z i2 , ifi=j;
corresponding to c = 4.99 < c∗. Figure 3b shows the [J(z)] ij = B k∈V\{i} B r i
corresponding
trajec2
tory in the
phas2
e plane intersecting the
a ijr
j, ifi̸=j.
B
ellipsedefinedin(23).Thesesimulationssupporttheclaimof
Lemma 6.2 and its interpretation made in Remark 6.3. The induced ∞−log norm of J(z) is:
µ
(J(z))=max(cid:20)
− w ir i + (cid:88) 2|a ik|r k − 3z
i2(cid:21)
.
0.2 ∞ i∈V B k∈Ne B r i
i
UnderAssumption(A4),itcanbeseenthat∃k >0suchthat
0
µ (J(z)) < −k; ∀z ∈ Rn. Now, the proof of Theorem 4.1
∞
-0.2 guarantees existence of a set Ω ⊂ Rn which is convex,
ζ
closedandpositivef-invariantunderthedynamics(2).Further,
0 50 100
fromTheorem4.1,weknowthatnoequilibriumexistsoutside
Ω . Thus, from Theorem 2.3, the dynamics (2) is strongly
ζ
contracting in Ω and the unique equilibrium is globally
(a) (b) ζ
exponentially stable. This completes the proof. ■
Fig.3:Oscillatorybehaviorofopinions.(a)Opiniontrajectory.
(b) Intersection of corresponding trajectory with the ellipse.
B. ProofofProposition4.5
Notice that under Assumption (A3), the dynamics (2)
reduces to (4). First, we prove positive invariance of Mn
VIII. CONCLUSIONS
under(4)byinspectingthevectorfieldatzontheboundaryof
We proposed a non-linear model of opinion dynamics to Mn. Consider any i∈V such that z =m . From (7), we
i max
capture the effect of heterogeneous resources available to the seethatS (z )≤0andC (z )≤0,asm ≤m andz¯ isa
i i i i i max i
agents on their opinions. In contrast to our prior work [26], convexcombinationof{z }n andz∈Mn.Thus,f (z)≤0.
j j=1 i
we dealt with general social networks with (possibly) antago- Similarly, for any i∈V such that z =m , f (z)≥0. This
i min i
nistic relations. We showed ultimate boundedness of opinions implies that Mn is positively invariant under (4).
and provided sufficient conditions for the dynamics to have Now, we show that z(t) converges to Mn. Note that
a globally exponentially stable equilibrium point. We also Assumption (A3) is a special case of Assumption (A4) and
provided necessary and sufficient condition for the existence hence Theorem 4.3 guarantees that there is a unique globallyAUTHORetal.:OPINIONDYNAMICS:IMPACTOFRESOURCEPENALTY 11
exponentially stable equilibrium point z∗ ∈ E. We know Choosing j =i, Definition 5.12 and Lemma 5.13 implies the
that under Assumption (A3), z¯ is a convex combination of bound on π given in (21). ■
i u
{z } and that (7) holds. So, ∀z ∈/ Mn, ∃i ∈ V such
k k∈Ni
that z˙ ̸= 0. Hence, the unique globally exponentially stable E. ProofofLemma6.1
i
equilibrium point z∗ ∈Mn and as a result, z(t) converges to To prove this, rewrite (22) as,
Mn.
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
z˙ −S (z )+ c r /B z = c r /B z (24a)
Next, we prove the last claim in the result, i.e., for the 1 1 1 1 2 1 1 2 2
(cid:2) (cid:3) (cid:2) (cid:3)
special case of m min < m max. We have already seen that z˙ 2−S 2(z 2)+ c 2r 1/B z 2 = c 2r 1/B z 1 (24b)
under Assumption (A3), the unique globally exponentially
Now, suppose z (t) and z (t) are periodic with fundamental
stable equilibrium point z∗ ∈ Mn. The following statement 1 2
periods T >0 and T >0 respectively. Then, S (z (t)) and
1 2 1 1
is a direct consequence of (7).
z˙ (resp.S (z (t))andz˙ )arealsoperiodicwithfundamental
1 2 2 2
(S1) For i ∈ V, z i∗ = m max if and only if m i = m max and period T
1
(resp. T 2). Further, from (24), it can be seen that
z j∗ =m max, ∀j ∈N i. ∃ m,n ∈ N such that T
1
= mT
2
and T
2
= nT 1. Thus,
From the necessary condition on m i in (S1), we can say that m=n=1. This completes the proof. ■
(S2) z∗ <m , ∀i∈(V \V ).
i max max
A further consequence of (S1) is that for i ∈ V , if ∃j ∈ F. ProofofLemma6.2
max
N i∩(V\V max) then z¯ i∗ <m max and hence z i∗ <m max. We From the discussion just above Lemma 6.2, it is necessary
canusethisfactalongwith(S1)and(S2)toalsoreasonthatfor that at least one of c or c < 0 for periodic solutions to
1 2
i∈V max,z i∗ <m max ifandonlyifthereisadirectedwalkin exist.Further,itisalsonecessarythatbothconformityweights
Gfromj ∈(V\V max)toi.Wecanmakesimilarobservations are non-zero. Otherwise, from Lemma 4.2, the socially closed
corresponding to m min. From all these observations, we can agent’s opinion would converge to its own m
i
value. The
finally say that opinionofthecontrarianagentthenwouldalwaysconvergeto
(S3) z∗ lies in the interior of Mn if and only if ∀i ∈ V , an equilibrium. Now, it remains to show that (c r +w r +
max 2 1 1 1
∃ a directed walk in G starting from j ∈ V \V to w r + c r ) < 0 is necessary for existence of periodic
max 2 2 1 2
i and ∀i ∈ V , ∃ a directed walk in G starting from solutions. We prove the inverse using Bendixson’s criteria.
min
j ∈V \V to i. Note the divergence of the vector field (22) at z∈R2 is,
min
Convergence to Mn occurs in finite time if and only if the (w r +w r +c r +c r ) 3z2 3z2
globallyexponentiallystableequilibriumz∗ liesintheinterior div(f(z))=− 1 1 2 2 1 2 2 1 − 1 − 2.
B r r
of Mn. This completes the proof of the result. ■ 1 2
Suppose(c r +w r +w r +c r )>0.Then,div(f(z))<
2 1 1 1 2 2 1 2
0, ∀z ∈ R2. Thus, by Bendixson’s criteria [30, Lemma 2.2]
C. ProofofLemma5.13
there are no periodic orbits lying entirely in R2.
Suppose Assumption (A3) holds. Then ∀i ∈ V, it can be
Now,considerthecasewhen(c r +w r +w r +c r )=0.
2 1 1 1 2 2 1 2
verified using Gerschgorin disc theorem that the Hessian of Inthiscase,div(f(z))<0,∀z∈R2\{0}anddiv(f(z))=0iff
χ (z) is positive semidefinite, ∀z ∈ Rn. Hence, χ (z) is
i i z=0.Supposethereexistsaperiodicorbit,theninthesimply
convex. Now, m i1 satisfies the first order necessary condition connected region S ⊂ R2 enclosed by the periodic orbit,
for a point to be a local minimizer of χ (z). Since χ (z) is (cid:82)(cid:82)
i i (div(f(z)))dz dz = 0. However, this cannot happen
convex, m 1 is also a minimizer of χ (z). ■ S 1 2
i i unless S = {0}, which cannot correspond to a periodic
solution. Hence, again, periodic orbits cannot exist. ■
D. ProofofTheorem5.14
We get the lower bound on π e and π u from the Defini- G. ProofofTheorem6.4
tion 5.11. To get an upper bound on π , note that
e Under the assumption m = m = m, it follows from
1 2
min maxχ i(z)≥max min χ i(z). Theorem 5.1 that z∗ = m1 ∈ E ; ∀c 2 ∈ R. The Jacobian of
z∈Rn i∈V i∈V z∈Rn (22) evaluated about z∗ is,
Using this inequality and Lemma 5.13, we can upper bound (cid:20) (cid:21)
(−κ −d) d
π defined in Definition 5.11 as, ∀j ∈V, J(z∗,c )= 1 .
e 2 gc (−κ −gc )
max χ (z∗) (cid:20) χ (z∗) (cid:21) 2 2 2
π ≤ i∈V i ≤max i , Under the stated assumptions, if c = c∗ then the eigen-
e max i∈Vχ i(m i1) i∈V χ j(m j1) values of J(z∗,c∗) are purely imag2 inary.2 This satisfies the
2
for any j ∈ V. Choosing j = i, Definition 5.12 and first assumption of the Hopf bifurcation theorem [31, The-
Lemma 5.13 implies the bound on π e given in (21). Now, orem 3.4.2]. The eigenvalues λ(c 2) of J(z∗,c 2) which are
considerπ u asinDefinition5.11.FromLemma5.13,wehave, purely imaginary at c 2 = c∗ 2 vary smoothly with the c 2.
(cid:88) (cid:88) For values of c sufficently close to c∗, the real part of
min χ (z)≥ χ (m 1). 2 2
i i i
z∈Rn complex conjugate eigenvalue pair can be characterized as
i∈V i∈V
Re(λ(c ))=−0.5[κ +κ +d+gc ]. Now, it is easily seen
2 1 2 2
Using this we get, ∀j ∈V,
that the derivative of Re(λ(c )) with respect to c evaluated
2 2
π ≤
(cid:80) i∈Vχ i(z∗) =(cid:88)(cid:34) χ i(z∗) (cid:35) ≤(cid:88) χ i(z∗)
.
at c∗ 2 is dd c2 [Re(λ(c 2))]| c2=c∗ 2=− 2r B1 ̸=0. Hence, the second
u (cid:80) χ (m 1) (cid:80) χ (m 1) χ (m 1) assumption of the Hopf theorem is also satisfied. The claim
i∈V i i i∈V j j i∈V j j now follows directly from the Hopf bifurcation theorem. ■
j∈V12 GENERICCOLORIZEDJOURNAL,VOL.XX,NO.XX,XXXX2017
REFERENCES [27] F. Bullo, Contraction Theory for Dynamical Systems, 1.1 ed. Kindle
DirectPublishing,2023.[Online].Available:https://fbullo.github.io/ctds
[1] J.R.FrenchJr,“Aformaltheoryofsocialpower.”PsychologicalReview, [28] W. A. Coppel, Stability and asymptotic behavior of differential equa-
vol.63,no.3,p.181,1956. tions,ser.Heathmathematicalmonographs. Heath,1965.
[2] M. H. DeGroot, “Reaching a consensus,” Journal of the American [29] R.P.AbelsonandJ.C.Miller,“Negativepersuasionviapersonalinsult,”
StatisticalAssociation,vol.69,no.345,pp.118–121,1974. JournalofExperimentalSocialPsychology,vol.3,no.4,pp.321–333,
[3] R. P. Abelson, “Mathematical models of the distribution of attitudes 1967.
undercontroversy,”ContributionstoMathematicalPsychology,1964. [30] H. K. Khalil, Nonlinear systems; 3rd ed. Upper Saddle River, NJ:
[4] M. Taylor, “Towards a mathematical theory of influence and attitude Prentice-Hall,2002.
change,”HumanRelations,vol.21,no.2,pp.121–139,1968. [31] J. Guckenheimer and P. Holmes, Nonlinear oscillations, dynamical
[5] N. E. Friedkin and E. C. Johnsen, “Social influence and opinions,” systems,andbifurcationsofvectorfields. Springer,2013.
JournalofMathematicalSociology,vol.15,no.3-4,pp.193–206,1990.
[6] R.HegselmannandU.Krause,“Opiniondynamicsandboundedconfi-
dencemodels,analysis,andsimulation,”JournalofArtificialSocieties
PrashilWankhede(StudentMemberIEEE)re-
andSocialSimulation,vol.5,no.3,2002.
ceivedtheB.Tech.degreeinElectricalEngineer-
[7] C. Altafini, “Consensus problems on networks with antagonistic inter-
ing from Sardar Patel College of Engineering,
actions,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 58, no. 4, pp.
Mumbai,India,in2021.HeiscurrentlyaPh.D.
935–946,2013.
studentintheElectricalEngineeringDepartment
[8] G. Deffuant, D. Neau, F. Amblard, and G. Weisbuch, “Mixing beliefs
at the Indian Institute of Science, Bangalore,
among interacting agents,” Advances in Complex Systems, vol. 3, no.
India.Hisresearchinterestsincludemulti-agent
01n04,pp.87–98,2000.
systems, opinion dynamics, game theory and
[9] A.V.ProskurnikovandR.Tempo,“Atutorialonmodelingandanalysis
non-linearcontrol.
ofdynamicsocialnetworks.PartI,”AnnualReviewsinControl,vol.43,
pp.65–79,2017.
[10] ——,“Atutorialonmodelingandanalysisofdynamicsocialnetworks.
PartII,”AnnualReviewsinControl,vol.45,pp.166–190,2018. Nirabhra Mandal (Student Member IEEE) re-
[11] B. D. Anderson, F. Dabbene, A. V. Proskurnikov, C. Ravazzi, and ceived the B.Tech. degree in Electrical Engi-
M. Ye, “Dynamical networks of social influence: Modern trends and neering from the Institute of Engineering and
perspectives,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 17616–17627, Management, Kolkata, India, in 2017 and the
2020. M.Tech.(Res) degree in Electrical Engineering
[12] Z. Meng, G. Shi, K. H. Johansson, M. Cao, and Y. Hong, “Behaviors fromtheIndianInstituteofScience,Bengaluru,
of networks with antagonistic interactions and switching topologies,” India,in2021.HeiscurrentlyaPh.D.studentin
Automatica,vol.73,pp.110–116,2016. theMechanicalandAerospaceEngineeringDe-
[13] J.Liu,X.Chen,T.Bas¸ar,andM.A.Belabbas,“Exponentialconvergence partmentatUniversityofCalifornia,SanDiego,
ofthediscrete-andcontinuous-timealtafinimodels,”IEEETransactions USA. His research interests include multiagent
onAutomaticControl,vol.62,no.12,pp.6168–6182,2017. systems,distributionalrobustoptimzation,popu-
[14] P. Cisneros-Velarde, K. S. Chan, and F. Bullo, “Polarization and fluc- lationgames,evolutionarydynamicsonnetworks,andnonlinearcontrol.
tuations in signed social networks,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic
Control,vol.66,no.8,pp.3789–3793,2021. SoniaMart´ınez(FellowIEEE)isaProfessorof
[15] M.Ye,Y.Qin,A.Govaert,B.D.Anderson,andM.Cao,“Aninfluence Mechanical and Aerospace Engineering at the
networkmodeltostudydiscrepanciesinexpressedandprivateopinions,” University of California, San Diego, CA, USA.
Automatica,vol.107,pp.371–381,2019. She received her Ph.D. degree in Engineering
[16] P.Jia,A.Mirtabatabaei,N.E.Friedkin,andF.Bullo,“Opiniondynamics MathematicsfromtheUniversidadCarlosIIIde
andtheevolutionofsocialpowerininfluencenetworks,”SIAMReview, Madrid, Spain, in May 2002. She was a Visit-
vol.57,no.3,pp.367–397,2015. ingAssistantProfessorofAppliedMathematics
[17] M.YeandB.D.Anderson,“Modellingofindividualbehaviourinthe at the Technical University of Catalonia, Spain
degroot–friedkin self-appraisal dynamics on social networks,” in 2019 (2002- 2003), a Postdoctoral Fulbright Fellow
18thEuropeanControlConference(ECC),2019,pp.2011–2017. at the Coordinated Science Laboratory of the
[18] Y. Tian, P. Jia, A. MirTabatabaei, L. Wang, N. E. Friedkin, and UniversityofIllinois,Urbana-Champaign(2003-
F. Bullo, “Social power evolution in influence networks with stubborn 2004) and the Center for Control, Dynamical systems and Computa-
individuals,” IEEE Transactions on Automatic Control, vol. 67, no. 2, tion of the University of California, Santa Barbara (2004-2005). Her
pp.574–588,2022. researchinterestsincludethecontrolofnetworkedsystems,multi-agent
[19] J.GhaderiandR.Srikant,“Opiniondynamicsinsocialnetworkswith systems,nonlinearcontroltheory,andplanningalgorithmsinrobotics.
stubbornagents:Equilibriumandconvergencerate,”Automatica,vol.50, She became a Fellow of IEEE in 2018. She is a co-author (together
no.12,pp.3209–3215,2014. withF.BulloandJ.Corte´s)of“DistributedControlofRoboticNetworks”
[20] D. Bindel, J. Kleinberg, and S. Oren, “How bad is forming your own (PrincetonUniversityPress,2009).Sheisaco-author(togetherwithM.
opinion?”GamesandEconomicBehavior,vol.92,pp.248–265,2015. Zhu)of“DistributedOptimization-basedControlofMulti-agentNetworks
[21] S.R.Etesami,“Open-loopequilibriumstrategiesfordynamicinfluence inComplexEnvironments”(Springer,2015).SheistheEditorinChiefof
maximization game over social networks,” IEEE Control Systems Let- therecentlylaunchedCSSIEEEOpenJournalofControlSystems.
ters,vol.6,pp.1496–1500,2022.
[22] S. R. Etesami and T. Bas¸ar, “Game-theoretic analysis of the Pavankumar Tallapragada (S’12-M’14) re-
Hegselmann-Krausemodelforopiniondynamicsinfinitedimensions,” ceived his Ph.D. degree in Mechanical Engi-
IEEETransactionsonAutomaticControl,vol.60,no.7,pp.1886–1897, neeringfromtheUniversityofMaryland,College
2015. Parkin2013.HewasaPostdoctoralScholarin
[23] L.Zino,M.Ye,andM.Cao,“Atwo-layermodelforcoevolvingopinion the Department of Mechanical and Aerospace
dynamics and collective decision-making in complex social systems,” EngineeringattheUniversityofCalifornia,San
Chaos:AnInterdisciplinaryJournalofNonlinearScience,vol.30,no.8, Diegofrom2014to2017.HeiscurrentlyanAs-
p.083107,2020. sistantProfessorintheDepartmentofElectrical
[24] S. Park, A. Bizyaeva, M. Kawakatsu, A. Franci, and N. E. Leonard, Engineering and the Robert Bosch Centre for
“Tuningcooperativebehavioringameswithnonlinearopiniondynam- Cyber Physical Systems at the Indian Institute
ics,”IEEEControlSystemsLetters,vol.6,pp.2030–2035,2022. ofScience,Bangalore,India.Hisresearchinter-
[25] S.R.Etesami,S.Bolouki,A.Nedic´,T.Bas¸ar,andH.V.Poor,“Influence estsincludenetworkedcontrolsystems,distributedcontrol,multi-agent
of conformist and manipulative behaviors on public opinion,” IEEE systemsanddynamicsofsocialsystems.
Transactions on Control of Network Systems, vol. 6, no. 1, pp. 202–
214,2019.
[26] P. Wankhede, N. Mandal, and P. Tallapragada, “Opinion dynamics
for utility maximizing agents with heterogeneous resources,” in 2023
AmericanControlConference(ACC),2023,pp.1054–1061.