Adaptive Human-Swarm Interaction based on Workload Measurement
using Functional Near-Infrared Spectroscopy
Ayodeji O. Abioye1*, Aleksandra Landowska2*, William Hunt1, Horia Maior2,
Sarvapali D. Ramchurn1, Mohammad Naiseh3, Alec Banks4, and Mohammad D. Soorati1
Abstract—Oneofthechallengesofhuman-swarminteraction
(HSI)ishowtomanagetheoperator’sworkload.Inordertodo
this, we propose a novel neurofeedback technique for the real-
time measurement of workload using functional near-infrared
spectroscopy (fNIRS). The objective is to develop a baseline
for workload measurement in human-swarm interaction using
fNIRS and to develop an interface that dynamically adapts
to the operator’s workload. The proposed method consists of
using fNIRS device to measure brain activity, process this
through a machine learning algorithm, and pass it on to the
HSI interface. By dynamically adapting the HSI interface,
the swarm operator’s workload could be reduced and the
performance improved.
Fig. 1: Heatmap showing abstracted tasks and agent distri-
I. INTRODUCTION bution to reduce operator workload.
The design of a suitable interface for human-swarm inter-
actionforswarmoperationscanbechallenging.Theoperator
II. RELATEDWORKS
needs to be able to monitor the status of the swarm, which
couldconsistofathousandrobots.Thedatacollectedbythe Controlling swarms requires cognitive functions such as
swarmmayneedtobeaccessibletotheoperatorinreal-time attention distribution, planning, working memory, decision-
without resulting in an information overload. One approach making, and mental workload. Understanding the mental
is to abstract the information to reduce workload. However, state of the human operator through neurotechnology can
this could affect the explainability of the swarm actions and increase safety and trust, and reduce errors in human-swarm
hence the operator’s trust in the system. operations. Real-time workload measurement has been done
Previous works investigating the effect of workload in previously using pupillometry [6]. However, pupillometry
human-swarm interaction ([1], [2], [3]) often rely on sub- (eye-tracking) for workload in swarms is unreliable, and
jective user feedback using tools such as the NASA TLX the application is limited. This is because it is difficult to
surveyquestionnaire[4].Thishasthelimitationthatusersare interpret,itisimpactedbyconfoundingvariablessuchasthe
likely to provide feedback on elements that stood out during physiological state of the operator and lighting conditions,
their experiments. Data on how the workload changes over and it might obscure the view of the operator.
time during the experiment is lost. When using self-reports, Electroencephalography (EEG) was also used to measure
people reflect on past experiences that are not happening mental workload indicators during the teleoperation of an
in real time. Moreover, a body of psychological research unmanned aerial vehicle (UAV). The study demonstrated
demonstrated that people are bad at expressing their mental that EEG can identify different levels of mental workload
states [5]. Therefore this research explores an alternative in operators during human-swarm interaction scenarios [7].
approach which uses functional near-infrared spectroscopy However EEG suffers some drawbacks, such as poor spatial
(fNIRS)tomeasuretheswarmoperator’sworkloadovertime resolution,sensitivitytomotionartifacts,andtoenvironmen-
more objectively. This information is then used to adapt the tal noise. In contrast, functional near-infrared spectroscopy
user interface to reduce the operator’s workload. (fNIRS) uses near-infrared light to measure brain activity,
*Theseauthorscontributedequally. providing more robust signals that are less sensitive to mo-
∗∗Emails:{a.o.abioye,w.hunt,sdr1,m.soorati}@soton.ac.uk,
{aleksandra.landowska,horia.maior}@nottingham.ac.uk, tion and electromagnetic interference from the environment.
mnaiseh1@bournemouth.ac.uk,abanks@dstl.gov.uk fNIRShaspreviouslybeenusedtomeasurementalworkload,
1ElectronicsandComputerScience,UniversityofSouthampton,UK.
demonstrating that it can effectively distinguish between
2SchoolofComputerScience,UniversityofNottingham,UK.
3ComputingandInformatics,BournemouthUniversity,UK different levels of workload, particularly in the prefrontal
4DefenceScienceandTechnologyLaboratory,UK. cortex,thatareassociatedwithvariationsinmentalworkload
∗∗∗The authors wish to acknowledge the support received from the during realistic air traffic control and piloting tasks [8], [9]
EPSRCprojectonSmartSolutionsTowardsCellular-ConnectedUnmanned
or driving [10]. fNIRS has been used in measuring trust and
AerialVehiclesSystem(EP/W004364/1)andFAST-PIviatheUKRITrust-
worthyAutonomousSystemsHub(EP/V00784X/1). mental workload in collaborative human-agent triads [11]
4202
yaM
31
]OR.sc[
1v43870.5042:viXraand we examine its effectiveness in measuring workload in map or single-drone control, demands cognitive resources
real-time during human-swarm interaction. fromtheuser.Thishasimplicationsforthedesignofuserin-
terfacesinswarmrobotics,emphasizingtheneedtooptimise
III. METHODOLOGY
these systems for minimal cognitive load while maintaining
The methodology consists of two parts. The first part effective control and decision-making capabilities.
focuses on developing the adaptive interface using the Hu-
The application of neurotechnology in HSI also presents
man and Robot Interactive Swarm (HARIS) simulator [12].
several challenges that need to be addressed. For instance,
Heatmaprepresentationwasusedtoabstractagentsandtasks
employingthistechnologyinreal-worldscenariosintroduces
using a five-point slider, similar to the trust slider used in
thedifficultyofcontrollingconfoundingvariablesthatmight
[13]. Previous research [14] found this to be an effective
impact data quality. In real-world applications, the user’s
representation when the swarm size or number of tasks is
physical movements and changes in environmental lighting
large. Figure 1 shows a screenshot of the developed human
conditions could affect the measurements of brain activity,
swarm interaction interface.
leading to inaccuracies in detecting mental workload levels.
The second part focused on the application of the fNIRS
Addressing these challenges requires innovative solutions to
in measuring workload during a HSI experiment in HARIS.
ensure that neurotechnology can be effectively and reliably
We conducted a feasibility test on a single participant using
used outside of controlled laboratory settings.
the wireless fNIRS device. This was equipped with a probe
Individual differences in brain responses are another sig-
for the frontal cortex consisting of eleven sources and seven
nificantchallenge,aspeoplehaveuniquebrainstructuresand
detectors across twenty-three channels. The goal was to
exhibit unique brain signal patterns. This variability means
identify the brain area mediating HSI and key challenges
that algorithms used to interpret these signals must be indi-
or opportunities for using fNIRS in HSI. This sets the
viduallycalibratedtoeachuser,aprocessrequiringextensive
foundation for understanding the neural dynamics in HSI
datacollectionthatisoftenimpracticalinreal-worldsettings
and highlights the potential of fNIRS in this field.
due to time and resource constraints. To overcome these
The user experiment consisted of two scenarios. In the
challengesindesigningbetterautonomoussystems,employ-
first scenario, the participant matched individual drones to
ing AI could be a promising approach. AI and machine
individual task. In the second scenario, heatmap was used to
learning techniques could adapt to individual differences
abstractthedronesandtaskswhichmeantthattheparticipant
more efficiently by learning from smaller datasets. Such
couldassignaclusterofagentstoaclusteroftasks.Thesec-
approaches could enable systems to quickly adjust to new
ond scenario has more autonomy support that allows agents
users, reducing the need for extensive calibration while still
to intuitively distribute themselves to solving tasks even
providing personalized and effective solutions for HSI.
whenthenumberoftasksoutweighsthenumberofagentsin
Acquiring ethics approval to work on the sensitive brain
theheatmapclusters.Theaimwastodeterminewhichofthe
signals of the users is a complex process due to the privacy
twointerfacesimposesagreatermentalworkloadontheuser.
concerns of accessing and processing personal data. Due to
ThedatacollectedinthisstudywasanalysedusingaGeneral
this limitation, the current work only contains information
Linear Model (GLM) approach, implemented through the
from one case study of one of the authors, hence it is
NIRSToolbox[15],toassessthementalworkloadassociated
not generalisable. The purpose of the current work was to
with each HARIS interface.
demonstrate the methodology and test that it is possible
to measure detectable effects. Future works would explore
whether this detection is generalisable by recruiting more
participants.
V. CONCLUSIONS
In this paper, we proposed a method to improve the
Fig. 2: Changes in HbO concentrations across prefrontal human-swarminteractionexperienceforswarmoperatorsby
channels during interactions with the HARIS heatmap inter- reducingtheirworkloadwhilemaintaininghigh-performance
face, as identified by fNIRS contrast analysis. The intensity levels. We defined a human swarm teaming task requiring
of blue on a colour scale reflects the magnitude of these varying levels of focus and dexterity resulting in high and
changes being statistically significant. lowstress/workloadconditions.Wetestedthetaskfeasibility
fordetectingworkloadusingfNIRS.Wehighlightedthechal-
IV. RESULT&DISCUSSION
lenges in deploying fNIRS for measuring workload. Further
The results shown in Figure 2 revealed trends towards works would (a) conduct studies to develop the baseline
changes in the concentration of oxygenated haemoglobin for fNIRS workload measurement in HSI, and (b) integrate
(HbO) in the left dorsolateral prefrontal cortex (DLPFC), workload measurement directly into the HSI interface, so it
an area associated with mental workload, working memory, can dynamically adapt to changes in workload due to task
anddecision-making.TheincreasedactivityintheleftDPFC density increasing or decreasing while maintaining a high
suggests that interacting with swarms, whether via a heat task completion efficiency.REFERENCES [8] H. Ayaz, P. A. Shewokis, S. Bunce, K. Izzetoglu, B. Willems, and
B.Onaral,“Opticalbrainmonitoringforoperatortrainingandmental
[1] A. O. Abioye, M. Naiseh, W. Hunt, J. Clark, S. D. Ramchurn, and
workloadassessment,”Neuroimage,vol.59,no.1,pp.36–47,2012.
M.D.Soorati,“Theeffectofdatavisualisationqualityandtaskdensity
[9] G. Durantin, J.-F. Gagnon, S. Tremblay, and F. Dehais, “Using
onhuman-swarminteraction,”in202332ndIEEEInternationalCon-
near infrared spectroscopy and heart rate variability to detect mental
ferenceonRobotandHumanInteractiveCommunication(RO-MAN),
overload,”Behaviouralbrainresearch,vol.259,pp.16–23,2014.
Aug2023,pp.1494–1501.
[10] H.J.FoyandP.Chapman,“Mentalworkloadisreflectedindriverbe-
[2] A. O. Abioye, W. Hunt, Y. Gu, E. Schneiders, M. Naiseh,
haviour,physiology,eyemovementsandprefrontalcortexactivation,”
J. E. Fischer, S. D. Ramchurn, M. D. Soorati, B. Archibald,
Appliedergonomics,vol.73,pp.90–99,2018.
and M. Sevegnani, “The effect of predictive formal modelling at
[11] L. Eloy, E. J. Doherty, C. A. Spencer, P. Bobko, and L. Hirshfield,
runtimeonperformanceinhuman-swarminteraction,”inCompanion
“Using fnirs to identify transparency- and reliability-sensitive
of the 2024 ACM/IEEE International Conference on Human-Robot
markers of trust across multiple timescales in collaborative human-
Interaction, ser. HRI ’24. New York, NY, USA: Association
human-agent triads,” Frontiers in Neuroergonomics, vol. 3, 2022.
for Computing Machinery, 2024, p. 172–176. [Online]. Available:
[Online].Available:https://www.frontiersin.org/articles/10.3389/fnrgo.
https://doi.org/10.1145/3610978.3640725
2022.838625
[3] M. Chandarana, D. Hughes, M. Lewis, K. Sycara, and S. Scherer,
[12] M. D. Soorati, M. Naiseh, W. Hunt, K. Parnell, J. Clark, and
“Planning and monitoring multi-job type swarm search and service
S.D.Ramchurn,“Enablingtrustworthinessinhuman-swarmsystems
missions,”JournalofIntelligent&RoboticSystems,vol.101,no.44,
throughadigitaltwin,”inPuttingAIintheCriticalLoop,P.Dasgupta,
p.14,February2021.
J.Llinas,T.Gillespie,S.Fouse,W.Lawless,R.Mittu,andD.Sofge,
[4] S.G.Hart,“Nasataskloadindex(tlx),”1986.
Eds. AcademicPress,2024,pp.93–125.[Online].Available:https:
[5] D.Tempelaar,B.Rienties,andQ.Nguyen,“Subjectivedata,objective
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/B978044315988600008X
data and the role of bias in predictive modelling: Lessons from a
[13] C.Nam,P.Walker,H.Li,M.Lewis,andK.Sycara,“Modelsoftrust
dispositionallearninganalyticsapplication,”PloSone,vol.15,no.6,
in human control of swarms with varied levels of autonomy,” IEEE
p.e0233977,2020.
TransactionsonHuman-MachineSystems,vol.50,no.3,pp.194–204,
[6] D. St-Onge, M. Kaufmann, J. Panerati, B. Ramtoula, Y. Cao, E. B.
June2020.
Coffey,andG.Beltrame,“Planetaryexplorationwithrobotteams:Im-
[14] M.DivbandSoorati,J.Clark,J.Ghofrani,D.Tarapore,andS.D.Ram-
plementinghigherautonomywithswarmintelligence,”IEEERobotics
churn, “Designing a user-centered interaction interface for human–
&AutomationMagazine,vol.27,no.2,pp.159–168,2019.
swarmteaming,”Drones,vol.5,no.4,p.131,2021.
[7] R. Fernandez Rojas, E. Debie, J. Fidock, M. Barlow, K. Kasmarik,
[15] H. Santosa, X. Zhai, F. Fishburn, and T. Huppert, “The nirs brain
S. Anavatti, M. Garratt, and H. Abbass, “Electroencephalographic
analyzirtoolbox,”Algorithms,vol.11,no.5,p.73,2018.
workload indicators during teleoperation of an unmanned aerial
vehicle shepherding a swarm of unmanned ground vehicles in
contested environments,” Frontiers in Neuroscience, vol. 14, 2020.
[Online].Available:https://www.frontiersin.org/journals/neuroscience/
articles/10.3389/fnins.2020.00040