Neural Network Tire Force Modeling for
Automated Drifting (AVEC ’24)
Nicholas Drake Broadbent, Trey Weber, Daiki Mori, and J. Christian Gerdes
Stanford University, Stanford CA 94305, USA
{ndbroadb,tpweber,dmori,gerdes}@stanford.edu
Abstract. Automateddriftingpresentsachallengeproblemforvehicle
control,requiringmodelsandcontrolalgorithmsthatcanpreciselyhan-
dlenonlinear,coupledtireforcesatthefrictionlimits.Wepresentaneu-
ralnetworkarchitectureforpredictingfronttirelateralforceasadrop-in
replacement for physics-based approaches. With a full-scale automated
vehiclepurpose-builtforthedriftingapplication,wedeploythesemodels
in a nonlinear model predictive controller tuned for tracking a reference
drifting trajectory, for direct comparisons of model performance. The
neural network tire model exhibits significantly improved path tracking
performance over the brush tire model in cases where front-axle brak-
ing force is applied, suggesting the neural network’s ability to express
previously unmodeled, latent dynamics in the drifting condition.
Keywords: Machine Learning, Tire Modeling, Autonomous Driving.
1 Introduction
The maneuvering capability of a vehicle is fundamentally limited by the fric-
tion between the tires and the road. Vehicle operation at the friction limits may
require large lateral and longitudinal tire slip, a regime that can be difficult to
modelaccuratelyinthepresenceofparametervariation[1].Thisisdueinpartto
themanyempiricallydefinedcharacteristicsoftirematerialcomposition(e.g.co-
efficient of friction between tire and road, cornering stiffness of the tire, thermal
properties)and thegeometry oftire andsuspensionsubassemblies(e.g. camber,
caster, and toe angles) that can significantly impact the overall vehicle dynam-
ics [2]. The resulting force and moment computations of physics-based models
are sensitive to the precise representation of these dynamic characteristics, par-
ticularly when operating in coupled slip regions at the limits of handling [1].
Recently,autonomousracinganddriftinghaveemergedaschallengeproblems
fordemonstratingprecisevehiclecontrolatthefrictionlimits.Whileinteresting
problems on their own, the insights gained from automated racing and drifting
also lay the foundation for future automated systems that could improve safety.
To succeed, controllers must reliably control tire forces in these nonlinear, cou-
pled slip regions. Autonomous drifting, in particular, poses challenges as the
tires are not only operating in these coupled slip regions but also heating and
disintegrating over the course of the test [3].
4202
luJ
81
]YS.ssee[
1v06731.7042:viXra2 Nicholas Drake Broadbent et al. (AVEC ’24)
Manyexamplesintheliteraturehaveshownthatanautonomousvehicle,with
thoughtful modeling and control design, can drift. Velenis was one of the first
to develop a controller for automated drifting, stabilizing the vehicle around an
unstablecorneringequilibriumwithalargesideslipangle[4].Subsequentcontrol
approachesbyotherauthorshaveextendedthisresulttopathtrackingand,with
theuseoffrontaxlebraking,simultaneousvelocitycontrol,demonstratedonfull
scale test vehicles [5]. The success of these approaches, applied to a variety of
autonomous drifting problems, suggest that automated vehicles could harness
these dynamics for greatly increased maneuverability.
Perhaps surprisingly, front axle braking while drifting poses an even more
difficult modeling problem than the rear axle. Unlike the rear tires, the front
tires are not always saturated and the tires are not coupled through a locked
differential. Front suspension geometry while drifting with large steering angles
further complicates modeling the coupled front tire forces. This is particularly
truewithdedicateddriftingvehiclessuchasTakumi,ourautomated2019Toyota
SuprabuilttoFormulaDriftspecifications.Takumifeaturesacustomfrontwheel
alignmentdesignedforhigh-performancedrifting(-7+/-0.3degreescamberand
6 +/- 0.3 degrees caster at 0 degrees steering angle). This setup creates effects
inthecoupledslipbehaviorthatcanbedifficulttomodel,sincethetirecontact
patch changes size and location based on steering angle.
Artificial intelligence offers a chance to address some of these challenges.
Djeumouet al.developedfrontandreartireforcemodelsfordriftingusingneu-
ralordinarydifferentialequationsandneural-ExpTanhparameterization,ensur-
ing physical accuracy by constraining predictions to a family of solutions and
capturinghigher-ordereffectsfromvehicledata.Comparedtoanonlinearmodel
predictive controller using the Fiala brush tire model, their models significantly
improved tracking, smoothed control inputs, and sped up computation time in
experiments [6]. Notably, their approach focused on steering and drive torque
and did not include the front axle braking necessary for independent speed con-
trol. Given the particular challenges with modeling front axle tire force genera-
tion under braking, we propose a neural network for predicting front tire lateral
force that makes no prior assumptions about the shape of the resulting tire
curve (or constraining predictions accordingly), relying exclusively on capturing
these dynamics with vehicle data. Comparing the performance to that of the
Fiala brush model in an experimental setup similar to that of Djeumou et al,
thelearning-basedmodelachievedsignificantlybetteroveralltrajectorytracking
performance with no increase in computational complexity. Deeper analysis of
theresultshighlightstheimportanceoftrainingdatacoverageofthestatespace
and potential opportunities for extending this approach to learn higher-order
effects.
2 Experimental Setup
2.1 Neural Network Model Development
We structure the input layer of the neural network around the same terms that
define lateral tire force generation within the Fiala brush model, as shown inNeural Network Drifting (AVEC ’24) 3
Fig. 1. We label vehicle states (yaw rate, velocity, and sideslip angle) and con-
trol inputs (steering angle and braking force) with raw measurements from the
vehicle. The corresponding normal and lateral forces are labeled with estimates
provided by an unknown input observer.
Fig.1. Neural network architecture for predicting lateral tire force
The data used to train the neural network features a combination of auto-
mated and manual drifting, amounting to approximately 30 minutes recorded
uptoonemonthbeforethesecomparativeexperimentstookplace.Onedataset,
featuring automated drifting with instances of front axle braking collected the
day before these experiments, is held out of the training data in order to it-
eratively tune the hyperparameters of the model including batch size, training
epochs, activation function, and number of hidden elements. The resulting neu-
ral network consists of a three-layer feedforward architecture with 8 elements in
thefirsthiddenlayer,16elementsinthesecondhiddenlayerandtanhactivation
functions in both hidden layers. While quite small by neural network standards,
thismodelsizecorrespondstoaroughly35msaveragesolvetime,approximately
equivalent to that of the physics-based tire model used for comparisons. There-
fore, a model of this size represents a drop-in replacement for a physical tire
model. Training proceeds by cycling through mini-batches of 1000 samples over
1000 epochs, with loss optimization governed by the Adam optimizer and mean
squared error loss function.
2.2 Trajectory Generation
The same tire force observer that generates front tire lateral force labels for the
neural network training assists in fitting front and rear axle tire parameters.
In addition to fully defining the Fiala brush model that served as the point of
comparisonfortheseexperiments,thesetireparametersandtheresultingmodel
are used in computing the offline reference trajectory, similar in approach to
Weber[7].Thistrajectoryfeaturesa15meterradiuscirclepathwithaconstant
sideslip angle of -40 degrees. By incorporating front axle braking, the target
velocity decreases from the equilibrium value without the use of brakes (V )
sol
with each revolution of the map (lap 1: V = V , lap 2: V = 0.95·V ,
des sol des sol
lap 3: V = 0.875·V ), allowing us to compare model performance in the
des sol
condition of increasing front axle longitudinal force (lap 1: F =0 N, lap 2:
xf,ref
F =1000 N, lap 3: F =2150 N).
xf,ref xf,ref4 Nicholas Drake Broadbent et al. (AVEC ’24)
2.3 Control Architecture
Nonlinear Model Predictive Control (NMPC) can handle multi-input, multi-
output systems with nonlinear dynamics and constraints on both states and
inputs while predicting future system behavior. These properties are advanta-
geous in trajectory tracking for automated drifting, as exhibited by both Goel
and Weber [5,7]. The implementation of NMPC for these experiments is very
similar to that of the latter contribution, with a similar cost function (reformu-
lated as a velocity tracking problem) and slightly different costs. The baseline
physics-basedMPCincorporatesaFialabrushfronttiremodel.Theneuralnet-
work MPC (NNMPC) features an otherwise identical control framework with
the same rear tire model and the learning-based front tire lateral force model as
a drop-in replacement for the Fiala brush tire model.
3 Results and Discussion
Fig.2. Tire model comparison of tracking performance under braking
While both controllers slightly undershoot desired velocity after initiation, NN-
MPC is able to respond to the error more quickly and with less oscillation, as
shown in Fig. 2a. This is consistent throughout the run, whereas the physics-
based MPC tends to respond to changes in desired speed more slowly, incurringNeural Network Drifting (AVEC ’24) 5
a higher frequency of large absolute velocity errors in the process. This hesita-
tion persists in sideslip angle tracking as well, where physics-based MPC shows
some greater deviation from the desired -40 degree sideslip while negotiating
control in the other states, as shown in Fig. 2b. Conversely, NNMPC is able to
more quickly achieve and maintain the desired sideslip angle, leading to higher
frequencies of small absolute sideslip angle errors in the process.
NNMPC’s trend of high performance in the velocity states translates well
to path tracking performance, where it exhibits a relatively low mean and max
absolute lateral error, as shown in Fig. 2c. In contrast, the physics-based con-
trol appears to cause Takumi to slowly slide out from the desired path as the
experiment progresses. This trend is consistent with the fact the tire tempera-
tureincreasesthroughouttheexperimentandproportionallyreducesfriction,as
shown by Kobayashi [3]. Conversely, the neural network-based model does not
rely upon explicit tire parameterization for the front axle. The neural network
may potentially be underfitting these temperature-dependent friction dynamics
by generalizing to tire force generation characteristics that are indicative of a
wide range of tire temperatures.
NNMPC’s comparatively strong performance trends in both velocity and
path state tracking appears to yield an overall reduced steering control effort
required to maintain the drift equilibrium throughout the maneuver, as shown
in Fig. 2d. However, if we decompose the stages of this experiment further into
thedriftinitiationregion(s=90.7:112.5)andsteadystateequilibriumregion(s
= 112.5:435.3), we gain further insights into the advantages and disadvantages
of each respective modeling approach—particularly when we focus into the ini-
tiation region dynamics, as shown in the insets of Fig. 2. For example, while it
mayappearthatNNMPCisoutperformingphysics-basedMPCintheinitiation
region,themeanabsoluteerrorsofvelocity,sideslipangle,andsteeringangleare
higherwithNNMPCthanwithphysics-basedMPC—andthepercentdifference
is significant (49%, 31%, and 26%, respectively). This is in stark contrast to
the steady state equilibrium region of the experiment, where the mean absolute
errors of velocity, sideslip angle, lateral error, and steering angle are lower with
NNMPC than with physics-based MPC, where the percent difference is signif-
icant once again (41%, 46%, 55%, and 53%, respectively). One explanation for
thisbehaviormaybefoundinthewayinwhichtheneuralnetworkwastrained.
Of the approximately 30 minutes of data used to train the model, less than 5%
can be prescribed to the drift initiation region. This imbalance in data repre-
sentation can potentially lead to a bias toward solely capturing the dynamics
of the steady state equilibrium region. Since the gradients calculated from the
dominant region will have a greater influence on the network’s parameter up-
dates, this can cause the model to prioritize minimizing the loss in the steady
state equilibrium region at the expense of capturing the dynamics of the drift
initiation region, further exacerbating the imbalance represented in the data.
Another explanation for this behavior may be rooted in how the features
andtargetswerelabelledandsynchronized.Latenciesinherentinobserverssuch
as the one used to label tire force targets can cause a temporal misalignment6 Nicholas Drake Broadbent et al. (AVEC ’24)
between the observed states and the actual system states—impairing the neural
network’s ability to learn the correct temporal patterns and dynamics of the
system. This may be particularly crucial in the drift initiation region, where the
vehicle is highly dynamic, undergoing comparatively far greater velocity state
derivatives(inyawrate,velocity,andsideslipangle)thanthoseindicativeofthe
steady state equilibrium region.
4 Conclusion
This investigation presents a novel neural network architecture for predicting
fronttirelateralforcesasasubstitutefortraditionalphysics-basedmodels,with
aspecificfocusonautonomousvehicledriftingmaneuvers.Throughcomparative
experimentation using a full-scale automated vehicle, we demonstrated that the
neural network model significantly enhances path tracking performance, espe-
cially under conditions involving front-axle braking forces. The implications of
thisstudyaresignificantforthedevelopmentofadvancedcontrolsystemsinau-
tonomousvehicles,particularlythosedesignedtooperateinextremeconditions.
Aswecontinuetobuildtrustandunderstandinginmachinelearningtechniques,
we maybe ableto achieve higherlevels ofprecision andreliability invehicle dy-
namicsmodeling,pavingthewayforsaferandmoreefficientautonomousdriving
technologies.
This research may be extended in several ways to ultimately achieve similar
closed-loop performance in trajectories of increasing complexity. Since observer
latencyandtemporalmisalignmentoflabeleddatamayhavebeenanissuewith
thisapproach,wearecurrentlyinvestigatingapproacheswithtargetlabelingthat
relysolelyuponvehicle-collectedmeasurementstopotentiallyeliminatethisbe-
havior.Additionalperformanceenhancementscanconceivablybeobtainedwith
the inclusion of additional relevant states as input to the neural network (e.g.
tire temperature, in order to capture temperature-dependent dynamics) or sim-
ply expanding the complexity of the network itself as computational limitations
allow.
References
1. Svendenius, J.: Tire Modeling and Friction Estimation. Lund University. (2007)
2. Pacejka,H.B.:TireandVehicleDynamics.3rded.,Butterworth-Heinemann(2012)
3. Kobayashi, T., Weber, T. P., Gerdes, J. C.: Trajectory Planning Using Tire Ther-
modynamicsforAutomatedDrifting.IEEEIntelligentVehiclesSymposium,(2024)
4. Velenis, E., Katzourakis, D., Frazzoli, E., Tsiotras, P., Happee, R.: Steady-state
drifting stabilization of RWD vehicles. Control Engineering Practice. 19, (2011)
5. Goel,T.:InCompleteControl;SimulataneousPath,Speed,andSideslipangleCon-
trol of a Drifting Automobile. Stanford University, Stanford, CA (2022)
6. Djeumou, F., Goh, J., Topcu, U., Balachandran, A.: Autonomous Drifting with 3
Minutes of Data via Learned Tire Models. In: ICRA, IEEE, London (2023)
7. Weber, T. P., Gerdes, J. C.: Modeling and Control for Dynamic Drifting Trajecto-
ries. IEEE Transactions on Intelligent Vehicles, (2023)