Eye-tracking in Mixed Reality for Diagnosis of
Neurodegenerative Diseases
Mateusz Daniol1, Daria Hemmerling1, Jakub Sikora1, Pawel Jemiolo1,
Marek Wodzinski1,2, and Magdalena Wojcik-Pedziwiatr3
Abstract—Parkinson’s disease ranks as the second most IdentifyingandcharacterizingbiomarkersforPDhavebecome
prevalent neurodegenerative disorder globally. This research increasinglyimportantforearlydiagnosisandeffectivedisease
aims to develop a system leveraging Mixed Reality capabilities
monitoring. Recently, the analysis of eye movements became
for tracking and assessing eye movements. In this paper, we
a significant research field among the potential biomarkers,
present a medical scenario and outline the development of an
application designed to capture eye-tracking signals through mostlyduetothepotentialtoprovideinsightsintotheneuronal
MixedRealitytechnologyfortheevaluationofneurodegenerative mechanisms and pathways involved in PDF pathogenesis. In
diseases. Additionally, we introduce a pipeline for extracting Mixed Reality (MR) glasses, modern eye-tracking technology
clinicallyrelevantfeaturesfromeye-gazeanalysis,describingthe
usesinfraredlightsourcesandcamerastomonitorthewearer’s
capabilities of the proposed system from a medical perspective.
eyemovementcontinuously.Thishardwareconfigurationcap-
The study involved a cohort of healthy control individuals
and patients suffering from Parkinson’s disease, showcasing tures pupil and corneal reflections, providing precise data on
the feasibility and potential of the proposed technology for gaze direction. The real-time processing unit in MR glasses
non-intrusive monitoring of eye movement patterns for the computes the wearer’s gaze point, enabling interactions like
diagnosis of neurodegenerative diseases.
seamless object selection, menu navigation, and dynamic
adjustment of virtual elements based on gaze. Reflective
Clinical relevance— Developing a non-invasive biomarker for
Parkinson’s disease is urgently needed to accurately detect the waveguidetechnology,usingmirrorstoredirectlight,offersan
disease’s onset. This would allow for the timely introduction efficient solution for developing highly effective eye-tracking
of neuroprotective treatment at the earliest stage and enable systems.
the continuous monitoring of intervention outcomes. The ability
Ocular motor disruptions in PD involve various abnormal-
to detect subtle changes in eye movements allows for early
ities, particularly affecting reflexive saccades (RS), antisac-
diagnosis,offeringacriticalwindowforinterventionbeforemore
pronounced symptoms emerge. Eye tracking provides objective cades(AS),memory-guidedsaccades(MGS),andsmoothpur-
and quantifiable biomarkers, ensuring reliable assessments of suit(SP).InPD,RSareoftenhypometric,especiallyvertically,
diseaseprogressionandcognitivefunction.Theeyegazeanalysis indicatingaspecificdisruptioninsaccadiceyemovement.AS
using Mixed Reality glasses is wireless, facilitating convenient
tasks reveal increased latency and error rates, serving as a
assessments in both home and hospital settings. The approach
distinctivemarkerfromotherdisorders.PD-relatedimpairment
offers the advantage of utilizing hardware that requires no ad-
ditional specialized attachments, enabling examinations through in MGS is characterized by reduced accuracy and increased
personal eyewear. latency, distinguishing it from conditions like Huntington’s
Index Terms—saccades, augmented reality, signal processing, disease. Additionally, SP in PD shows reduced velocity and
eye monitoring
smoothness, with distinctions from cerebellar ataxia or multi-
ple system atrophy.
I. INTRODUCTION
The exploration of eye movements as a potential biomarker
Parkinson’s disease (PD) is a prevalent neurodegenerative
for the diagnosis and measurement of Parkinson’s disease has
disorder affecting over 10 million individuals worldwide [1].
demonstrated encouraging results [2]–[7]. Furthermore, the
non-invasive,objective,andrapidnatureofeyetrackingmakes
The project was funded by The National Centre for Research and Devel-
opment,PolandunderLiderGrantno:LIDER/6/0049/L-12/20/NCBIR/2021. it an attractive approach for evaluating oculomotion, with the
The project was funded by The National Centre for Research and Devel- added potential for gamification mechanisms using MR tech-
opment,PolandunderLiderGrantno:0049/L-12/2020.
1Mateusz Daniol, Daria Hemmerling, Jakub Sikora, Pawel Jemiolo, and nology to enhance diagnostic capabilities. In the area of MR
MarekWodzinskiarewiththeAGHUniversityofKrako´w,FacultyofElectri- in medicine, Microsoft Hololens (1 & 2) glasses are the main
calEngineering,Automatics,ComputerScience,andBiomedicalEngineering, player, but from over 200 applications reviewed by Gsaxner
Krakow,Poland.hemmer@agh.edu.pl
2MarekWodzinskiisalsowiththeUniversityofAppliedSciencesWestern et al. only a few are related to patient diagnostics [8]. What
Switzerland(HES-SOValais),InformationSystemsInstitute,Sierre,Switzer- is more important there are almost no studies evaluating the
land. use of MR glasses in monitoring neurodegenerative diseases
3Magdalena Wojcik-Pedziwiatr is with the Andrzej Frycz Modrzewski
[9]. There is also a lack of studies investigating off-the-shelf
KrakowUniversity,DepartmentofNeurology,Krakow,Poland.
©2024IEEEmustbeobtainedforallotheruses,inanycurrentorfuture eye tracking in detecting PD-related eye movement disorders.
media,includingreprinting/republishingthismaterialforadvertisingorpro- Traditional methods of eye movement monitoring face sev-
motionalpurposes,creatingnewcollectiveworks,forresaleorredistribution
eral challenges, including the requirement for costly equip-
to servers or lists, or reuse of any copyrighted component of this work in
otherworks. ment, specialized software, and difficulties in adapting them
4202
rpA
91
]CH.sc[
1v48921.4042:viXraA. Acquisition Procedure
In the first task, participants focus on appearing points,
each preceded by a central point, and perform 30 repetitions.
Points randomly appear at positions (-20, -10, 10, and 20
degrees relative to the participant’s head) and are displayed
at continuous random intervals ranging from 1 to 3 seconds.
The second task, known as anti-saccades, is structurally
Fig.1. Auserengagedinaneyemovementtask(A),userviewduringthe
identical(handledbythesamecodesegment),withthediffer-
activity(B).
ence being in the instruction. Participants are asked to direct
their gaze in the opposite direction to the appearing point, so
if the point appears on the right side, the participant should
for use in a hospital environment [3], [10]. Our study using
look to the left.
the Microsoft HoloLens 2 (HL2) tackles cost and complex-
ity issues by leveraging its integrated eye-tracking features. The third task called memory-guided saccades, is presented
This user-friendly solution eliminates the need for separate, asachallengingtask,precededbyinstructionsandanexercise
expensive eye-tracking setups, making HL2 a portable and with a guiding arrow that is later absent in the main part of
easily deployable option for hospitals, seamlessly integrating the task. The instructional phase involves 10 repetitions, and
into existing healthcare systems. participants are instructed to look at the location where the
point appeared previously. The sequence and placement of
Contribution:ThisresearchfocusesondevelopingaMixed
points are analogous to the previous tasks, and the times and
Reality-based system for tracking and evaluating eye move-
places of their appearance are also randomized. In the main
ments.Wepresentamedicalscenarioanddetailthecreationof
part of the task, 30 repetitions are performed.
anapplicationdesignedtocaptureeye-trackingsignalsthrough
Mixed Reality technology for neurodegenerative disease as- In the fourth task, involving eye-tracking movements, par-
sessment. Additionally, we introduce a pipeline for extracting ticipants are tasked with observing a moving point. Points
clinically relevant features from eye-gaze analysis, empha- oscillate from -15 to 15 degrees and back relative to the
sizing the system’s medical capabilities. The study included participant’s head. Thirty repetitions are performed, and two
bothhealthyindividualsandpatientswithParkinson’sdisease, frequencies are randomly selected: 0.2 or 0.4 Hz.
illustratingtheviabilityandpromiseofourtechnologyinnon-
intrusively monitoring eye movement patterns. This suggests B. Technical Details
potential applications for the diagnosis of neurodegenerative
diseases. The HoloLens 2 features an integrated eye tracker with
a sampling rate of 30 Hz and a spatial accuracy of 1.5°
[11], capable of concurrently recording gaze data from both
II. METHODS eyes. Although the standard eye-tracking API of the device
does not permit the extraction of raw monocular signals,
The study involves participants performing a series of four such functionality is accessible through the Eye Tracking
tasks, utilizing an integration of MR glasses to conduct a Extended API. Our contribution lies in the development of an
detailed examination of rapid and deliberate eye movements. application for the acquisition of eye-tracking data, utilizing
Before each task, the user is presented with either textual the standard 30 Hz eye-tracking capabilities of the HoloLens
and auditory instructions or undergoes a brief training session Glasses.Thisfrequencyiscommonlyemployedincommercial
guiding them on the correct task execution. In Figure 1, the Mixed Reality systems not intended for scientific research
user is depicted performing an eye movement task alongside and is readily accessible to software developers. We aimed
their corresponding perspective. toexaminethefeasibilityofutilizingeyetrackingtechnology,
MR technology enables to capture and analyze fast eye evenatlowerfrequencies,whichisstandardlyavailableinMR
movements, particularly reflex saccades triggered by external solutions, for the detection of syndromes associated with neu-
stimuli. The advanced tracking capabilities of the MR glasses rodegenerative diseases. The application is composed of two
facilitate a nuanced exploration of voluntary gaze redirection layers: an interactive app built on Unity for the presentation
inantisaccades,emulatingcomplexdecision-makingscenarios of tasks and a C++ based layer for the low-level acquisition
with high fidelity. Moreover, the study delves into memory- of sensor data. This setup enables the collection of signals
guidedsaccades,whereinparticipantsnavigateanMRenviron- from all available sensors, including the inertial measurement
ment, providing insights into the interplay between memory unit (IMU), microphones, and eye-tracking data (such as the
processes and ocular motor control. The application of MR directionofeyegazeandgazedistance),alongwithacquisition
glasses extends to examining slow eye movements, including timestamps.TheUnitylayersimilarlyrecordsthepositionsof
gaze fixation and smooth pursuit. Gaze fixation is scrutinized holographicobjectspresentedtotheuser.Allcollecteddatais
in dynamic real-world scenarios, allowing for a fine-grained storedintheinternalmemoryoftheHoloLens2andprocessed
visual attention analysis during the task. post-procedure.C. Data Processing e) Average latency: Average latency was calculated as a
Raw data collected from HL2 including an eye tracker difference between a timestamp of first saccade in a correct
timestamp, the eye gaze vector, and the eye gaze origin direction in response to a stimulus, and corresponding stimu-
point, were extracted. The eye gaze position was calculated lus.
f) Incorrect saccades ratio: Instances of stimuli where
as origin+direction vector sum. The X-axis component of
the first registered saccade was in the same direction as the
the eye gaze position was extracted and normalized to the
stimuli were counted as incorrect and a ratio of incorrect to
HL2 field of view. This normalization facilitates comparison
incorrect summed with correct ones was calculated.
with the positions of visual stimuli. The positions of these
Theparametersformemory-guidedsaccadesareasfollows:
visual stimuli were obtained from the logging component of
g) Incorrect saccades ratio: Instances of stimuli where
the HL2 Unity application. The stimulus display timestamp
the first registered saccade was in a different direction to
and the X-axis position component were extracted from this
a previous stimulus were counted as incorrect, and a ratio
data. The eye gaze position data underwent filtering using a
of incorrect to incorrect summed with correct results was
Savitzky-Golay filter [12] for noise reduction and smoothing.
calculated.
In the sections focusing on reflex, antisaccades, and memory
In computing smooth pursuit, the algorithm considers:
saccades, saccade points in the filtered signal were identified
h) Smooth pursuit speed: The speed of the gaze signal
as the first gaze data point with an amplitude exceeding half
wascalculatedasagradientoftheabsolutevalueofgazedata.
of the signal’s standard deviation, in response to a peripheral
Mean and standard deviation were evaluated.
visual stimulus. If no such response occurred before the
i) Smoothpursuitacceleration: Accelerationofthegaze
appearance of the next visual stimulus, no saccade point was
signalwascalculatedasasecondderivativeofgazedata.RMS
recorded.
of acceleration was evaluated.
For reflex saccades 4 parameters were extracted:
Parameters calculated from each part of the experiment are
a) Latency: Latency was calculated as a difference be-
as follows:
tween the timestamps of a saccade point, and the first visual
• Reflex Saccades: average latency [ms], average saccade
stimulus displayed before that saccade point. Due to how
speed [°/ms], average amplitudes for 10 and 20 degrees
saccade points were registered, this guaranteed no instances
[°], average fixation time [ms],
of mismatching stimulus-saccade pairs were included.
• Anti Saccades: average latency [ms], incorrect saccades
b) Saccade speed: Due to a limiting sampling rate of
ratio,
60 Hz, the saccade speed could only be approximated. The
• Memory Saccades: incorrect saccade ratio,
gradient of the gaze signal was calculated, and filtered once
• SmoothPursuit:averagesaccadespeed[°/ms],rootmean
again with a Savitzky-Golay filter [12]. For each registered
square of acceleration [°/ms2], speed standard deviation.
saccade, the maximum value in a radius of 20 samples from
the saccade point was recognized as a speed approximation III. RESULTS
for that saccade. A. Preprocessed data
c) Averageamplitudes: For10°and20°peripheralvisual
Raw data from Hololens 2 device was received as a binary
stimuli, an actual gaze amplitude was approximated. First,
file. The file was parsed to an array of structures containing
stimuli signals were resampled to gaze signal sampling times.
both head and eye movement data. From that structure, fields
Then, parts of the gaze signal corresponding to 10° and 20°
representingtimestamps,eyegazevectors,andeyegazeorigin
visual stimuli were extracted and averaged.
point were extracted. The horizontal axis component was
d) Average fixation time: For each registered saccade,
extracted,normalizedandfilteredasdescribedinsectionII-C.
fixationtimewascalculated.Aswithsaccadespeed,thegradi-
Study information data (information about visual stimulus
entofthegazesignalwascalculatedandfiltered.Forthreshold
displayed with corresponding timestamp) was transformed to
calculation, outliers were removed by a modified Z-score as
an array of tuples (timestamp, x-axis position). Position along
described by Iglewicz [13]. The gaze stabilization threshold
the x-axis was normalized in the same way as eye gaze data,
was then calculated as a 0.05 of the standard deviation of the
thusenablingcomparisons.Anexampleoftheresultsofinitial
outlier-removed gradient signal.
data preprocessing is presented in figure 2.
For each saccade point, the initial start of a fixation was
identified as a timestamp of the first gradient datapoint below B. Case study
thatthreshold(andafterthesaccade);andtheendofafixation For a section of study participants, parameters were nor-
as the next gradient datapoint exceeding the threshold. To malized to [0,1] and averaged over the healthy (n=13) and
eliminate microfixations, any fixations less than 50 ms in neurodegenerative (PD) (n=4) groups. Boxplots of those pa-
lengthwerediscarded,andtheabovecalculationwasrepeated, rameters are displayed in figure 3. Clear disparities between
starting from the end of discarded microfixation (instead of a healthy controls and Parkinson’s disease (PD) patients are
saccade point). If no fixation was detected before the next evident in reflex speed and reflex amplitude at 20 degrees. In
visual stimulus, the longest of microfixations was registered contrast, the interquartile ranges vary between the analyzed
for calculation. The parameters used to characterize the anti- groups for the remaining parameters, while the max-min
saccades included: ranges may lead to overfitting. .F (xilt ce or med pg oa nz ee ntd )ata Saccadepointsindentified V (xisu pa ol ss itt ii om nu )lidisplayed detect meaningful insights into neurological conditions using
such accessible technology suggests a promising avenue for
1.0
n
gazepositio
onent)
0.5
l
t
do
i
eow
rn
se cor oi fn reeg syd
e
th-ia
t
erg
a
pn
c
oo
k
ts
i
eni ns
g
tc
it
ao
e
ls
c
it
h
ms na pon alod
cg
te
y
on fih
n
ia nn
h
tec
e
gi an
rl
ag
th
tict nh
a
ge
re
aw
.
ffTi od
h
re
i
ds
s
ap
fi
bre
ln
ea dd
din
ea
g
vd io
u
cp
n
es-
-
eye omp 0.0 with simpler specifications into routine clinical assessments,
malized (xc
0.5
p efa fr et cic tiu vl earl sy oli un tir oe ns sou ar rc ee- cc ro un cis atr la [in 1e 4d ].e Tn hv ii sro hn am se tn ht es w poh te er ne tic ao ls tt o-
Nor
1.0
benefitalargerpopulation,particularlyinresource-constrained
environments where access to high-end diagnostic equipment
0 20000 40000 60000 80000 100000 120000
Samplenumber may be limited [15]. The study’s contribution lies in its
assessment of the HL2 glasses for eye-tracking, specifically
Fig.2. Exampleofpreprocessedsignalfromreflexsaccadespart.
in detecting eye movements indicative of neurodegenerative
diseases. Future directions may involve expanding the study
to a larger participant pool, incorporating longitudinal data to
1.0
observetheprogressionofsymptoms,andrefiningthemethod-
ology based on feedback and advancements in technology.
0.8
0.6
REFERENCES
0.4 [1] Parkinson’s Foundation, “Parkinson Statistics,”
https://www.parkinson.org/understanding-parkinsons/statistics , 2018,
Online;accessed26January2024.
0.2
[2] Yue Ran Sun, Sinem B Beylergil, Palak Gupta, Fatema F Ghasia, and
AasefGShaikh,“Monitoringeyemovementinpatientswithparkinson’s
0.0 disease:Whatcanittellus?,” vol.Volume15,pp.101–112.
RL RLD RA10 RA20 RAFT AL AISR MISR SSD SSA SSS [3] IleokJungandJi-SooKim,“Abnormaleyemovementsinparkinsonism
andmovementdisorders,” vol.12,no.1,pp.1–13.
[4] Hessa Alfalahi, Sofia B. Dias, Ahsan H. Khandoker, Kallol Ray
Fig.3. Boxplotsforparametersforhealthygroup(darkblue)andPDgroup
Chaudhuri, and Leontios J. Hadjileontiadis, “A scoping review of
(light red). Depicted parameters: RL - reflex latency, RSD - reflex speed,
neurodegenerative manifestations in explainable digital phenotyping,”
RA10-reflexamplitude(10°),RA20-reflexamplitude(20°),RAFT-reflex
vol.9,no.1,pp.1–22, Number:1Publisher:NaturePublishingGroup.
averagefixationtime,AL-anti-latency,AISR-anti-incorrectsaccadesratio,
[5] Moez Krichen, “Anomalies detection through smartphone sensors: A
MISR-memory-incorrectsaccadesratio,SSD-smoothpursuitspeed,SSA
review,” vol.21,no.6,pp.7207–7217.
-smoothpursuitaccelerationRMS,SSS-smoothpursuitstd.deviation
[6] DagAarsland,LuciaBatzu,GlendaM.Halliday,GertJ.Geurtsen,Clive
Ballard,K.RayChaudhuri,andDanielWeintraub, “Parkinsondisease-
associated cognitive impairment,” vol. 7, no. 1, pp. 1–21, Number: 1
IV. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSIONS Publisher:NaturePublishingGroup.
[7] Hossein Motahari-Nezhad, Meriem Fgaier, Mohamed Mahdi Abid,
The study demonstrates the potential of using the com- Ma´rta Pe´ntek, La´szlo´ Gula´csi, and Zsombor Zrubka, “Digital
biomarker–based studies: Scoping review of systematic reviews,” vol.
mercially available MR glasses for identifying symptoms as-
10,no.10,pp.e35722,Company:JMIRmHealthanduHealthDistribu-
sociated with neurological disorders, particularly Parkinson’s tor:JMIRmHealthanduHealthInstitution:JMIRmHealthanduHealth
Disease. By leveraging advanced eye-tracking technology, the Label: JMIR mHealth and uHealth Publisher: JMIR Publications Inc.,
Toronto,Canada.
device enables the detection of characteristic eye movement
[8] ChristinaGsaxner,JianningLi,AntonioPepe,YuanJin,JensKleesiek,
patterns, such as reflexive saccades, antisaccades, memory- Dieter Schmalstieg, and Jan Egger, “The HoloLens in medicine: A
guided saccades, and smooth pursuit. The findings align with systematicreviewandtaxonomy,” vol.85,pp.102757.
[9] JasonOrlosky,YutaItoh,MaudRanchet,KiyoshiKiyokawa,JohnMor-
existing literature on eye movement abnormalities in PD.
gan, and Hannes Devos, “Emulation of physician tasks in eye-tracked
The study specifically highlights the hypometric nature of virtualrealityforremotediagnosisofneurodegenerativedisease,” vol.
reflexive saccades in PD, difficulties in antisaccade tasks, 23,no.4,pp.1302–1311.
[10] LamprosC.Kourtis,OliverB.Regele,JustinM.Wright,andGrahamB.
impairment in memory-guided saccades, and reduced smooth
Jones, “Digitalbiomarkersforalzheimer’sdisease:themobile/wearable
pursuit,providing validationfor theuse ofHL2 inmonitoring devicesopportunity,” vol.2,no.1,pp.9.
these symptoms. The study emphasizes the generalizability of [11] Eye tracking on HoloLens 2, “Microsoft,”
https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/mixed-reality/design/eye-
the approach, considering the 30 Hz eye-tracking frequency
tracking,2023, Online;accessed26January2024.
commonly found in non-scientific, low-cost, and gaming ap- [12] Abraham.SavitzkyandM.J.E.Golay, “Smoothinganddifferentiation
pliances. The ability to detect neurological symptoms with ofdatabysimplifiedleastsquaresprocedures.,” AnalyticalChemistry,
vol.36,no.8,pp.1627–1639,1964.
such simple and accessible technology holds promise for
[13] BorisIglewiczandDavidHoaglin,HowtoDetectandHandleOutliers,
lowering the cost of diagnosis and increasing the adoption of AmericanSocietyforQuality,1993.
eye-tracking technology in healthcare. The study recognizes [14] Shogo Shimada, Yasushi Ikei, Nobuyuki Nishiuchi, and Vibol Yem,
“Studyofcybersicknesspredictioninrealtimeusingeyetrackingdata,”
the prevalence of the 30 Hz eye-tracking frequency in non-
in 2023 IEEE Conference on Virtual Reality and 3D User Interfaces
scientific, low-cost, and gaming appliances. The ability to AbstractsandWorkshops(VRW),2023,pp.871–872.[15] Pasquale Arpaia, Egidio De Benedetto, and Luigi Duraccio, “Design,
implementation, and metrological characterization of a wearable, inte-
gratedAR-BCIhands-freesystemforhealth4.0monitoring,” vol.177,
pp.109280.