Bridging the Gap: Unravelling Local Government Data Sharing Barriers in Estonia
and Beyond
Katrin Rajamäe Soosaar1 and Anastasija Nikiforova2
1Association of Estonian Cities and Rural Municipalities, Tartu, Estonia, katrin.raja@gmail.com
2University of Tartu, Tartu, Estonia, Nikiforova.anastasija@gmail.com
Abstract: Estonia's digital government success has received global acclaim, yet its Open Government Data
(OGD) initiatives, especially at the local level, encounter persistent challenges. Despite significant progress
of national OGD initiative in OGD rankings, local governments lag in OGD provision. This study aims to
examine barriers hindering municipalities from openly sharing OGD. Employing a qualitative approach
through interviews with Estonian municipalities and drawing on the OGD-adapted Innovation Resistance
Theory model, the study sheds light on barriers impeding OGD sharing. Practical recommendations are
proposed to bridge the gap between national policies and local implementation, including enhancing aware-
ness, improving data governance frameworks, and fostering collaboration between local and national au-
thorities. By addressing overlooked weaknesses in the Estonian open data ecosystem and providing action-
able recommendations, this research contributes to a more resilient and sustainable open data ecosystem.
Additionally, by validating the OGD-adapted Innovation Resistance Theory model and proposing a revised
version tailored for local government contexts, the study advances theoretical frameworks for understand-
ing data sharing resistance. Ultimately, this study serves as a call to action for policymakers and practition-
ers to prioritize local OGD initiatives.
Keywords: Barrier, Innovation Resistance theory, Interview, Local government, Municipality, Open data,
Open data ecosystem, Open data portal, Open Government Data, Technology adoption, Qualitative ap-
proach
1 Introduction
Estonia, known as a “digital state” or “e-country”, has struggled with maintaining and providing Open
Government Data (OGD) (McBride et al., 2018) despite its success in digital governance. Significant ad-
vancements have been observed since 2020, with Estonia rising from 24th place in 2018 to 5th place in the
European Open Data Maturity Report (Publications Office of the European Union, 2023) by 2020 and
maintaining a top position in subsequent years due to substantial improvements in policy indicators and the
impact dimension. However, while overall, Estonia's journey in open data governance showcases signifi-
cant progress and leadership at the national level, there are persistent challenges in data provision and
quality at the local government level (Rajamäe-Soosaar & Nikiforova, 2024).
Local administrative level data, being closest to cities citizens often being generated by its citizens, indus-
tries, academia, and public authorities for their public service mission, carries great value for various range
of open data ecosystem stakeholders, but until now still their full potential is not utilized due to an inter-
twined set of organizational, technological, and legal barriers (Liva et al., 2023; Fusi, 2021; Sandoval-
Almazan et al., 2021). As of mid-2023, only 12 out of 79 (15%) Estonian local governments, including 15
urban municipalities and 64 rural municipalities, had published any data on the national OGD portal (with
one more published after the study), with larger municipalities like Tallinn and Tartu being the main con-
tributors.
A study conducted in 2022, examining the information systems of local government revealed that the in-
formation systems of municipalities (Proud Engineers, 2024) found that local government information sys-
tems in Estonia do not form a coherent integrated ecosystem. Knowledge of service management and de-
velopment is generally low, and most local governments do not prioritize data management and open data.The Estonian Digital Agenda 20301 also highlights the digital divide between local authorities and state
agencies. This underscoring the need for a more in-depth examination of municipal issues to investigate
possible causes.
The objective of this study is to examine Estonian OGD development at the national and local levels, iden-
tifying the main barriers municipalities face when openly sharing OGD, defining corrective actions to im-
prove the situation. To achieve the objective, we conduct qualitative analysis of barriers faced by local
governments when opening their data through interviews with local governments, whose protocol is devel-
oped by drawing from the OGD-adapted Innovation Resistance Theory (IRT), which is intended to study
functional and psychological factors OGD barriers, empirically identifying predictors affecting public
agencies’ resistance to openly sharing government data (Nikiforova and Zuiderwijk, 2022). While focusing
on examining barriers associated with the governmental data sharing by local governments, this study also
validates the model, as it remains so far to be conceptual model with no application to the real-world con-
text.
The findings from local government interviews are used to propose improvements for the current Estonian
OGD ecosystem and its local data ecosystem in particular. As one of the authors is involved with the Esto-
nian Association of Municipalities, which represents the common interests and arranges co-operation of
local governments being responsible for developing and implementing the digital transformation plan of
local governments (incl. data governance and open data), we intend to use these results to support munici-
palities in developing data governance and open data initiatives by transforming these recommendations
into actions.
Given the limited research on local OGD or local data ecosystem, this study offers new insights into the
role of local governments/ municipalities in providing open data and the associated barriers and enablers.
By focusing on Estonia, the study serves as call for action for more research and practical efforts to address
challenges at the local level, as the integral yet often overlooked part of open data ecosystem, aiming for a
more resilient and sustainable open data ecosystem. This is even more so, considering that we demonstrate
that even in the case of very successful national OGD initiative (as evidenced by high ranking in the OGD
indices and benchmarks), it may lag at the local level. This discrepancy highlights the need for focused
attention on enhancing OGD efforts within municipalities to match the nation's trend-setting status. The
results could inform data governance and open data policymaking, offering practical recommendations for
national and local authorities to enhance Estonia's open data landscape.
The paper is structured as follows: Section 2 provides background on the topic, Section 3 presents meth-
odology. Section 4 presents the results of the interviews with local governments’ representatives on barriers
and enablers towards OGD publishing and maintenance and the recommended measures for local data
ecosystem improvement. Section 5 establishes discussion, acknowledges limitations, suggests future re-
search directions, while Section 6 concludes the paper and stresses practical and theoretical contributions
of this study.
2 Background
2.1 Related literature
The OGD ecosystem at local and regional levels in Europe shows slow progress. This is particularly true
for Estonia, despite its advanced e-government infrastructure, which has rarely been the focus of OGD
research, with only a few studies investigating the reasons for its low OGD maturity, although both at the
national level (Kassen, 2019; McBride et al., 2018). There has been no recent examination of Estonia's
rapid evolution from “follower” to “trend-setter” (in ODM reports). Research on local government-level
1 https://www.mkm.ee/en/e-state-and-connectivity/digital-agenda-2030OGD in Estonia is notably lacking, a trend seen across Europe. Most studies at European level that focus
on the local data ecosystem, concentrate on open data platforms, data usage and sharing, and digital ma-
turity assessments in municipalities, with limited attention to local OGD and barriers public agencies face
when opening data, as evidenced by a systematic literature review by Rajamäe-Soosaar & Nikiforova
(2024).
Given the potential of city and municipal data, there is a need for research on regional and local OGD
ecosystems, focusing on the progress of open data initiatives, barriers to data sharing, and user perspectives.
While OGD adoption has been extensively studied at the national level, the used methods can be adapted
to the local government context, e.g., established technology adoption models. However, current research
primarily emphasizes technology acceptance models, which aim to identify factors predicting technology
use, while overlooking the reluctance towards data opening.
For example, studies such as Wirtz et al. (2019) used the Technology Acceptance Model (TAM) to examine
OGD use determinants. Talukder et al. (2019), Zuiderwijk et al. (2015), and Shao (2023) employed the
Unified Theory of Acceptance and Use of Technology (UTAUT) to explore behavioral intentions towards
OGD adoption in various national contexts. Islam et al. (2023) integrated UTAUT with the Information
System Continuance Model to investigate sustained usage intentions of OGD platforms in Bangladesh,
similar to Yang and Wu (2022) in Taiwan, who combined UTAUT and the DeLone and McLean IS Success
Model. Weerakkody et al. (2017) used the Diffusion of Innovations Theory (DOI) to identify predictors
influencing public sector open data use. Some studies adopted hybrid approaches, combining multiple the-
oretical models (e.g., Wang et al., 2020; Lnenicka et al., 2022; Islam et al., 2023).
While these studies primarily investigate OGD acceptance from the user perspective, some have shifted
focus to the OGD provider's perspective, elucidating factors that impact adoption by government agencies.
For instance, Wang and Lo (2016) used the Technology–Organization–Environment (TOE) framework to
explore key determinants such as perceived benefits, barriers, organizational readiness, and external pres-
sures in Taiwan. Hossain et al. (2022) proposed a model integrating seven context-specific TOE variables
to understand factors shaping OGD initiatives. Huang and Huang (2022) examined individual and organi-
zational factors influencing public servants' intention to implement OGD policies in Taiwan, using the
Theory of Planned Behaviour (TPB).
Nonetheless, the reluctance perspective with identification of surrounding barriers to-wards data opening,
remains crucial as being capable to pinpoint actual issues and challenges that need to overcome to success-
fully adopt the phenomenon. The Innovation Resistance Theory (IRT) offers a promising approach to iden-
tifying barriers preventing the acceptance of OGD. OGD-adapted model has been proposed by Nikiforova
and Zuiderwijk (2022), though it has never been tested, i.e., it remains a theoretical concept that requires
validation in real-world scenarios with its further refinement, should such be needed. To this end, this study
addresses this gap by using the proposed theoretical model to examine barriers Estonian local governments
are facing, while by doing so, validating the model and evaluating its appropriateness to the studied prob-
lem.
2.1 Estonian OGD journey
Estonia launched its first national open data portal in 2015. Initially, it hosted a small number of datasets,
where by 2018 – 3 years after the portal launch - data availability was limited to 89 datasets, found by users
inconvenient to use it (McBride et al., 2018; McBride et al., 2020). A major factor affecting insufficient
focus on open data movement in Estonia is typically considered to be due to the X-Road - the national
interoperability infrastructure that provide a unified and secure data exchange system, used by Estonian
public sector institutions for exchanging data and offering services to the citizens, thereby reducing the
emphasis on open data initiative and making policymakers sceptical regarding OGD initiatives (McBride
et al., 2018). The state of the art, however, changed with the societal and international pressure, including
the importance of OGD in international e-Government rankings (McBride et al., 2020), and entering into acontract with Open Knowledge Estonia (non-profit organization) to improve the performance of Estonia’s
OGD ecosystem done by the Estonian Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications in 2018, which
led to substantial improvements. By 2020, the number of datasets, unique users, applications, and open
data events had significantly increased, propelling Estonia's ranking in the European Open Data Maturity
report from 27th to 14th place (McBride et al., 2020). A pivotal role in this transformation was played by
legislation.
By 2021, amendments to the Estonian Public Information Act aligned with EU Directive 2019/1024, im-
posing new obligations for public information provision and re-use. These included requirements for open
data descriptions, availability of research data, immediate release of dynamic data, non-restrictive re-use
conditions, and free access to high-value datasets.
As a result of this transformation, Estonian efforts have been recognized in various EU and global rankings.
E.g., the European Open Data Maturity Report shows Estonia's impressive journey from 27th place in 2018
to a "trendsetter" position by 2020, reaching 4th place in 2023. This progress highlighted substantial im-
provements in policy indicators and the impact dimension, despite persistent challenges in data provision
from smaller local governments and issues with the quality of open data, particularly regarding the currency
of data and metadata, and linked data. In the OECD OURdata Index of 2023, Estonia ranked 4th out of 36
countries, excelling in policy content and government data literacy programs. However, the country scored
lower in the availability of high-value datasets and impact monitoring. The most recent report by the Open
Data Inventory (ODIN) ranked Estonia 5th in Northern Europe and the 11th position globally (as of 2022).
ODIN also identified coverage as a key area for improvement, particularly in social statistics and subna-
tional data availability, based on data from Statistics Estonia. This again points to the shortcomings in local-
level data provision. The World Justice Project, while not primarily focused on open data governance, ranks
Estonia 9th globally and 7th regionally in 2023. Estonia scores highly for publicized laws and government
data but ranks lower in "Civic Participation" and "Complaint Mechanisms" (13th out of 31 countries).
Overall, Estonia's journey in open data governance showcases significant progress and leadership, espe-
cially at the national level, while highlighting ongoing challenges in local data provision and quality.
Most benchmarks focus primarily on central governments, where the Global Open Data Index is one of
those few that covers regional or local levels, but it has not covered Estonia in any of its assessments.
Unfortunately, this project has been archived, limiting in-depth insights into local open data landscape.
In 2021, the new open data portal (avaandmed.eesti.ee) was launched, which is powered by a custom-made
platform for the open data portal tailored to meet specific needs better than the CKAN platform that pow-
ered the first Estonian OGD portal. By January 2024, the portal hosted 1,807 datasets, reflecting significant
growth. However, only 12 out of 79 local governments in Estonia had contributed to the portal, publishing
fewer than 170 datasets in total. The primary contributors among these were the municipalities of Tallinn
and Tartu. Both cities have also dedicated portals for geospatial data.
Low local governments participation rate, however, may be due to the fact that, in accordance with the
Estonian Public Information Act, local governments must maintain a document register and disclose certain
documents, such as legislation, contracts, and public letters, from their Document Management System
(DMS). The public document register includes documents not subject to restrictions, such as private data.
Municipal websites typically feature direct links to the public view of their DMS, allowing access to JSON
files containing legislation, contracts, and official correspondence from nearly 50 local governments. Few
municipalities have published links to their DMS datasets on the OGD portal. For Anija, Harku, and Saue
Municipalities, the portal notes that the data was migrated from the previous version of the national OGD
portal without publisher review. Nine other local governments have updated their dataset metadata on the
national portal. Most municipalities, however, have not done none of the above providing the access to
their DMS through their websites. To this end, as we found out during the discussion with the representative
of the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications, a new Data Portal/Gateway will be developed
soon, integrating the State Information System management system (RIHA) and the Open Data Portal, withimproved usability for a better user experience. To address these challenges, Estonia plans to integrate the
State Information System management system (RIHA) with the Open Data Portal and improve its usability.
However, despite high rankings and increase in popularity of the OGD portal, indicated by the number of
datasets it hosts and usage statistics (download rates, rating and feedback along with the use cases (134
use-cases as of May 2024)), within the local context of Estonia open government data (OGD) is not widely
recognized. A 2024 survey2 for the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications found that only
one-third of Estonians had heard of "open data," and just 17% understood its meaning. However, 71% of
respondents still considered open data important for society.In summary, while Estonia has improved its
positions in many open data rankings, local governments are still lagging, as evidenced by the modest
number of municipalities publishing data on the national portal. A survey on open data awareness revealed
that the topic is relatively unknown to the public, which may also be a constraint at the local administrative
level. These findings are used as for developing an interview protocol to identify the main barriers local
governments face in sharing and maintaining open data, directly addressing the research question of this
study.
3 Methodology
To answer the research question, we conduct a qualitative study driven by technology adoption theory to
empirically identify the main barriers Estonian local governments face in sharing and maintaining open
data.
To this end, we utilize the model proposed by Nikiforova and Zuiderwijk (2022) to study barriers associated
with the OGD opening. They propose an OGD-adapted IRT model to study the resistance of public author-
ities to openly share government data.
Innovation Resistance Theory (IRT), in turn, was developed by Ram and Sheth in 1989 (Ram and Sheth,
1989) arguing that consumers resist innovations despite their necessity and desirability due to several bar-
riers that inhibit their adoption. According to IRT, barriers are categorized into: (1) functional barriers that
arise when consumers face significant changes from adopting the innovation, related to product usage,
value, and risks; (2) psychological barriers, which stem from consumers' traditions and perceived product
image, often conflicting with prior beliefs.
IRT has been widely applied in marketing and business research (Ma and Lee, 2019; Dwivedi et al., 2023),
with many studies empirically evaluating consumer resistance to innovations (Talwar et al., 2020). How-
ever, its application in the e-government domain is limited to two studies, with (Prakash and Das, 2022)
that examines citizens' resistance to digital contact tracing apps during the COVID-19 pandemic and (Ni-
kiforova & Zuiderwijk, 2021) that proposed the model we are using in this study.
Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk’s (2021) conceptual model consists of five main IRT barrier categories, each
associated with OGD barriers identified through a literature review (Table 1). Based on these barriers, five
hypotheses were formulated to study public authorities' resistance to openly sharing government data in
the form of “[Construct∈ {Usage barrier; Value Barrier; Risk barrier; Tradition Barrier; Image Barrier}]
has a positive effect on public agencies’ resistance toward openly sharing government data” (H1: Usage
barrier, H2: Value Barrier, H3: Risk barrier, H4: Tradition Barrier, H5: Image Barrier) (Nikiforova &
Zuiderwijk (2021, p.3). We employ these hypotheses, tailoring them to the specific context of our study.
As such, our hypotheses are:
H1: Usage barrier (UB) positively influences local governments’ resistance to openly sharing gov-
ernment data .
H2: Value barrier (VB) positively influences local governments’ resistance to openly sharing gov-
ernment data .
2 Open data portal (eesti.ee)H3: Risk barrier (RB) positively influences local governments’ resistance to openly sharing gov-
ernment data .
H4: Tradition barrier (TB) positively influences local governments’ resistance to openly sharing
government data .
H5: Image barrier (IB) positively influences local governments’ resistance to openly sharing gov-
ernment data.
Table 1. The proposed model and its elements (Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk, 2022)
Barrier Measurement item
Usage UB1: It is difficult to attain the appropriate quality level for open government data to be shared openly
Barrier UB2: It is difficult to prepare data for publication so that they comply with OGD principles
(UB) UB3: It is difficult to prepare data for publication so that they become appropriate for reuse
UB4: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to the complexity of the process
UB5: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to the unclear process
UB6: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD portal due to their limited functionality
UB7: Open government data portals often do not allow for semi-automation of the publishing process
UB8: It is difficult to maintain openly shared government data
Value VB1: My organization believes that openly sharing government data is often not valuable for the public
Barrier VB2: Many open government datasets are not appropriate for reuse
(VB) VB3: Many open government datasets suffer from data quality issues (completeness, accuracy, uniqueness, con-
sistency etc.)
VB4: The public gains of openly sharing government data are often lower than the costs
VB5: My organizations’ gains of openly sharing government data are often lower than the costs
VB6: Data preparation is too resource-consuming for my organization
VB7: Open government data do not provide any value to my organization
VB8: Open data that my organization can openly share will not provide value to users
VB9: The amount of resources to be spent to prepare, publish and maintain open government data outweigh the
benefit my organization gains from it
Risk Bar- RB1: My organization fears the misuse of openly shared government data
rier (RB) RB2: My organization fears the misinterpretation of openly shared government data
RB3: My organization fears that openly shared government data will not be reused
RB4: My organization fears violating data protection legislation when openly sharing government data
RB5: My organization fears that sensitive data will be exposed as a result of opening its data
RB6: My organization fears making mistakes when preparing data for publication
RB7: My organization fears that users will find existing errors in the data
RB8: My organization fears that openly sharing its data will reduce its gains (otherwise the organization could sell
the data or use it in another beneficial way)
RB9: My organization fears that openly sharing its data will allow its competitors to benefit from this data
Tradition TB1: Freedom of information requests are sufficient for the public to obtain government data
Barrier TB2: My organization is reluctant to implement the culture change required for openly sharing government data
(TB) TB3: Employees in my organization lack the skills required for openly sharing government data
TB4: Employees in my organization lack the skills required for maintaining openly shared government data
TB5: My organization is reluctant to radically change the organizational processes that would enable openly shar-
ing government data
Image IB1: My organization has a negative image of open government data
Barrier IB2: My organization believes that open government data is not valuable for users
(IB) IB3: My organization fears that openly sharing government data will damage the reputation of my organization
IB4: My organization fears that the accidental publication of low-quality data will damage the reputation of my
organization
IB5: My organization fears that associating them to incorrect conclusions drawn from OGD analysis by OGD users
will damage the reputation of my organization
Figure 2 presents the model, with the numbers in brackets indicating the number of measurement items
defined for each barrier, as presented in Table 1.Figure 2. Research model and proposed hypotheses (the numbers in brackets refer to the number of measurement
items in Table 1) (Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk, 2022)
While the model is approach-agnostic, allowing to utilize both the quantitative and qualitative approach,
the authors recommend a qualitative study for richer insights, particularly in understanding the nuanced
challenges of individual organizations, navigating conversation, considering the unique setting of an indi-
vidual organization. As such, the study proposes conducting interviews with representatives of public agen-
cies.
To this end, an interview protocol is developed based on the model, as described in the next section along
with the sampling approach utilized in this study.
3.1 Interview protocol
The initial interview protocol, based on the proposed OGD-adapted IRT model by Nikiforova & Zuiderwijk
(2021), was tailored to suit the objectives of this study. It was expanded to encompass (1) the OGD eco-
system (5 questions), and (2) organizations' experience with the Estonian national portal
avaandmed.eesti.ee. As the interviews focused on local governments, all the questions were adapted to
municipalities’ perspective. The final interview protocol is available in Supplementary Materials and on
ZENODO [link to be added upon acceptance]. To avoid language barrier, the interview protocol was trans-
lated into the respondent’s native language – Estonian.
The interview protocol comprises four major sections. The first section delves into the general profile of
the organization represented by the respondent and their awareness of open data. This includes inquiries
about the local government, the respondent's role, the type of data collected by the municipality, and their
awareness of the concept of "open data." The later question was added in the light of the survey that re-
vealed limited awareness of open data amongst Estonian residents3.
The second section includes questions about sharing openly data on municipal website or portal and na-
tional open data portal. Most of the Estonian local governments have not published any data in national
portal, but there might be datasets that are openly shared on the municipal website (e.g., document registers)
(as analysis of Estonian Open Data Portal documented in Section 4 revealed). The Public Information Act
indicates the data that should be disclosed in open format also by local governments, if possible and appro-
priate, and would not involve disproportionately great effort. Hence, this interview section was split into
two separate blocks repeating questions to gain more insight on the experience with both hubs and identify
possible datasets that possess the characteristics of open data on local level websites.
The second section addresses openly sharing data on municipal websites or portals and the national open
data portal. Most of the Estonian local governments have not published data in national portal, but there
might be datasets that are openly shared on the municipal website (e.g., document registers) (as found in
(Soosaar & Nikiforova, 2024)). The Public Information Act indicates the data that should be disclosed in
3 https://avaandmed.eesti.ee/open format also by local governments, if possible and appropriate, and would not involve disproportion-
ately great effort. Hence, this interview section was split into two separate blocks repeating questions to
gain more insight on the experience with both hubs and identify potential datasets that possess the charac-
teristics of open data on local level websites.
In the light of the above, this section contains questions:
1) whether the municipality has ever openly shared its own data or the data it collected from other
sources;
2) what were the drivers for doing this or what were the reasons for not sharing them openly;
3) what type of data the municipality shared openly? and how often;
4) what was the process of openly sharing data? and who within the organization were involved;
5) what challenges the organization faced in openly sharing data;
6) what have been the specific cases, where municipality’s open data was reused by third party?
The latter question was added to this section to identify possible use cases of OGD usage, which could
contribute to better understanding of the local data ecosystem. If the local government had not shared data
on national open data, additional question about the reasons for not doing it were asked.
The third section focuses on IRT model-related questions. As this study is explorative in nature, each meas-
urement item was converted into an open-ended question of the form “To what extent do the following
situations form a barrier to openly sharing your organization’s data: …” where each barrier listed in Table
1 is then addressed.
Open-ended question and long responses were given preference over closed-ended questions (yes/no) as
the interest was to delve into the respondents' real experiences with obstacles encountered by local govern-
ments. Before addressing specific barriers, respondents were provided with a definition of each barrier and
asked if any challenges related to openly sharing data were encountered. The same question was asked after
addressing each specific barrier, i.e., whether there are any other barriers that could form a barrier? (see
Table A.1 1). After all the barriers’ related questions have been asked, additional general question was
included to identify any additional barriers not covered in the predefined categories. These additional ques-
tions would help to verify whether all potentially relevant barriers were captured, aiding in the validation
and refinement of the model.
The final section explores the overall open data ecosystem and potential improvements. It seeks the re-
spondent's perspective on various aspects, including their perception of the OGD ecosystem, awareness of
policy documents or initiatives, suggested actions at national and municipal levels, and the perceived value
of open data. As such, it consists of 5 questions:
1) how the respondent sees the OGD ecosystem and its actors;
2) whether respondent is aware of policy documents or initiatives guiding developments of OGD on
Estonian or European level;
3) which actions should be taken at the national level;
4) which actions by municipalities to improve the disclosure of open data by local governments;
5) what is the benefit or value of open data?
3.2 Interview sample
When assembling the interview sample, selection criteria were established based on several factors for
municipalities, namely (1) population size, (2) geographical diversity, (3) presence on the national open
data portal.
Considering the wide variation in population across local governments, ranging from 165 registered inhab-
itants to over 50,000 residents with the average number of residents of 17 381 (According to EstonianPopulation Register4 as of 01.01.2024), the selection aimed to encompass municipalities from three cate-
gories based on population size: those with fewer than 10,000 residents, those with 10,000 to 50,000 resi-
dents, and those with over 50,000 residents. To ensure representation from different regions, municipalities
from each geographical area (e.g., Northern, Southern) were included in the sample. Finally, the local gov-
ernments that have published data in national open data portal were identified based on results of the re-
spective analysis in (Rajamäe-Soosaar and Nikiforova, 2024). The objective was to include approximately
one-third of the municipalities already sharing data on the national portal, thereby incorporating their ex-
perience into the study. On the other hand, municipalities without prior experience with the national portal
provided valuable insights into the barriers preventing data publication.
The selection process resulted in 16 local governments, out of which consented to participate in the inter-
views, forming the final sample. Informed consent for recording the interviews and utilizing the collected
data was obtained from participants prior to the interviews, with both parties digitally signing the consent
form.
All interviews were conducted online in Estonian using MS Teams software and were recorded. The re-
cordings were then converted into MP3 audio files using VLC software and transcribed using an Estonian
speech recognition and transcription tool Textiks5. The transcriptions were subsequently analysed using
qualitative data analysis software NVivo, with coding based on the interview protocol questions. The list
of codes, along with the number of files and references, is provided in the Table B.1, while the results are
presented in the next Section.
4 Results of interviews with local governments on barriers and enablers towards
OGD publishing and maintenance
This section presents results of interviews conducted with 12 local governments across Estonia, aimed at
identifying the obstacles associated with the publication and maintenance of OGD at the local level in
Estonia. Organized in alignment with the sections outlined in the interview protocol (as detailed in Section
2.2.1), the results provide insights into: (1) the general profile of the respondents, (2) the organization and
its stance on open data, (3) usage barriers, (4) value barriers, (5) risk barriers, (6) tradition barriers, (7)
image barriers, and (8) the broader landscape of the open data ecosystem. Finally, the most relevant barriers
and the recommendations for actions at both the national and local levels are provided.
4.1 General profile of the respondents
Interviews with the 12 municipalities included in the sample were conducted between March and April
2024. In two cases, there were 2 respondents from one municipality, while the other 10 interviews were
conducted one-on-one, involving a total of 14 respondents.
Half of the interviewed local governments have populations ranging from 10,000 to 50,000 inhabitants,
while 3 municipalities have over 50,000 residents and 3 have fewer than 10,000 residents according to the
population registry. Half of the respondents held top-level managerial positions such as Mayor, Deputy
Mayor, or Member of Municipal Council. 29% were Top/Leading Specialists (e.g., Data Manager, IT Ad-
visor), and 3 respondents held mid-level management positions (e.g., head of department).
4 https://www.siseministeerium.ee/en/activities/population-procedures/population-register
5 tekstiks.ee4.2 Organization and provision of open data
In the first part of the interview exploration centred on the type of data collected and published by the
organization represented by the interviewee, along with the associated challenges and drivers for openly
sharing data.
Two municipalities (LG64, LG7) underscored that all functions and tasks outlined in the Local Government
Organisation Act7 and other legislation necessitate data collection or processing. The types of data men-
tioned by all respondents include:
- data collected by providing (e-)services (e.g., benefits, permits, applications);
- document management system (local governments regulations, correspondence, etc.);
- data about the municipality’s personnel (e.g., salary data, interview summaries);
- data collected into national registers (e.g., population register, education information system);
- data collected due to legal obligation (e.g., register of pets, register of cemeteries);
- geospatial data connected to land use and infrastructure (e.g., detailed plans, lighting, playgrounds);
- surveillance and sensor data (e.g., cameras, pollution sensors);
- analyses and surveys (e.g., satisfaction surveys).
Some local governments (LG2, LG4, LG7) emphasized that while it is not mandatory to use GIS software
and create WMS services of their spatial data, they have allocated additional financial and human resources
to it. Two respondents highlighted that they collect additional data besides education information register,
such as information about hobby/recreational education. One respondent (LG11) categorized the bases for
data collection into three categories: data collected by law, based on consent, and data collected under
contract.
Respondents’ awareness of the concept of “open data” was examined to understand their prior exposure to
this topic and put the focus on open government data. Most of the respondents were aware of the term
“open data” and could mention several principles of open data, but many acknowledged that it is some-
what challenging to distinguish between “data” and “open data” in the context of local government. Two-
thirds of the interviewed municipalities were unaware neither of both general open data principles8
and the obligation arising from the Public Information Act, which stipulates that open data should, if
possible, be published in machine-readable format and should include data descriptions describing datasets
and data (metadata).
Questions about sharing organizational data on the municipal portal and national portal (section two of the
interview) were divided into two separate blocks, as 7 of the interviewed local governments had not pub-
lished any data on the national portal. The first part focused on municipal website or portal. Most re-
spondents mentioned that they comply with § 28 of Public Information Act9 that stipulates the obligations
of local government agencies to disclose data and information on their website, but in addition, they publish
more data, e.g., geospatial data. Table 2 summarizes the main types of data that respondents openly
share on their websites. The format of these data varies greatly, and in many cases, machine-readable
formats are not provided.
Table 2. Main type of data on municipal website/portal
Type of data Description Cases
Development plan, budget The drafts and final versions of these documents All
strategy and annual budget should be available
6 Local Government
7 https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/501072023003/consolide
8 https://public.resource.org/8_principles.html
9 https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/503052023003/consolideSpatial plans Comprehensive spatial plan and detailed spatial All
plans in line with Planning Act10
Services of municipality Description of services, grants, permits etc. that All
the local authority offers to residents
Other geospatial data Map layers, e.g., public transport routs and stops, LG1, LG2, LG11, LG4, LG5, LG7,
local authority agencies, parking areas, public LG9, LG 12
waste stations and containers, playgrounds etc.
Statistical data Different statistics about the municipality LG4, LG5, LG11, LG7, LG10
Document register Local government legislation, contracts, and pub- All
lic correspondence
Visualised budget implemen- Interactive visualisation of local government LG1, LG 10, LG3, LG 9
tation budget implementation by MS PowerBI
Procurement plan Annual plan of procurements All
Contacts Contacts of local authority bodies (council and All
administration) and agencies (e.g., schools, kin-
dergartens, libraries)
The process of openly sharing data on municipal websites varies depending on the size and internal pro-
cesses of the local government. In some cases, the responsibility for publishing specific data on the munic-
ipal website or designated geoportal lies with the data owner or department. Smaller municipalities often
have only one website administrator, who collects data from data owners or to whom the data owners turn
when data needs to be updated.
The primary driver for openly sharing data on municipal websites (stimuli) in most cases is the obli-
gation outlined in the Public Information Act and other legislation regulating the disclosure of specific
information. However, some respondents emphasized that this is not the sole motive for public disclosure
of local government data.
Other motives highlighted by the respondents include:
- transparency of the local government agencies (LG3, LG5, LG6, LG8);
- output, whose production was supported by public funding and therefore should be publicly avail-
able (driven by their own intent rather than law or regulation) (LG10, LG4);
- informing citizens and facilitating citizen autonomy (LG4, LG9, LG10).
Additionally, LG7 and LG9 pointed out that the data was initially collected to optimize their internal pro-
cesses or service delivery, and afterward, it was openly shared with the public.
Interviewed organizations acknowledged various challenges they have faced or are facing in openly
sharing data on municipal websites, which are categorized with examples in Table 3.
Table 3. Challenges that municipalities have faced in openly sharing data
Challenge Description or example of the challenge
Lack of human resources Lack of human resources or current personnel is too engaged with day-to-day activities (LG6,
LG8, LG10)
LG10: “Each department is responsible for their own things on the website and if they don’t
have the skills to put it there or the rights, then the Communication Specialist has been there
for that. Of course, when people have changed or someone is on vacation, a challenge always
arises”
Technical platform The sharing of data should be done with less effort - technical platforms have limited function-
alities (LG11, LG12)
Lack of competence and Lack of data competencies in the organization – data governance or management, data analytics,
understanding open data, data quality management etc. (LG3, LG5, LG1, LG9, LG10)
Security and privacy issues Decision-making on data that can be publicly shared due to possible privacy breach. E.g., some
spatial data (e.g., locations of sensors) could be reused for criminal motives (e.g., cyber-attacks,
theft) or should be not published for national security reasons (LG1, LG2, LG9)
10 https://www.riigiteataja.ee/en/eli/504072023008/consolideReusability Difficulties in data preparation to be shared as open data (open data principles-compliant) due
to format in which they are stored by the organization (LG12)
LG12: “There is a lot of information on the website that could actually be grouped under open
data, but it's not in machine-readable format today.”
Possible mistakes when anonymizing data for sharing (LG9)
Organization processes Difficult to implement the data management and publication process, so that every data owner
understands and fulfils it (LG7)
Local governments are cognizant of various stakeholders/ parties who reuse the data municipality shares,
including:
1) students, who use the data for research purposes and projects, such as developing new applications;
2) journalists, who use financial data and document register as the basis for their articles;
3) actors involved in spatial planning (e.g., real estate developers), who use GIS portals;
4) entrepreneurs, who use spatial data and plans to inform their business decisions;
5) residents, who use data about road and street closures or snowploughing to plan their trips effec-
tively;
6) Members of Municipal Council use financial data in their decision-making processes.
It's worth noting that while some respondents mentioned the Members of the Municipal Council as users
of the data shared on their website, they can be considered internal users rather than third parties.
Some of the interviewed organizations demonstrated awareness of examples where municipal open data
was reused to bring public value. These instances included:
- applications in public transportation domain, such as bus schedules and real-time bus departure
information;
- Waze that uses data on street and road closures to enhance their application's functionality;
- Minuomavalitsus.ee11 that publishes a systematic overview of local governments’ services, incor-
porating data collected by municipalities.
However, certain organizations lacked understanding of both reusers and use-cases, which emerged as a
barrier, as discussed in later sections.
As previously mentioned, five of the interviewed local governments had published some data on the Esto-
nian open data portal avaandmed.eesti.ee. At the time of writing (May 2024), one municipality from the
sample had also published data on the national portal.
Datasets published by these municipalities on national portal range from common datasets including geo-
spatial, budget data and document registers to specific sector information like transport, education, and
planning, reflecting the varied needs and activities of different local governments. Geospatial data is shared
by largest municipalities, namely Tallinn and Tartu, whereas smaller municipalities predominantly publish
document registers. Notably, the municipality with the most datasets mentioned a recent reorganization of
datasets on the national portal, combining those related to the same service. As such, the overall number
seemingly decreased, however, the content remained unchanged. At the time of the interview, they had
three types of datasets on the portal: (1) “classical machine-readable formats” as comes from respondents
(e.g., JSON, CSV, XML), (2) spatial data for GIS software (e.g., map layers), and (3) historical data that is
not updated (e.g., annual budget of a specific year as PDFs).
The main driver for sharing data on the national portal was often the initiative of key personnel within
the municipality, and in most cases the first datasets were published already years ago. Two of the respond-
ents admitted to not updating datasets since their initial disclosure and lacking awareness of the data-
sharing process. I.e., LG1 mentioned that: “...this became relevant for a moment when there was this open
11 https://minuomavalitsus.ee/endata portal, but no one has dealt with it more systematically… at least for about a year and a half this topic
has not been relevant at all.”
Challenges faced by local governments in sharing data on the Estonian national portal included:
- no possibility to get datasets usage statistics (e.g., downloads in the last month/year). The overall
statistics page of the portal is not usable – not possible to sort by data owner or dataset name;
- time-consuming metadata filling process – organization has to fill all metadata fields when adding
a new dataset (no pre-filled fields);
- inability to convert data to various formats within the portal, while different user groups need dif-
ferent format of the data;
- lack of preview functionality for uploaded dataset;
- difficulty in identifying valuable datasets for publication.
Seven municipalities had not shared any data on national portal, with four citing lack of awareness or
resources as the main reason. For example, when elaborating on the possible reasons of lack of awareness
of national portal existence, LG10 mentioned: “There are so many topics here that perhaps some letters
may have been overlooked or a notification has gone missing. I don’t know of any other reason.” LG3
brought out: “… we don’t have the so-called resources or capability today to undertake this work, to gather
these things together and start publishing them. In our house, it’s more like this… the problems are on the
objects, if there’s a fire today, you deal with putting out that fire, rather than looking at how to possibly
prevent future fires in this context - attention is paid to this, but rather less.”
There was an interesting case with one municipality that believed it was already sharing data on the national
portal, as they had communicated with the Ministry of Economic Affairs and Communications, provided
the necessary information, and assumed it would be published on the portal. However, no data had actually
been shared. This situation highlights a misunderstanding of roles within the OGD ecosystem. Local gov-
ernments often assume that data sharing is centrally managed by the Ministry, while the Ministry expects
local governments, as the data owners, to handle the publication themselves.
Another reason mentioned by LG12 is that “Many open data of municipality are today, for example, based
on information systems and these information systems are located at service providers. And getting the
data from there is also a bit problematic, because this is not foreseen in service level agreements.”
After general understanding of organizations experience with the OGD until now has been established, let
us discuss specific barriers as implies form the model.
4.3 Usage barriers
Most of the usage barriers can be indicated as relevant for majority of the municipalities when openly
sharing data.
Half of the respondents (6) agreed that the inappropriate quality level of the municipality’s data (UB1)
can be one of the barriers of openly sharing data. 2 respondents mentioned that the barrier lies more in the
fact, that the quality level of the data is unknown or undefined. Two municipalities thought they may have
quality issues in some operation fields and 2 of the respondents did not see quality as a barrier.
Majority of the interviewed municipalities (8) assessed the process to prepare data for sharing as com-
plicated (UB2). 3 respondents, in turn, do not consider it complicated and one interviewee could not eval-
uate it due to lack of knowledge about this process. For the reasons for complexity of data preparation
process, LG10 mentioned that in many cases they are doing manual work with no means of process auto-
mation, as well as lack of data management system. LG12 added that: “…the information systems provide
data differently and they have not taken it into account.” LG3 raised the competence issues: “If there are
no competencies and awareness in the organization, for example about the national portal, then it isdifficult because someone has to start understanding it from scratch.” LG7 indicated the process itself is
not complicated, but it is difficult to make data owners to implement and follow this process.
The process to make municipality’s data reusable by others (UB3) was found to be complicated or
somewhat complicated by 8 respondents, but the reasons varied quite a lot. In more detail, they were:
1) anonymization that in some cases requires manual or tailored solutions (LG10);
2) difficult to select the most appropriate format for data further reuse, e.g., JSON, CSV or XML
(LG12);
3) time required to be dedicated to preparing a through documentation/description of the data, if done
thoroughly (LG4);
4) limited knowledge and understanding of what is meant by “reusability” (LG3, LG5).
Two respondents assess the process itself not to be complicated, but “…rather the concern is that we have
no knowledge who is the user of this data” (LG11) and “…it is hard to find out what this necessary amount
of data is that someone could actually use” (LG4).
The next three barriers (UB4, UB5, UB6) concerned the open data portal - avaandmed.eesti.ee (i.e., all
further responses to be treated as referring to national portal).
5 interviewees could not assess whether the process to publish data on an open data portal is compli-
cated (UB4) as they had no knowledge or previous experience with it. One respondent mentioned that they
started to create an account in the portal, and with some questions related to the process to which they had
no immediate answers and therefore they stopped at that point. Some other challenges the municipalities
(LG4, LG6, LG7) had faced were the same with those already mentioned in previous sub-section, namely:
(1) publishing is too time-consuming (preparing metadata by manually filling respective form); (2) diffi-
culty in creating APIs and getting data moving between the systems; (3) preparation of data in appropriate
formats.
Only four respondents (LG8, LG10, LG11, LG5) agreed that the process of publishing municipality’s
data on an open data portal is unclear (UB5). 3 municipalities mentioned that there are good guidelines
available in the portal and the process is quite straightforward, “…but maybe if you are using APIs, that
might require more knowledge, but overall, most people could manage” (LG6). One municipality that has
not published data there mentioned: “I read the guide, according to the guide, it seems like you have steps
that you complete and it is supposed to work, but since I haven’t tested it, I don’t know if it actually works.”
LG12 raised a different concern: “I have understood that whatever is put up [in the portal] will be pub-
lished… there seems to be no control.” LG8 and LG9 mentioned again the awareness as one of the key
factors, stressing that “… when this knowledge [about publishing in OD portal] reaches that level, that it’s
actually maybe really some things that need to be done, then we would have a lot more data available
through this portal.”
Half of the respondents admitted that they cannot comment on the functionality of open data portal
(UB6), as they had not used the Estonian OD portal. For example, LG5 mentioned: “…why I haven’t used
it, maybe because I haven’t understood the benefits of it. Just collecting data doesn’t provide any value.
No one can value data until what you have collected reflects something back to us.” Two municipalities
find the national portal satisfactory with enough functionalities. However, two other municipalities criti-
cized several aspects, such as (1) the limited functionality of the search tool; (2) the current portal's non-
compliance with the Data Description Standard12, which sets requirements for interoperable data descrip-
tions; (3) the presence of many datasets that refer users to another system, requiring them to open another
system to actually access the data.
Majority of the interviewed municipalities (9) acknowledged that lack of possibility to semi-automate
process to openly share its data (UB7) is a barrier. “If it were much easier to share data in open data
12 https://www.kratid.ee/en/juhisedportal, we would publish much more” (LG5) and “…if there were interfaces, it would make everything
easier for us” (LG6). As most of the Estonian local authorities use standard solutions and information
systems, two respondents (LG1, LG12) suggested that the interface with the portal should be between the
standard solution already, so that same datasets of different local governments would be published through
API.
The last question regarding usage barriers concerning process to maintain data once published (UB8)
was understood differently by respondents – some of them kept in mind the maintenance of all the data
municipality is managing and others referred to the data published in open data portal. As for the latter,
LG7 mentioned: “At the moment the portal has no functionality to set up storage deadlines for datasets
and you have to track somewhere else that”. On the other hand, LG6 did not see it as a problem: “In some
cases, it's good to keep certain things there. They're not going anywhere, if the need should arise.”
Other usage barriers that form a barrier for municipalities to openly share its data are grouped in Table 4.
Table 4. Other usage barriers
Usage barriers Description or examples of the barriers
Lack of resources No distinguished function or person who is responsible for open data and/or data management
(LG1)
Lack of financial and human resources (LG2, LG3)
In some areas there is no data and creating it from scratch is very time-consuming (LG2)
Limited knowledge and The meaning of open data is unclear (LG12)
awareness Users of OD can make statistics, but not conclusions based on data (LG5)
The awareness about the national portal is limited, it is not visible enough for users (LG9)
Overall data competences and awareness of open data is low (LG1, LG10, LG3)
The value of organization’s Not clear, who is the user of local level open data and therefore the value is unclear (LG1,
OD unclear LG3, LG10)
The “best” format of open There are many machine-readable formats available, and it is unclear, which format would be
data not defined most valuable for the users (LG4)
Unclear, what to publish Limited knowledge of the users’ needs – what datasets are wanted by users, i.e., high-value
datasets (LG7)
Difficult to prioritize, which data should be published (LG1)
Technical solutions Lack of solutions, that would make the data processing more convenient (LG10)
4.4 Value barriers
Next, barriers related to organizational beliefs and values were discussed, focusing on overall views on
open government data and the organization's specific datasets. Some respondents found it challenging to
distinguish between these perspectives, leading to answers for questions VB2 and VB3 being more focused
on the organization’s open data.
Most respondents (9) agreed or somewhat agreed that employees in their municipality believe that openly
sharing government data is often not valuable for the public (VB1). For example, LG11 noted: “…Of-
ten the purpose of it is not seen, as to why or for whom it is needed.” Conversely, three municipalities, who
provided examples of use-cases they were aware of in the first section of interview were more positive
about it: “…I actually think that the value of data to the public as a user is understood” (LG9).
More than half of municipalities (7) acknowledged that people in their organization tend to believe that
many open government datasets are not appropriate for reuse (VB2). Some reasons mentioned by
respondents were that: (1) some data becomes useless when anonymized (LG10); (2) it is hard to see, who
could be the user of a specific data organization owns (LG9); (3) there is a belief that nothing useful can
be done with open data (LG3). 3 respondents were neutral about this question and 2 interviewees did not
see this as a barrier, for example LG7: “…considering that local governments operate at the level of power
closest to the individual, on the contrary, opportunities may arise to value the data, which affects the daily
lives of as many people as possible.”Nearly all municipalities (10) agreed that the organization believes that many open government datasets
suffer from data quality issues (e.g., completeness, accuracy, uniqueness, consistency, etc.) (VB3). The
most mentioned issues were inconsistency and inaccuracy. One example from LG8 states that “The average
salary or workload of teachers is a big mess…if the source data is incorrect, then it is not possible to get
correct results.” LG9 brought out that the reason for this belief might be the fact that people in organization
tend to be too critical about their data. LG7 complemented this discussion with the following: “…as far as
I know, few agencies, organisations, companies have made quality determinations to their databases…so,
if you do not know the quality, that means it is of questionable quality.”
Most respondents (8) rather agreed (but not strongly) with the belief in organization that public gains of
openly sharing government data are often lower than the costs (VB4). For example, LG6: “In terms of
human resource cost… so much time is spent on it, but at the same time this information is not consumed,
nothing is created based on it, so the question arises, why is it needed” and LG10: “…you are doing a lot
of work within that, but what do you do with that data after that… it is just nice, that you're getting some
kind of overview, but well, what's next.” One municipality (LG4) argued that it is hard to have a straight
answer, as some datasets are more valuable and interesting than others, but if the aim was to publish eve-
rything, then the costs would be too high compared to the public gains thereby pointing to the issues asso-
ciated with data prioritization.
Only four municipalities believe that the organization’s gains of openly sharing government data are
often lower than the costs (VB5). For example, LG3: “… if it were the other way around, if great benefits
were seen, it would probably already be dealt with.” Three respondents had no opinion on this.
Half of municipalities agreed that data preparation is too resource-consuming for their organization
(VB6), as “you have to process the data and it takes time” (LG10). Two respondents (LG9, LG8) brough
out that today it is not too resource-consuming, but they were not sure about sharing data on national portal,
as they had no previous experience with it. One municipality mentioned that the biggest issue, i.e., the
process that takes most resources is the data management, not sharing open data.
Half of the local governments rather agree with the belief that open government data do not provide any
value to their organization (VB7). For example, LG12: “…people have not understood the value of open
data” and LG3: “…the common understanding is that if you do something, direct return is important…
indirect benefits don't tend to be seen”. Some respondents commented that it could be the case in some
fields or departments, but not a general belief in their organisation.
Most of the respondents (7) acknowledged that people in their local authority tend to believe that open
data that they can openly share will not provide value to users (VB8). Two municipalities mentioned
that geoinformation may be an exception here, as the officials see more value in it. LG7 commented: “…ra-
ther, there's no such belief, but very much would help if we knew more, what data users need.” LG 2
highlighted another aspect that officials in the organization that do not work with open data cannot see its
value.
The final value barrier - the number of resources to be spent to prepare, publish and maintain open
government data outweigh the benefit my organization gains from it (VB9) – lead to ambiguous re-
sponses. Only 4 municipalities totally agreed with it. Three respondents rather disagreed and five of them
did not have a clear answer. For example, LG10: “To a certain extent, I think benefits are seen, but if it
starts to take most of the working time, it will go the other way.” LG9 points out that: “I rather think that
this is not the case…we overestimate the effort we must put into it and underestimate the benefit. The benefit
of such things is often underestimated, as it is often indirect.”
The other value barriers that respondents see as a barrier for their municipality to openly share its data that
were not covered by the model are provided in Table 5.
Table 5. Other value barriers
Value barriers Description or example of the barrierDuplicated data collection Same kind of data is gathered by different agencies – brings the question, which of them is
by different agencies reliable or which data to use as a basis. E.g., in case of residents of municipalities, the data of
Estonian Population Register and Statistics Estonia is different (LG10)
Value of open data portal The value of Estonian open data portal is unknown to public (LG12)
unclear Anonymized data in some cases is useless and can only be used for statistical purposes (LG2)
Terms “data” and “open Understanding of the term “data” and “open data” is different, not uniform and needs clarifica-
data” are unclear tion amongst the officials (LG3, LG7)
Open data not prioritized Open data is not a priority for organization (LG8, LG10)
4.5 Risk barriers
Risk barriers pertain to the uncertainty regarding the financial, functional, and social consequences of using
or publishing open data. Most of the risk barriers of the model were found relevant or somewhat relevant
by the respondents, with only one barrier deemed not applicable.
Half of the respondents (6) agreed that the fear of the misuse of openly shared government data (RB1)
may be a barrier. Three municipalities raised concerns about security, not only criminal activity, but also
cybersecurity, which is a new topic in regards the situation in the world. On the contrary, some respondents
argue that open data per se means that the possibilities of misuse are already minimized.
The fear of misinterpretation of openly shared government data (RB2) was somewhat more often
acknowledged, as 8 respondents raised different concerns connected to it. For example, LG2: “Many offi-
cials also fear that if we publish too much, people will start asking too much or get too aware… I don't see
fear in it, but, well, some do”. Some gave the example of financial data and documents, that might be the
source of misinterpretation as people have limited understanding of this data. Conversely, two respondents
mentioned that if someone makes a false interpretation or draws an incorrect conclusion from the data, it
reflects the individual's limited understanding rather than an issue with the data itself. LG7 commented:
“…this possibility exists, but we try to minimize it.”
6 municipalities agreed that this might be the case in their organization that people fear that openly shared
government data will not be reused (RB3). For example, LG3 pointed out that: “…it could be from this
view that who needs them at all and why we should do it.” Four respondents did not consider this fear a
barrier to openly sharing data. For example, LG6 mentioned: “…I think we are not afraid of this, as we
have offered data and it is up to users to do something with it”. Two municipalities mentioned that the
“fear” is not relevant, but “belief” that OGD will not be reused is relevant (covered in previous section on
value barriers).
The majority of interviewed municipalities (10) acknowledged the fear of violating data protection leg-
islation when openly sharing government data (RB4), particularly among officials handling personal
data. Respondents highlighted several reasons and additional concerns: (1) the boundaries of what consti-
tutes personal data are delicate or blurred (LG11, LG4); (2) fear of injunctions by the inspectorate (LG12);
(3) hesitancy to process data due to data protection concerns (LG4); (4) previous cases or negative experi-
ences have made people cautious (LG7); (5) document management systems are primary sources where
data that should not be openly shared could be exposed (LG7, LG9). Two municipalities expressed confi-
dence that this fear is not widespread in their organization, as there is a clear understanding of what data to
restrict.
The respondents were more ambivalent about the fear that sensitive data will be exposed as a result of
opening its data (RB5). Half of them agreed with it and some referred that it is connected to the previous
question, and this might be relevant to their organisation. But some respondents commented that sensitive
information is usually removed from data during the preparation of opening data and it cannot be the case
that, for example “…data of disabled persons is accidentally exposed” (LG4).
Less than half of the municipalities (5) agreed or somewhat agreed with the fear of making mistakes when
preparing data for publication (RB6). For example, LG10 mentioned: “…it is also feared, but maybe
less than compared to the previous two [fears]” and LG1 complemented: “…as we cannot be sure aboutthe quality of our data, then the fear is automatically there.” LG7 pointed out, that this is not a widespread
fear, but some people are more worrying. Two respondents did not see it applicable to their organization,
as this fear could be relevant if they would process and share more data than today.
The fear that users will find existing errors in the data (RB7) received mixed feedback. One respondent
mentioned that it is probably the biggest fear related to data (LG5) and two municipalities acknowledged
that this fear might be relevant, but not to the extent that it forms a barrier to share data (LG1, LG4). This
fear could be related to the problems with quality of data (LG11) and human fear of making mistakes (LG3,
LG6). On the contrary, nearly half of respondents held the opposite perspective, for example LG12: “…if
somebody finds mistakes, it's good, we'll find out there's something wrong. That's the feedback, that’s
good,” and LG8: “…it’s overall positive, then we know that somebody uses it.”
Majority of municipalities do not find the fear that openly sharing its data will reduce its gains (RB8)
relevant as they cannot see the possibility, how municipality could sell the data or whether it is even pos-
sible by law. One respondent provided an interesting example, how companies are gathering data of pro-
curements from municipalities’ websites and then offer this data for the service provides, who have joined
their procurement/tender platforms.
The fear that openly sharing organization’s data will allow its competitors to benefit from this data
(RB9) was found irrelevant, as municipalities are public sector bodies and could not see, who the compet-
itors in their territory might be. The local governments are watching each other’s initiatives and, in some
cases, compete over residents, but in terms of data there is no competition.
Other risks or fears mentioned by respondents that might form a barrier for the municipality to openly share
its data are provided in Table 6.
Table 6. Other risk barriers
Risk barrier Description or example of the barrier
Security issues Publishing of some type of data might be used for criminal motives (e.g., cyber-attacks,
security breach) (LG1, LG2)
General fear of the unknown LG3: “Lack of data awareness creates fears, as everything unknown seems scary to some
people"
Lack of resources Overall lack of resources (LG7)
4.6 Tradition barriers
Tradition barriers were considered somewhat less relevant by respondents compared to usage and value
barriers. The interviewed municipalities split in thirds in responses regarding the belief that Freedom of
information requests are sufficient for the public to obtain government data (TB1). The respondents
who were subtle commented, that “…this might be the case of some fields of activity, but not a widespread
belief” (LG5). Two municipalities brought out that if enough data is already published, then there are less
information requests, and it means less work with them.
The reluctancy to implement the culture change required for openly sharing data (TB2) was not seen
as a barrier by most of the respondents. LG9 and LG10 pointed out that major cultural shift was done during
the administrative reform13 and LG3 commented they are on the transition point, where the readiness for
change is somewhat there, but the traditions also prevail. LG5 commented: “It depends greatly on manage-
ment and politicians…in our case there is rather desire to publish more”. LG2 and LG7 admitted that there
might be some people in organization who are reluctant to change, but this cannot be applied to the entire
organization.
Half of the respondents (6) agreed that employees in their municipality lack the skills required for
openly sharing data (TB3). Three municipalities thought that the basic skills exist, but there might be
some specific skills that need development. LG1 broadened the issue: “…starting with the notion of what
13 Estonian administrative reform was implemented in 2015-2017, for further information access: https://www.agri.ee/en/admi-
nistrative-reform-2015-2017value the data carries… it is viewed as only in the context of their own department and no one can assess
in the context of an organization or the customer point of view.” Some respondents referred to the national
OD portal and admitted that they have no experience with it, but it would probably be only the first time a
new thing to learn.
The respondents interpreted the question regarding the lack of the skills required for maintaining openly
shared data (TB4) differently. Most referred to the overall data maintenance and did not perceive it as a
problem, as it aligns with their daily practices. However, some municipalities, particularly those responding
from the perspective of maintaining data in the national portal, acknowledged that manual maintenance
requires someone to oversee the data (e.g., ensuring it is up-to-date), which consumes time.
Most municipalities rather would not agree that organization is reluctant to radically change the organ-
izational processes that would enable openly sharing government data (TB5). The arguments were
following: (a) the management is positive about the change, but some employees are reluctant (LG10), (b)
the desire for change is there, but lack of financial and human resources are the barriers for change (LG3,
LG11), (c) open data is not valued and not prioritized (LG5).
Other tradition barriers mentioned by respondents, which might hinder the municipality from openly shar-
ing its data, are detailed in Table 7. Interestingly, while most municipalities did not acknowledge reluctance
to change in culture or processes as a barrier (TB2), several of them emphasized during the discussion of
other tradition barriers the general resistance to changes within the organization. This included negative
attitudes towards any kind of changes among the personnel, indicating a broader cultural reluctance to
embrace new approaches or initiatives.
Table 7. Other tradition barriers
Tradition barrier Description or example of the barrier
Open data is not a priority There are main functions that people are used to doing, open data is something new (LG1)
Open data is not valued (LG5)
Reluctance/resistance to Habit of doing things the same way as done previously (LG2)
change Negative attitude towards change (LG3)
It is difficult to change the mindset of people, who are used to do things as always (LG5)
Technophobia - irrational fear Fear that digitalisation brings more work than savings (LG9)
of technology
Lack of data management pro- Estonian data management Framework is difficult to understand and implement at local
cesses level (LG6)
4.7 Image barriers
Majority of the interviewed municipalities (8) consider that their organization do not have negative image
of open government data (IB1). Two respondents mentioned that the image is neutral, as LG10 com-
mented: “[The negative image] may be a case for some data…as time goes on, the more people want their
work to have a meaning…time resource versus the benefits of it is being considered in their work.”
Half of the respondents agreed or rather agreed that their organization believes that open government
data is not valuable for users (IB2). 4 municipalities rather did not agree, they acknowledged that there
might be a few people who believe it (LG6) or it might be relevant in case of some datasets (LG4). LG8
commented: “…rather they fear it or do not know, whether the data is valuable or not.”
The municipalities split into two regarding the fear that openly sharing government data will damage
the reputation of their municipality (IB3). Half of them disagreed, for example, LG7 commented: “…ra-
ther, we strive for such a reputation that it shows us in a better light.” The other half of respondents rather
agreed that: (a) this fear might be the case for some data (LG1), (b) it could be connected to the fear of
making mistakes and data quality issues (LG10), (c) data can reveal the “real picture”, which is not as good
as expected (LG3, LG9). LG5 pointed out that some employees fear that open data related to their work
might show them in a poor light.Majority of the respondents (9) admitted that the fear that the accidental publication of low-quality data
will damage the reputation of their municipality (IB4) may be applicable to them. Two of them specified
that this is more a risk they must mitigate.
Half of the municipalities acknowledged that their organization fears that being associated with incorrect
conclusions drawn from OGD analysis by OGD users will damage its reputation (IB5). Examples
provided by respondents include instances of (1) wrong conclusions based on document registers (LG10),
(2) media making incorrect interpretations (LG11, LG9), and (3) the challenge of disproving such incorrect
conclusions (LG9).
Most interviewees did not see any other image barriers for their municipalities to openly share its data. But
LG9 raised an interesting point: “The topic of open data is not one that receives significant public credit,
and therefore, it is not given excessive attention. …if it were something exciting, there might be a desire to
support those who are considered cool… this kind of order would probably change a lot and a lot of data
would come on the market.”
4.8 Other barriers
Half of the respondents identified additional barriers beyond those covered by the model utilized for the
interviews, primarily falling into the categories of usage and value barriers. However, some highlighted
barriers are not initially included in the model, which could inform its refinement:
1) lack of data awareness – individuals working in local authorities may lack awareness of the concept
of open data or have an overall understanding gap regarding data;
2) lack of data competence – there may be insufficient knowledge and skills to work with data, such
as data governance or management, data analytics, and data quality management;
3) lack on human resources - there may be no designated function or person responsible for open data
and/or data management;
4) lack of financial resources – there might be an overall shortage of funds to fulfil all obligations
imposed on local governments;
5) lack of clarity on what data to publish – uncertainty exists regarding which data would be most
valuable for users;
6) difficult in prioritizing data - challenges arise in determining which data should be published first.
4.9 Open data ecosystem
The final part of the interview covered overall open data ecosystem – its actors, the benefit of open data,
measures to improve the current situation and the awareness of policy documents and initiatives.
All the respondents were able to identify at least two open data ecosystems actors: the data owners (e.g.,
municipalities, state agencies) and the data users/ consumers (e.g., private sector, academia, journalists,
other public agencies). Additionally, half of the interviewees mentioned some form of mediator or inter-
mediary – such as a platform, portal, or solution – that facilitates consumer access to, viewing, download-
ing, or requesting data. Two municipalities identified another key actor - regulatory body and Data Protec-
tion Inspectorate, responsible for creating regulations and ensuring compliance. Furthermore, one respond-
ent highlighted stakeholders who stand to benefit from open data initiatives.
The majority of top-level management respondents indicated a lack of awareness regarding policy docu-
ments or initiatives guiding open data development at either the Estonian or European level (e.g., Esto-
nian Digital State 2030). However, some of them specified that employees responsible for this domain
likely possess knowledge about them. Additionally, three municipalities pointed out that these documents
often inadequately address the needs of local government levels, portraying them as more akin to slogans
or aiming to enhance the digital state's reputation.Several recommendations were made regarding actions to be taken at the national level (e.g., Ministry)
to facilitate municipalities in disclosing more open data and adhering to related requirements:
- defining most important or valuable datasets that municipalities should prepare and share on
the national portal (LG1, LG12, LG6) serving as a pivotal starting point for open data initiatives at
the local level;
- resolving the issues concerning the revenue base of local governments , as it is challenging to con-
template necessary changes when basic municipal services lack resources (LG11, LG3);
- resolving problems with compatibility and interfaces must such as data duplication across different
databases and manual insertion, with the need to streamline data management processes (LG10);
- more practical guidance, training and assistance tailored to municipalities from the state agencies,
rather than solely offering general documentation and informational events (LG12, LG11, LG6,
LG7);
- implementing direct application programming interfaces (API) between standard software used by
local governments and the national open data portal to enhance data exchange efficiency (LG12,
LG5);
- showcasing the benefits and value of municipal open data (LG5, LG1);
- defining specific measures for municipalities that would incentivize them to publish more open data
defined (e.g., the portal minuomavalitsus.ee14).
The majority of respondents (8) agreed that average and smaller municipalities are likely unable to handle
this topic on their own and emphasized the inevitability of cooperation among them. They suggested several
actions that could be taken by local governments:
- implementing uniform information systems across municipalities to ensure consistent data collec-
tion and management practices (LG5, LG12);
- enhancing awareness among local government employees about the importance and benefits of
open data initiatives (LG2, LG9);
- facilitating knowledge exchange platforms for sharing insights and advancements in data analytics
developments among municipalities (LG1);
- ensuring the proper implementation of data management and governance frameworks to streamline
the process of publishing open data (LG5, LG6, LG7);
- providing guidance or training on open data initiatives through associations such as the Association
of Estonian Cities and Municipalities (LG8, LG11, LG12);
- harmonizing or standardizing datasets related to similar municipal functions to ensure interopera-
bility and facilitate cross-municipality data usage (LG4);
integrating data management practices with strategic management processes to enhance the use of
data in decision-making within municipalities (LG5).
Based on the barriers identified in the previous subsections, the first priority should be to raise awareness
and build competence regarding municipal data. As highlighted by LG2: “Awareness needs to be signifi-
cantly increased to truly understand the data that local governments produce themselves. That’s where the
focus should be directed…it doesn’t make sense to hold or duplicate data that already exists elsewhere in
the country, which I see happening frequently. By doing so, the work itself becomes more focused”.
Despite the challenges faced by municipalities and the barriers they experience within the studied context,
and often a lack of awareness of the value of data, many municipalities do recognize the benefit or value
of open data, which are provided in Table 8.
14 https://minuomavalitsus.ee/enTable 8. Opinions on benefit or value of open data
Benefit or value Description or example
Increase of service quality The quality of some services might increase due to the analysis made by combining open data
(LG1)
Use of geospatial information by architects, planners etc. makes processes faster and of higher
quality (LG2)
Public value creation Even if the value is not seen now, there might be someone there who already foresees it (LG7)
New services New services created by private or third sector (LG4, LG6, LG7)
Proactive services and pre- Linked data could be a basis for proactive services and prevention activities, e.g., road closures
vention activities in Waze application (LG10)
Smarter decisions Open data can be helpful in the decision processes, e.g., designing public services or business
(LG8, LG12)
The biggest value comes from knowledge and correct/accurate conclusions that are drawn on
data (LG3, LG5, LG9)
Less referrals from residents Residents have more data available, and the number of referrals decreases because of it (LG2)
Prevent the spread of misin- It is possible to rely on data in case of intentional dissemination of misinformation (LG3)
formation
Rise of data awareness Enables to increase data awareness and data literacy, e.g., data analysis skills (e.g., already on
lower levels of education) (LG4)
4.10 Recommendations for ecosystem improvements
Based on interviews with local governments, several barriers considered most relevant by respondents were
identified. From these barriers, we derive recommendations to overcome or mitigate them, as suggested by
interviewees.
The results of the interviews revealed 18 barriers of the IRT model with which at least half of the respond-
ents agreed. The highest number (6) was related to value barriers, 4 to both risk and usage barriers, 3 to
image barriers, and 1 to tradition barriers. Consequently, all categories of IRT barriers are relevant for local
governments, albeit to different extents. Table 9 presents (1.1) the barriers not included in the initial model
as identified from interviews and (1.2) the most relevant barriers already included in the model, where
barriers addressing similar or overlapping issues are combined. Additionally, it provides (2) the recom-
mended measures for ecosystem improvement at (2.1) national level (e.g., policymakers, portal owner) and
(2.2) local level (individual or local governments collectively).
Table 9. Most relevant barriers and recommendations for improvements
Barrier Measures at national level (e.g., policymakers, Measures at local level (individual
portal owner) LG or collectively)
Lack of data awareness/ com- Practical guidance, training and help for munici- Guidance and training offered by Asso-
petence palities ciation of Estonian Cities and Munici-
Lack of skills for openly shar- palities, knowledge exchange about
ing data (TB3) data governance and analytics develop-
ments, e.g., best practices
Lack of human and financial Revision of the revenue base of local govern- Increase awareness of existing employ-
resources ments ees, identify “data enthusiasts” within
Specific measures for municipalities that would organization
motivate them to allocate resources there
Lack of clarity, what data to Centrally agree upon the most relevant/valuable datasets, that local governments must pub-
publish lish themselves (e.g., initiated by ministry in cooperation with local governments)
Inappropriate data quality Adaption of central data governance guidelines Implementation of data manage-
(UB1, IB4, VB3) (including data quality) for municipalities ment/governance & automated data
quality management procedures
Complexity of data prepara- Solutions that would make the data processing Publishing of data in formats that re-
tion (for reuse) (UB2, UB3) more convenient (augmentation and automa- quire minimal additional work
Resource intensity of data tion), enhancement of OD portal
preparation (VB6)Barrier Measures at national level (e.g., policymakers, Measures at local level (individual
portal owner) LG or collectively)
No semi-automate process to Direct application programming interfaces (API) between standard software (used by local
publish data (UB7) governments) and national open data portal
Lack of OGD value awareness Benefits and value of municipal open data should Uniformed information systems that
for public/ users (VB1, IB2, be evidenced by use-cases; make usage statistics provide more uniformed data
VB8) of datasets available to publishers
Datasets not appropriate for Datasets related to the same municipal functions could be harmonized/uniformed by defin-
reuse (VB2) ing uniform granularity level
Public gains lower than costs Demonstrate the impact of open data through Testimonials about OGD use-cases,
(VB4) showcases/ use-cases/re-uses, success stories
Fear of misuse and misinter- n/a n/a
pretation (RB1, RB2)
Fear of violating data protec- Clear guidelines and examples of different cases Implement processes that mitigate the
tion regulations and exposure risks
of sensitive data (RB4, RB5)
Incorrect conclusions drawn Improvement of overall data analytics skills (e.g., in general education, adult training)
from OGD (IB5)
For certain barriers (designated as n/a in Table 9), specific countermeasures or activities were not identified
during the interviews with local governments. This particularly applies to fears of misuse and misinterpre-
tation (RB1, RB2), for which potential measures to alleviate concerns might include: (1) enhancing overall
data literacy for all actors in the open data ecosystem through initiatives such as seminars, workshops, and
courses, (2) establishing feedback mechanisms and platforms for the exchange of best practices, and (3)
developing and promoting awareness of robust data governance policies.
Moreover, the qualitative analysis uncovered the primary user groups and some use cases of open data at
the local level known to municipalities, including students, journalists, entrepreneurs, residents, spatial
planning actors, and council members. This insight could serve as a valuable foundation for fostering col-
laboration among municipalities and conducting a more comprehensive analysis of user needs.
5 Discussion and Limitations
While Estonia has demonstrated progress in open data rankings, there are still notable areas for improve-
ment, particularly at the local government level. Despite major cities like Tallinn and Tartu are publishing
their data as OGD, the majority of municipalities have yet to contribute to the national portal. This discrep-
ancy underscores a broader issue of limited awareness and understanding of open data among both the
public and local administrative bodies. Despite the recognized importance of open data, there is a noticeable
lack of research focusing on OGD at the local government level, not only in Estonia but also internationally.
Acknowledging the growing significance of local and smart city open data portals within the broader eco-
system (Liva et al., 2023; Lnenicka et al., 2024) and a noticeable lack of research focusing on OGD at the
local government level (Fusi, 2021; Sandoval-Almazan et al., 2021), not only in Estonia but also interna-
tionally (Rajamäe-Soosaar and Nikiforova, 2024), it is imperative to address the current limitations in local
open data provision and to enhance the visibility of local OGD in the national portal.
To address this gap, this study aimed to identify the barriers preventing Estonian municipalities from openly
sharing data and to propose effective strategies to overcome these obstacles. To this end, qualitative anal-
ysis was conducted, employing the OGD-adapted Innovation Resistance Theory model, through interviews
with 12 local governments. Results highlighted that while municipalities collect diverse data types, various
challenges in openly sharing data on persist.
Challenges faced by municipalities include human resource constraints, technical platform constraints, lack
of data competencies, and difficulties in preparing data to be shared as open data due to the format in which
they are stored. Technical platform constraints associated with the Estonian open data portal (1) theinability to get usage statistics for datasets, (2) the time-consuming process of filling metadata fields with
lack of automation of the process, (3) difficulty in creating APIs and getting data transferred between the
systems, (4) preparation of data in appropriate formats, (5) difficulty in prioritizing and identifying high-
value datasets for their further publication. More than half of the municipalities interviewed had not yet
shared any data on the national portal at the time of the interview, primarily due to either a lack of awareness
or insufficient resources. However, following the interviews, some municipalities indicated their intention
to address this issue soon or to allocate more attention to it within their organizations. Another challenge
highlighted was the difficulty in accessing data from information systems hosted by service providers,
which was not foreseen in service level agreements.
The barrier types covered by the IRT model include various usage, value, risk, tradition, and image barriers.
The most relevant barriers for openly sharing the data include: (1) lack of awareness and skills for open
data sharing (TB3), (2) insufficient human and financial resources, (3) uncertainty about what data to pub-
lish, (4) concerns about data quality (UB1, IB4, VB3), (5) the complexity and resource intensity of data
preparation for first-time publishing and further re-use (VB6, UB2, UB3), (6) lack of data publishing pro-
cess automation (UB7), (7) lack of understanding of the value of open data for the public/users (VB1, VB2,
VB8, IB2) and belief that public gains are lower than costs of data opening (VB4), (8) fears about misuse
and misinterpretation of opened data (RB1, RB2), (9) fear of potential violations of data protection regula-
tions (RB4, RB5), and (10) the possibility of incorrect conclusions being drawn from the data (IB5).
The interviewees proposed several measures to address these barriers at both national and local levels.
These recommendations could serve as input for developing specific action plans to assist local govern-
ments in navigating the challenges of open data. For instance, interviewees suggested conducting aware-
ness-raising activities and providing practical guidance and training, strategies that have also been sup-
ported by previous studies (Golub and Lund, 2021; Kawashita et al., 2022). Additionally, they highlighted
the importance of automation and implementing motivation measures for local governments.
Furthermore, the analysis uncovered that while data governance guidelines have been established by the
central government, they often lack applicability to municipalities and necessitate adaptation to local con-
texts through practical sample procedures. Solutions that streamline data processing, such as augmentation,
automation, and APIs, were also recommended to reduce manual workload.
Given that the value and benefit of open data emerged as the most significant barrier, there is a pressing
need to emphasize its importance by showcasing evidence through use-cases, testimonials, and success
stories. This aligns with the findings of previous research (Lassinantti et al., 2019; Lnenicka et al., 2024;
Ansari et al., 2022; Hein et al., 2023; Chokki et al., 2022), which underscores the importance of under-
standing the various types of data users and their motivations in leveraging open data for valuable impact.
Moreover, making detailed usage statistics and analytics of datasets on the national portal available to data
publishers would enable them to monitor user interest effectively.
One of the key measures to address the current situation involves reaching a consensus on the most relevant
and valuable datasets that local governments should publish, a notion supported by existing literature
(Kević et al., 2023; Utamachant & Anutariya, 2018; Nikiforova, 2021). Additionally, it is crucial to address
the security aspect of open data, particularly concerning spatial data (in line with (Yang et al., 2015). These
actions necessitate collaboration between local governments and the national level, including the ministry.
Harmonizing datasets related to specific services by defining uniform granularity levels and data diction-
aries could further streamline the process and contribute to the interoperability of published data (in line
with (Hein et al., 2023; Kawashita et al., 2024; Ali et al., 224)).
The prevalent fear among municipalities regarding potential violations of data protection regulations (in
line with (Li et al., 2024)) underscores the importance of clear guidelines and the implementation of pro-
cesses to mitigate associated risks. Active monitoring by the Inspectorate and adherence to GDPR regula-
tions are essential steps in this regard.However, this study has several limitations. Firstly, the primary findings rely on qualitative analysis derived
from interviews with local stakeholders, inherently introducing subjectivity into the results. However, this
methodological choice was deliberate, as qualitative approaches offer a deeper understanding of the sub-
jective experiences and contextual nuances that quantitative methods may overlook and help to identify
unforeseen factors that may influence the phenomenon under investigation.
Secondly, the sample size is constrained to 15% of Estonian municipalities (12 out of 79), potentially im-
pacting the generalizability of the findings. Future research endeavors could benefit from employing a
quantitative approach that encompasses all Estonian municipalities, thus offering broader insights and en-
hancing the objectivity of the conclusions.
Thirdly, since the research focuses specifically on Estonian local governments, the results may not be di-
rectly applicable to other contexts with differing administrative systems. It is essential to interpret the find-
ings within the context of Estonia's unique governance structure and consider potential variations in other
countries.
Lastly, given the dynamic nature of the topic, the results reflect a snapshot in time, emphasizing the imme-
diate relevance of their application in enhancing the local data ecosystem and associated data provision.
Furthermore, it is recommended to replicate the study in the future to identify any remaining barriers or
new challenges that may have emerged. By using the presented results as a baseline, future iterations of the
study can evaluate the impact of interventions and assess changes in perceived barriers over time.
6 Conclusions and future research directions
This study aimed to examine the barriers hindering open data sharing within local authorities in Estonia.
By focusing on the specific context of local government data sharing practices, we contribute to the broader
understanding of open data governance and implementation, particularly within the context of local data
ecosystem, which is an integral part of the open data ecosystem.
The core contribution of this study lies in its examination of the challenges faced by Estonian local gov-
ernments in embracing open data initiatives. By delving into the reasons behind the disparity between cen-
tral government and local authority efforts, as evidenced by the Estonian Digital Agenda 2030, key imped-
iments and actionable solutions were determined.
Through interviews with representatives from local governments, this research sheds light on the complex-
ities surrounding data sharing practices at the municipal level. It not only uncovers the primary barriers
inhibiting open data sharing but also highlights potential enablers that could facilitate smoother implemen-
tation. From enhancing awareness and skills among local government stakeholders to improving data gov-
ernance frameworks and infrastructure, it offers a roadmap for creating a more conducive environment for
open data sharing leading to more resilient and sustainable open data ecosystem. The study also revealed
and communicated with interviewees some simple steps for improvement, e.g., publishing open data of
local government document management systems on national portal with one of the municipalities pub-
lished data after the interview.Given that several databases the municipalities are using for data collection, are centralized or national, it
is crucial to study, which municipal data should be published by local governments themselves and in
which cases the central register/body should be the publisher. This requires cooperation between local gov-
ernments and the national level and could be one of the future research directions. In addition, as the quality
of open data and metadata were often named during interviews as potential barriers preventing data opening
or complicating it, as well as data maintenance, the future studies could take this into focus, including
considerations of integrating of respective mechanisms for their control and improvement into the OGD
portal. In addition, the study implicated gaps in knowledge about the actual users and their needs, thus
mapping the main user groups of local-level OGD and developing detailed use-cases of data reuse would
be valuable to bring more comprehensive view. The qualitative analysis on local level OGD provision
barriers and enablers could be complemented with quantitative analysis, to validate the relevant barriers
identified by this study.
By validating the OGD-adapted IRT model, which has not yet been tested in real-world scenarios, and
proposing refinements based on empirical evidence, this study contributes to the advancement of theoretical
frameworks for understanding resistance to data sharing. Moreover, it has been demonstrated that the model
is applicable at both the national level that it was originally developed for and local data ecosystem to
which it was tailored in this study. As such, this study also proposed a revised version of the instrument
tailored for local government context. As part of the model validation by its application to Estonian case,
all barriers were found to be relevant, while in addition, municipalities raised some barriers not included in
the initial model falling predominantly to the categories of usage and value barriers. These implications
can serve as possible additions for the OGD-adapted IRT model refinement upon they are validated.
Declaration of Generative AI and AI-assisted technologies in the writing process
During the preparation of this work the authors used Copilot in order to improve formatting, styling and
translation. After using this tool/service, the authors reviewed and edited the content as needed and takes
full responsibility for the content of the publication.
References
Ali, M., Papageorgiou, G., Aziz, A., Loukis, E., Charalabidis, Y. and Pellicer, F.J.L., 2024. Towards the
Development of Interoperable Open Data Ecosystems: Harnessing the Technical, Semantic, Legal, and
Organizational (TSLO) Interoperability Framework. In 25th Annual International Conference on Dig-
ital Government Research (dg.o 2024), June 11–14, 2024, Taipei, Taiwan. ACM, New York, NY,
USA, 11 pages. https://doi.org/10.1145/3657054.3657160
Ansari, B., Barati, M. and Martin, E.G., 2022. Enhancing the usability and usefulness of open government
data: A comprehensive review of the state of open government data visualization research. Govern-
ment Information Quarterly, 39(1), p.101657.
Chokki, A.P., Frénay, B. and Vanderose, B., 2022, April. Open Data Explorer: An End-to-end Tool for
Data Storytelling using Open Data. In AMCIS 2022.
Dawes, S.S., Vidiasova, L. and Parkhimovich, O., 2016. Planning and designing open government data
programs: An ecosystem approach. Government Information Quarterly, 33(1), pp.15-27.
Dwivedi, Y. K., Balakrishnan, J., Das, R., & Dutot, V. (2023). Resistance to innovation: A dynamic capa-
bility model based enquiry into retailers’ resistance to blockchain adaptation. Journal of Business Re-
search, 157, 113632.
Golub, K. and Lund, A., 2021. Why open government data? The case of a Swedish municipality. Journal
of Data and Information Science, 6(1), pp.120-138.Fusi, F., 2021. Smaller cities, greater barriers? Moving data sharing ahead in US local governments. In
Research Handbook on E-Government (pp. 65-82). Edward Elgar Publishing.
Huang, Y.C. and Huang, T.Y., 2022, October. Why Do Public Servants Intend to Open Government Data?
The Case of Taiwan. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference on Theory and Practice of
Electronic Governance (pp. 344-352).
Kassen, M., 2019. Open data and e-government–related or competing ecosystems: a paradox of open gov-
ernment and promise of civic engagement in Estonia. Information Technology for Development, 25(3),
pp.552-578.
Kawashita, I., Baptista, A.A. and Soares, D., 2022. Open government data use by the public sector-an
overview of its benefits, barriers, drivers, and enablers.
Kević, K., Kuveždić Divjak, A. and Welle Donker, F., 2023. Benchmarking geospatial high-value data
openness using GODI Plus methodology: a regional level case study. ISPRS International Journal of
Geo-Information, 12(6), p.222.
Islam, M. T., Talukder, M. S., Khayer, A., & Islam, A. N. (2023). Exploring continuance usage intention
toward open government data technologies: An integrated approach. VINE Journal of Information and
Knowledge Management Systems, 53(4), 785-807.
Lassinantti, J., Ståhlbröst, A. and Runardotter, M., 2019. Relevant social groups for open data use and
engagement. Government Information Quarterly, 36(1), pp.98-111.
Li, Y., Yang, R. and Lu, Y., 2024. A privacy risk identification framework of open government data: A
mixed-method study in China. Government Information Quarterly, 41(1), p.101916.
Liva, G., Micheli, M., Schade, S., Kotsev, A., Gori, M. and Codagnone, C., 2023. City data ecosystems
between theory and practice: A qualitative exploratory study in seven European cities. Data & Policy,
5, p.e17.
Lnenicka, M., Nikiforova, A., Clarinval, A., Luterek, M., Rudmark, D., Neumaier, S., Kević, K. and Bolí-
var, M.P.R., 2024. Sustainable open data ecosystems in smart cities: A platform theory-based analysis
of 19 European cities. Cities, 148, p.104851.
Ma, L. and Lee, C.S., 2019. Understanding the barriers to the use of MOOCs in a developing country: An
innovation resistance perspective. Journal of Educational Computing Research, 57(3), pp.571-590.
McBride, K., Olesk, M., Kütt, A. and Shysh, D., 2020. Systemic change, open data ecosystem performance
improvements, and empirical insights from Estonia: A country-level action research study. Information
Polity, 25(3), pp.377-402.
McBride, K., Toots, M., Kalvet, T. and Krimmer, R., 2018. Leader in e-government, Laggard in open data:
Exploring the case of Estonia. Revue française d'administration publique, (3), pp.613-625.
Mohammad A. Hossain, Shams Rahman, Mohammed Quaddus, Elsie Hooi, and Abdus-Samad
Olanrewaju. (2022. Factors Affecting Performance of Open Government Data Initiatives: A Multi-
Method Approach Using Sem and FSQCA. Journal of Organizational Computing and Electronic Com-
merce, 1-20.
Molodtsov, F., Nikiforova, A. (2024). “An Integrated Usability Framework for Evaluating Open Govern-
ment Data Portals: Comparative Analysis of EU and GCC Countries”. In Proceedings of the 25th An-
nual International Conference on Digital Government Research
Nikiforova, A., 2021, October. Towards enrichment of the open government data: a stakeholder-centered
determination of High-Value Data sets for Latvia. In Proceedings of the 14th International Conference
on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance (pp. 367-372).
Nikiforova, A. and Zuiderwijk, A., 2022, October. Barriers to openly sharing government data: towards an
open data-adapted innovation resistance theory. In Proceedings of the 15th International Conference
on Theory and Practice of Electronic Governance (pp. 215-220).
Prakash, A.V. and Das, S., 2022. Explaining citizens’ resistance to use digital contact tracing apps: A
mixed-methods study. International Journal of Information Management, 63, p.102468.Publications Office of the European Union., Open data maturity report 2023. LU: Publications Office,
2023. Accessed: Jan. 17, 2024. [Online]. Available: https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2830/384422
Rajamäe-Soosaar, K., Nikiforova, A. (2024). “Exploring Estonia’s Open Government Data Development
as a Journey towards Excellence: Unveiling the Progress of Local Governments in Open Data Provi-
sion” In Proceedings of the 25th Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research
Ram, S. and Sheth, J.N., 1989. Consumer resistance to innovations: the marketing problem and its solu-
tions. Journal of consumer marketing, 6(2), pp.5-14.
Sandoval-Almazan, R., Valle Gonzalez, L. and Millan Vargas, A., 2021, June. Barriers for Open Govern-
ment implementation at municipal level: The case of the State of Mexico. In DG. O2021: The 22nd
Annual International Conference on Digital Government Research (pp. 113-122).
Shao, D. (2024). Empirical analysis of open government data usage in Tanzania. Information Discovery
and Delivery, 52(1), 73-84.
Talukder, M. S., Shen, L., Talukder, M. F. H., & Bao, Y. (2019). Determinants of user acceptance and use
of open government data (OGD): An empirical investigation in Bangladesh. Technology in Society,
56, 147-156.
Talwar, S., Talwar, M., Kaur, P. and Dhir, A., 2020. Consumers’ resistance to digital innovations: A sys-
tematic review and framework development. Australasian Marketing Journal (AMJ), 28(4), pp.286-
299.
Utamachant, P. and Anutariya, C., 2018, July. An analysis of high-value datasets: a case study of Thailand’s
open government data. In 2018 15th international joint conference on computer science and software
Wang, H. J., & Lo, J. (2016). Adoption of open government data among government agencies. Government
Information Quarterly, 33(1), 80-88. Hein, A., Engert, M., Ryu, S., Schaffer, N., Hermes, S. and
Krcmar, H., 2023. Building open government data platform ecosystems: A dynamic development ap-
proach that engages users from the start. Government Information Quarterly, 40(4), p.101878.
Wang, D., Richards, D., Bilgin, A. A., & Chen, C. (2020). A predictive model for citizens’ utilization of
open government data portals. In Digital Libraries at Times of Massive Societal Transition: 22nd In-
ternational Conference on Asia-Pacific Digital Libraries, ICADL 2020, Kyoto, Japan, November 30–
December 1, 2020, Proceedings 22 (pp. 159-175). Springer International Publishing.
Weerakkody, V., Irani, Z., Kapoor, K., Sivarajah, U. and Dwivedi, Y.K., 2017. Open data and its usability:
an empirical view from the Citizen’s perspective. Information Systems Frontiers, 19, pp.285-300.
Wirtz, B. W., Piehler, R., Thomas, M. J., & Daiser, P. (2016). Resistance of public personnel to open
government: A cognitive theory view of implementation barriers towards open government data. Pub-
lic Management Review, 18(9), 1335-1364. engineering (JCSSE) (pp. 1-6). IEEE.
Yang, T.M., Lo, J. and Shiang, J., 2015. To open or not to open? Determinants of open government data.
Journal of Information Science, 41(5), pp.596-612.
Yang, T.M. and Wu, Y.J., 2021. Looking for datasets to open: An exploration of government officials'
information behaviors in open data policy implementation. Government Information Quarterly, 38(2),
p.101574.
Zuiderwijk, A., Janssen, M., & Dwivedi, Y. K. (2015). Acceptance and use predictors of open data tech-
nologies: Drawing upon the unified theory of acceptance and use of technology. Government infor-
mation quarterly, 32(4), 429-440.Appendix
Appendix A. Example of transforming usage barrier and associated items into interview ques-
tions
Barrier and measurement items Interview questions
Usage barrier (UB) Q12. Are there any usage barriers related to the required changes
in your municipality’s routines that form a challenge for openly
sharing your municipality’s data? (UB)
Q13. To what extent do the following situations form a barrier to
openly sharing your municipality’s data:
UB1: It is difficult to attain the appropriate qual-
ity level for open government data to be shared an inappropriate quality level of your organization’s data?
openly (UB1)
UB2: It is difficult to prepare data for publication
so that they comply with OGD principles a complicated process to prepare data for sharing? (UB2)
UB3: It is difficult to prepare data for publication a complicated process to make your municipality’s data reus-
so that they become appropriate for reuse able by others? (UB3)
UB4: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD a complicated process to publish your municipality’s data on
portal due to the complexity of the process an open data portal? (UB4)
UB5: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD an unclear process of publishing your municipality’s data on
portal due to the unclear process an open data portal (UB5)
UB6: Data are difficult to publish on the OGD
portal due to their limited functionality limited functionality of open data portals? (UB6)
UB7: Open government data portals often do not
allow for semi-automation of the publishing pro- no possibility to semi-automate my organization’s process to
cess openly share its data? (UB7)
UB8: It is difficult to maintain openly shared gov- the need and a complicated process to maintain data once
ernment data published (UB8)
Q14. Are there any other usage barriers that form a barrier for
your municipality to openly share its data? (UBn)
Value Barrier (VB) …
Risk Barrier (RB) …
Tradition Barrier (TB) …
Image Barrier (IB) …
Appendix B. Codes used in NVivo to analyse the interviews
Name Description Inter- References
views
Image barriers 12 56
IB1. Negative image of OGD your municipality has a negative image of open government 10 11
data
IB2. Belief that OGD is not valua- your municipality believes that open government data is not 11 11
ble for users valuable for users
IB3. OGD damages reputation of your municipality fears that openly sharing government data 10 10
LG will damage the reputation of your municipalityName Description Inter- References
views
IB4. Accidental publication of your municipality fears that the accidental publication of 11 12
low-quality data damage reputa- low-quality data will damage the reputation of your munici-
tion pality
IB5. Incorrect conclusions drawn your municipality fears that associating them with incorrect 9 9
from OGD conclusions drawn from OGD analysis by OGD users will
damage its reputation
Other image barriers 3 3
OD ecosystem questions about overall open data ecosystem and potential 12 66
improvements
Actions by LG individually or in Which actions should be taken by local governments them- 12 13
cooperation selves to improve the publication of open data? (individually
or in cooperation)
Actions on national level Which actions should be taken at the national level (e.g., 11 13
Ministry) to help municipalities disclose more open data and
comply with the requirements related to open data?
Benefit or value of OD What could be the benefit or value of open data in your 11 20
opinion?
OGD ecosystem actors How do you see the whole open data ecosystem – which ac- 10 12
tors and what does it include?
Policy documents or initatives of Are you aware of any policy documents or initiatives guid- 8 8
OGD ing developments in the field of open data on Estonian or
European level? Are you aware of Estonian Digital State
Development Plan?
Organization and municipal portal 12 75
Cases of reuse of OD specific cases, where your municipality’s open data was re- 11 21
used by third party
Challenges of sharing data What challenges did your municipality face in openly shar- 11 15
ing data?
Drivers to share data on municipal 8 8
portal
Process of sharing data how the process of openly sharing data worked and who 11 12
within your municipality was or were involved?
Type of data on municipal portal What type of data did your municipality share openly and 12 19
how often?
Organization and national portal 12 28
Cases of reuse of OD specific cases, where your municipality’s open data was re- 1 1
used by third party
Challenges of sharing data What challenges did your municipality face in openly shar- 4 6
ing data
Drivers to share data on national 3 3
portal
Process of sharing data how the process of openly sharing data worked and who 3 3
within your municipality was or were involved
Reasons for not sharing data 7 11
Type of data on national portal What type of data did your municipality share openly and 3 4
how often
Organization of the interviewee some questions about the organization you are working for 12 33
Role of respondent in LG What is your role in this municipality 12 13
Type of data LG collects What type of data does your municipality collect 12 20
Overall barriers Are there any other barriers that form a barrier for your mu- 9 12
nicipality to openly share its data (not limited to the catego-
ries above)
Overall understanding of OD 10 12
Risk barriers 12 94Name Description Inter- References
views
Other risk barriers 8 8
RB1. Fear of misuse of OGD -the fear of the misuse of openly shared government data 11 11
RB2. Fear of misinterpretation of -the fear the misinterpretation of openly shared government 11 12
OGD data
RB3. Fear that OGD not reused the fear that openly shared government data will not be re- 11 11
used
RB4. Fear of violating data protec- -the fear violating data protection legislation when openly 12 13
tion sharing government data
RB5. Fear that sensitive data is ex- -the fear that sensitive data will be exposed as a result of 9 9
posed opening its data
RB6. Fear of making mistakes the fear making mistakes when preparing data for publica- 9 9
tion
RB7. Fear that users find errors in the fear that users will find existing errors in the data 11 11
data
RB8. Fear that OGD reduces gains the fear that openly sharing its data will reduce its gains 6 7
(otherwise the municipality could sell the data or use it in
another beneficial way)
RB9. Fear that OGD allows com- the fear that openly sharing its data will allow its competi- 3 3
petitors benefit tors to benefit from this data
Tradition barriers 12 65
Other tradition barriers 7 9
TB1. Information requests are suf- your municipality believes that Freedom of information re- 11 11
ficient quests are sufficient for the public to obtain government data
TB2. Reluctancy to implement cul- your municipality is reluctant to implement the culture 12 13
ture change change required for openly sharing government data
TB3. Lack of skills for openly employees in your municipality lack the skills required for 11 12
sharing data openly sharing government data
TB4. Lack of skills to maintain employees in your municipality lack the skills required for 10 10
OGD maintaining openly shared government data
TB5. Reluctancy to change organi- your municipality is reluctant to radically change the organi- 10 10
sational processes zational processes that would enable openly sharing govern-
ment data
Usage barriers 12 113
Other usage barriers 11 13
UB1. Inappropriate quality an inappropriate quality level of your municipality’s data 12 13
UB2. Preparation of data compli- a complicated process to prepare data for sharing 12 12
cated
UB3. Make data reusable compli- complicated process to make your municipality’s data reusa- 10 12
cated ble by others
UB4. Publishing in OD portal complicated process to publish your municipality’s data on 12 13
complicated an open data portal
UB5. Publishing of OD unclear unclear process of publishing your municipality’s data on an 10 11
open data portal
UB6. Limited functionality of OD limited functionality of open data portals 11 14
portal
UB7. Semi-automate process to no possibility to semi-automate my municipality’s process 12 12
share OD to openly share its data
UB8. Maintain data once pub- the need and a complicated process to maintain data once 11 13
lished published
Value barriers 12 113
Other value barriers 8 9
VB1. OGD not valuable for public openly sharing government data is often not valuable for the 12 12
publicName Description Inter- References
views
VB2. Datasets not appropriate for -many open government datasets are not appropriate for re- 12 12
reuse use
VB3. Datasets have quality issues many open government datasets suffer from data quality is- 11 11
sues (completeness, accuracy, uniqueness, consistency, etc.)
VB4. Public gains are lower than the public gains of openly sharing government data are often 12 13
costs lower than the costs
VB5. Org. gains are lower than your organization’s gains of openly sharing government data 7 9
costs are often lower than the costs
VB6. Data prep. too resource-con- data preparation is too resource-consuming for your organi- 11 11
suming zation
VB7. OGD provides no value to open government data do not provide any value to your or- 11 11
org. ganization
VB8. Org. OGD provides no value open data that your organization can openly share will not 10 13
to users provide value to users
VB9. Spent resources vs benefits number of resources to be spent to prepare, publish and 12 12
to organization maintain open government data outweigh the benefit my or-
ganization gains from it