Identifying and modelling cognitive biases in mobility choices
Chloe CONRAD Carole ADAM
M1 student, Univ. Lyon 1 Univ. Grenoble-Alpes - LIG
M1 internship report - October 2022 to June 2023
Abstract
This report presents results from an M1 internship dedicated to agent-based modelling and simulation of daily
mobility choices. This simulation is intended to be realistic enough to serve as a basis for a serious game about the
mobilitytransition. Inordertoensurethislevelofrealism,weconductedasurveytomeasureifrealmobilitychoicesare
made rationally, or how biased they are. Results analysed here show that various biases could play a role in decisions.
We then propose an implementation in a GAMA agent-based simulation.
1 Introduction
One of the central axes in the development of a more ecological society is the transition towards more sustainable modes
of mobility. To trigger and successfully complete this transition, several tools and levers can be used. One of these
tools is the implementation of public policies favoring the use of soft mobility modes [6]. However, data shows that this
approach alone is not sufficient1. Another complementary approach consists in developing educational tools to facilitate
this transition.
The Switch project2 follows this second approach, with the objective of developing a serious game to raise awareness
about the mobility transition. The main idea of the project is to use game dynamics on top of an agent-based simulation,
to trigger reflection in the player about their daily mobility choices. An agent-based simulation is a computer program
in which autonomous intelligent entities called agents interact together and with their environment to carry out a certain
task. These systems fall into the field of distributed artificial intelligence and are particularly useful for such educational
purposes. Indeed, they allow the user to interact with the system, try out different scenarios, and control relevant
parameters in order to understand their impact on the observed outputs.
This report is structured as follows: Section 2 provides some background and details the previous work on which the
current internship project is grounded; Section 3 describes our survey and analyses its results; Section 4 introduces our
agent-based simulator, how it uses the survey results, and two experiments; Section 5 concludes the report.
2 Background and previous work
2.1 A model of mobility choice
ThefirstmobilitychoicesimulatorintheSWITCHprojectwasproposedby[8]. Itdefinedarational,multi-criteriadecision
process based on six criteria identified from sociological studies: comfort, speed, safety, cost, praticity, and ecology. Each
individualagentihastheirownprioritiesforeachcriterionc,denotedprio (c),showinghowimportantthiscriterionisfor
i
the agent. Four mobility modes are studied: individual car, public transport (bus), bicycle, walking. Each mode m has a
value on each criteria c, denoted val(m,c); this ’objective’ value depends on the current city infrastructure and represents
how well the mode m satisfies the criterion c. Based on these heterogeneous priorities, and homogeneous values, each
individual i computes their score score (m) for each mobility mode m, with the following formula:
i
(cid:88)
score (m)= val(m,c)∗prio (c)
i i
c∈crits
1Chiffres cl´es des transports 2023. Donn´ees et ´etudes statistiques pour le changement climatique, l’´energie, l’environnement, le logement
et les transports : https://www.statistiques.developpement-durable.gouv.fr/chiffres-cles-des-transports-edition2023?rubrique=
56dossier=1337
2SwITCh-SimulatingthetransitionoftransportInfrastructuresTowardsmartandsustainableCities: https://www6.inrae.fr/switch
1
4202
beF
51
]YC.sc[
1v12990.2042:viXraTherationalchoicefortheagentiisthenthemobilitymodethatreceivesthemaximalscore. Thismodelisinteresting
but was shown to be insufficient, in particular due to ignoring the role of habits [3] that create an inertia in our mobility
choices. The model was therefore later enriched with habits [7, 1] as well as cognitive biases [2].
2.2 Cognitive biases
Cognitive biases are heuristics used by our cognitive system to facilitate decision-making [10]. They allow rapid reasoning
during stressful or complex situations despite the incompleteness or uncertainty of the information necessary for rational
decision-making. Although they are essential to our proper functioning, they can sometimes lead to irrational decision-
making. Therefore they must be taken into account when constructing realistic human behaviour models.
The literature in cognitive science has identified a large number of cognitive biases [4, 5], but not all of them are
interesting to take into account in the context of daily mobility choice. Thus, before developing a simulation, it is
necessary to identify those which play a role in our context and which may therefore be relevant to implement in our
simulation. An initial study based on semi-structured interviews and bibliographic research was previously carried out
and allowed us to select 3 biases:
• Confirmation bias: tendency to only consider information that confirms our opinions and choices.
• Reactance bias: negative reaction to an external attempt to influence us away from our habits or choices.
• Overestimation bias: our semi-structured interviews showed an almost systematic overestimation of travel times by
bike and while walking.
Following this study, a first Python simulation was implemented, that showed the interest of integrating cognitive
biases in the decision process to enhance simulation realism. But before implementing cognitive biases in a complete
urbanmobilitysimulation,weneedtomoreformallyquantitativelyevaluatetheireffectonmobilitydecisions. Thesurvey
designed to this aim is presented in the next section.
3 Survey of mobility perceptions and priorities
A quantitative analysis of the effect of biases on the choice of a daily mobility means requires a study on a large number
of people. To ensure a large participation, we chose to use an online questionnaire form. The goal of this survey is to
evaluate the rationality of mobility choice and to identify cognitive biases that could impact this choice.
3.1 Methodology
The questionnaire consists of three main parts. The first part concerns the responders’ profile and their mobility habits.
In the second part, the participants are asked to provide their ratings of priority over the 6 decision criteria identified
above (ecology, comfort, financial accessibility, practicality, safety and speed), i.e. o state how important each criterion is
in their choice of a daily mobility mode. The third and last part concerns the participants’ perceptions of the value of the
mobility modes considered (bicycle, car, public transport and walking) over these criteria: they are asked to mark how
well they think that each mode satisfies each criterion. All ratings (priorities and values) are made on a Likert scale from
0 to 10.
The goal of these questions is to allow us to estimate what would be the rational mobility choice of each participant
with respect to the formula described above, based on the priorities and values that they provide. We should then be
able to compare the declared mobility mode of each participant with that predicted rational mode. In the case when they
differ, several reasons can explain the discrepancy, including the impact of cognitive biases. Besides, the declared values
and priorities will be averaged to calibrate parameters of our simulator.
3.2 Questionnaire
The questionnaire was administered in French. Below is a translation of its main elements:
• Part 1: responder profile
1. What is your gender (Multiple choice: woman, man, other, do not wish to answer)
2. Which mobility mode do you use most for your daily trips? (Multiple choice: bicycle, car, public transport, walking)
3. What is the distance between your place of residence and your main place of activity, in km?
4. How many times per week do you realise the roundtrip between your place of residence and your main place of activity?
25. Are any mobility modes inaccessible to you (personal constraints, lack of infrastructures, for instance no public transport
available)? (Multiple choice: bicyle, car, public transport, walking, none)
6. Give precisions if you wish. (free text)
• Part 2: importance of choice criteria: for each criteria, we ask you to evaluate how important it is for you when choosing
your daily mobility mode. Answers on a Likert scale from 0 to 10 for the following 6 criteria:
– Ecology: this mode has a low carbon footprint
– Comfort: this mode is pleasant to use
– Financial accessibility: this mode is cheap
– Praticity: this mode is flexible, does not impose strong constraints
– Safety: this mode allows me to move without risks (accidents, injury, aggression)
– Speed: this mode allows me to reach my destination in low time
• Part 3: evaluation of responder’s perceptions of mobility means. For each of the 4 modes:
1. How would you rate the (ecology, comfort, financial accessibility, praticity, safety, speed) of this mode as a daily
commuting mode? 6 questions, answers on a Likert scale from 0 to 10.
2. Do you want to add anything on your perception of this mode? (free text answer)
3.3 Participation
Following the diffusion of our survey on-
line during spring 2023, 625 people did
answer the questionnaire. Figure 1 rep-
resentsthedistributionofusualmobility
mode in our respondents. We will use
this distribution as a comparison point
with our simulation results.
Figure 1: Distribution of habitual mobility mode over 625 respondents
3.4 Average values to calibrate the simulator
Inordertocalibrateouragent-basedsimulation,wewillusetheaveragevaluesreportedbytherespondentsforthepriority
of criteria, as well as for the evaluation of modes on these criteria.
Average priorities of criteria. We first computed the average priority of each of the 6 decision criteria, over each
subpopulation of respondents (cyclists, car drivers, bus users, pedestrians), as well as over the global population of all
respondents. Figure 2 reports these average priorities, computed from the answers to the part 2 of our survey.
(a) Cyclists (b) Car drivers (c) Bus users (d) Walkers
Figure 2: Priority profiles of the 4 subpopulations wrt usual mobility mode
Average values of modes on criteria Wethencomputedtheaverageevaluationsofmobilitymodesonthe6decision
criteria, over the subpopulations of users of this mode, vs non-users (i.e. sers of all 3 other modes). This is based on the
answers to the part 3 of our survey. Figure 3 reports the results.
We can see that the evaluation of the modes differ among their users vs the users of other modes. Concretely, people
whouseamoderateithigher,onmostcriteria,thanpeoplewhodonotuseit. Thiscanbeexplainedintwoways: people
who rate a mode higher are therefore more likely to use it; but people who use a mode are also more likely to upgrade
their perception a posteriori to justify their choices.
3(a) Bicycle (b) Bus
(c) Car driving (d) Walking
Figure 3: Comparing the evaluation of modes by users / non-users
3.5 Rational choices and identification of biases
The general idea of evaluating the rationality of respondents’ choices of means of transport is to estimate, based on their
responses,thechoicethatwouldbeconsideredasrationalbythemulti-criteriadecisionmodeldescribedabove(Section2).
We will then compare the predicted rational choice with the habitual mobility mode reported by the participant. We
expect that not all respondents will use the mobility mode that would be considered rational, which can be explained by
several reasons, such as individual constraints (the rational mode is not available or accessible to the user), habits (the
user’s habit is kept despite not being best anymore), or cognitive biases.
Wecannotconsiderthatachoiceisirrationalwhenitistheonlyoneavailable. Therefore,asafirststep,weeliminated
fromthelistofpossiblechoicesthemodesthattheusertickedasunavailable(inpart1ofthesurvey)andthemodesthat
would take too long based on the reported home-work distance (over 15km for bicycle, over 5km for walking). In order to
estimate the best rational mobility choice for each participant, we then used two different methods.
Personal values. The first method consists in considering the evaluations of the modes on the six criteria that were
reported by the respondents themselves (in part 3 of the questionnaire). These evaluations are used in the multi-criteria
decisionformulapresentedabove, tocomputethescoresofallavailablemodes; themodewiththebestscoreisconsidered
as the rational choice. This method allows us to identify participants who make ’irrational’ choices with respect to their
own perceptions of the modes. Figure 4 shows the resulting predicted rational choices of users of each mode, as computed
with our multi-criteria decision formula, using their declared priorities and declared evaluations. We can observe that the
chosen mode matches the rational prediction for many, but not all, users.
(a) Cyclists (b) Bus users (c) Car drivers (d) Walkers
Figure 4: Rational choice of mobility for users of the 4 modes, based on personal DECLARED values
Crowdsourced values. However, these declared evaluations could themselves be biased, as suggested by the results
above(Figure3). Asaresult,someparticipantscouldappearrationalbecauseofabiasedreportedevaluation. Inorderto
4solvethisproblem,weusedasecondpredictionmethod. Sincethevalueofmodesoncriteriadependsmostlyontheurban
infrastructure (having safe cycling lanes, sufficient frequency and capacity of buses, expensive petrol and car insurance,
etc) or on external parameters (bicycle is more ecological than car driving), we could consider them as homogeneous
among all agents in a similar environment. We therefore decided to ’crowdsource’ the evaluation of each mode on each
criteria by computing its average evaluation over all respondents. We then used the same multi-criteria decision formula,
butreplacingtheindividuallyreportedsubjectiveevaluation,withthesupposedlymoreobjective,averagevalue. Figure4
reports the results. We can see that more choices are considered irrational with this second method, due to taking into
account evaluation biases that were hidden by the first method.
(a) Cyclists (b) Bus users (c) Car drivers (d) Walkers
Figure 5: Rational choice of mobility for users of the 4 modes, based on average CROWDSOURCED values
3.6 Discussion
First of all, it is interesting to observe the big gap between the results obtained by the two methods. Indeed, when using
reported subjective evaluations in the formula (method 1), we find that 443 (out of 625) respondents make the rational
choice of daily mobility. When using the average crowd evaluation in the same formula (method 2), we only have 297
rational choices among the respondents.
This can be explained when studying the respondents’ perceptions of the different mobility modes. Indeed, we can
observe that the perception of the value of a mode on the criteria is over-evaluated by the users of this mode when
compared with the general population. This is even more obvious when comparing with the perception by non-users of
this mode (Figure 3). Assuming that each mode has an objective value on each criteria (walking is perfectly ecological
while driving is not, road safety can be evaluated by accident statistics, etc), we could explain this over-estimation by the
impact of the confirmation bias. For instance, users of public transport could unconsciously modify their perception of
this mobility mode to bring an internal validation of their choice.
Asimilarbiascanalsobeobservedinthepriorityprofilesoftherespondents(Figure2). Forinstance,cardriversreport
alowerpriorityofecologyandfinancialaccessibilitythantheotherpopulations,whileconsideringthatindividualcaristhe
least ecological and the most expensive mode. Similarly, cyclists perceive the bicycle as being the most dangerous mode,
but also report a lower priority for safety. Of course it is impossible to say if there is a selection of users who are already
lesssensitivetosafetyandthereforechoosetorideabicycle, orifpeoplechoosingtorideabicyclewillsubsequentlylower
their priority for safety to validate their choice.
Tosummarize,wecanobservethatamongtherespondentstothequestionnaire,only47.5%choosetheirdailymobility
mode rationally according to the second method. One possible explanation for this phenomenon is the confirmation bias.
But other biases could also have an effect without being identifiable from our results. For instance, reactance is hard to
show in our results since it appears in response to an external incentive that is perceived as trying to force oneself into
a different choice. Thus, to evaluate the effects of this bias, it would be necessary to voluntarily create this incentive
and observe the evolution of perceptions on the different means of transport. Furthermore, the effects of overestimation
bias could not be observed with the responses to the questionnaire; however it had already been clearly identified in the
preliminary semi-structured interviews, and will thus be implemented in our simulation.
To conclude, it must also be clarified that the conclusions drawn from the responses to this questionnaire are only
hypotheses for the development of a simulation. Evaluating the presence of cognitive biases in a decision using a ques-
tionnaire is complex, because it is possible that respondents adapted their answers to justify their choice of daily means
of transport, and because several different reasons could explain the same decision. In the sequel, we implemented these
hypotheses in an agent-based simulation in order to check whether they make it possible to generate results that are
consistent with reality, which would give more value to this study.
54 Agent-based mobility simulation
Following the completion of this survey, we developed a multi-agent simulation of choices of daily mobility mode. It was
decided to carry out this simulation in the Gaml language which is the programming language supported by the GAMA
platform3 [9]. It is an open source multi-agent simulation platform with an integrated development environment. The
Gaml language was created specifically for this platform, it was designed to be usable by non-computer scientists and is
based on the Java language. Besides, it is already used in the previous versions of the Switch simulation so it was more
coherent to continue the work with this same language.
4.1 Agents
Anagent inthesimulationrepresentsanindividualhavingtochoose ateachtime steponemobility mode amongthefour
ones considered.
Attributes and initialisation. Each agent has a number of attributes influencing its decisions.
• Physical fitness: float between 0 (very bad) and 100 (perfect).
• Home-work distance, randomly initialised between 0 and 20km, since we are mostly interested un urban mobility.
• Habits: the agent remembers which modes it used in the past; the history is randomly initialised and then updated
with each trip. Habits are used to compite cognitive biases and to initialise the following 2 attributes
• Priorities for the 6 criteria: initialised with the results of our survey (average priorities over the subpopulation
of users of a given mode), for the habitual mobility mode deduced from the agent’s habits. These priorities are
considered static.
• Perceptions of modes on criteria: also initialised from the results of our survey (average values of modes on criteria
over the subpopulation of users of each mode) and based on the agent’s habitual mode. These perceived values will
dynamically evolve during the simulation, under the effect of cognitive biases or environmental changes.
Behaviour. At each time step of the simulation, all the agents choose a mode of mobility among the 4 ones considered
(bicycle, car, public transport and walking), by computing their scores with the multi-criteria decision formula (weighed
average of values of the mode on each criterion, weighed by the priority of the criterion). However, we modify this
initial model by introducing several pre-processing operations on the agent’s perceptions and the availability of means of
transport.
Firstly, walking is removed from the options for agents with a physical fitness lower than 10 whatever the distance;
for agents with a physical fitness between 10 and 90 if the distance is more than 2 km; and for agents with a physical
fitness above 90 if the distance is above 5km. Bicycle is similarly removed for agents with physical fitness lower than 10;
for agents with a home-work distance greater than 8 km and a physical fitness between 10 and 90; and for agents with a
physical fitness over 90 and a distance over 20 km.
Second,theeffectsofcognitivebiasesareappliedonperceivedvaluesofmodesbysomeagents(theproportionofbiased
agents is a parameter of the simulation). For those agents that are concerned by the confirmation bias, the perceived
values of their most used mobility mode on the criteria are raised. For the agents concerned with the overestimation bias,
their perceived speed of walking and cycling are lowered.
4.2 The environment.
A central element of the simulation is the description of the environment in which the agents will evolve. This description
is made using several quantitative (Table 1) and qualitative (Table 2) parameters. Among these parameters, some will be
directly taken into account in the behaviour of the agents while others represent a global description of the environment.
A default value is assigned to each of these parameters. Most of these values were taken from the Python simulation
developed earlier or from the existing version of the SWITCH simulation. Only the price of petrol was updated in
January 2023, to correspond to the average price at this period.
The number of agents and the proportions of agents affected by the biases are global description parameters of the
environment used at initialisation. The other parameters all have a direct effect on the choices of agents and can be
modified during the simulation, via the graphical interface (Figure 6); the new values must be confirmed to notify the
3GAMAplatform: https://gama-platform.org/
6Parameter Default value
Number of agents 625
Petrol price 1.95euro/L
Monthly bus pass 65.5 euros
Proportion of roads with cycling lane 50.0%
Mean frequency of buses 10 / hour
Mean bus capacity 100 people
Mean car speed 42.3 km.h
Mean bicycle speed 14 km.h
Mean walking speed 6.4 km.h
Mean bus speed 10 km.h
Proportion of agents with confirmation bias 50%
Proportion of agents with over-estimation bias 50%
Table 1: Quantitative parameters and their default values
Parameter Default value
Rainy weather False
Pleasant temperature True
Daylight True
Urban environment False
Rush hour False
Table 2: Qualitative parameters and their default values
simulationofthechanges,sothattheagents’perceptionscanbesubsequentlyupdated. Iftheseparametersareleftattheir
default value, they have no effect, the environment is considered neutral. If the user modifies their value, it impacts the
agents’ perceptions of the mobility modes concerned by the parameter. For example, if the user increases the proportion
of roads equipped with cycle lanes, the safety and speed values of cycling increase. If the user activates the rainy weather
setting, cycling becomes less comfortable and more dangerous, walking becomes less comfortable and driving becomes
more dangerous.
Figure 6: Screenshot of the graphical interface for modifying environment parameters of the simulation
4.3 Simulation results
We consider as output of our simulation the distribution of agents’ choices over the four available mobility modes. Since
weinitialiseourpopulationwiththeprioritiesandvaluesreportedinoursurvey,wewishtoobtainaresultingdistribution
similar to the one measured in our surveyed population (Figure 1). We ran two experiments to compare the distributions
obtained with and without the influence of cognitive biases.
7Experiment 1: no cognitive biases. We ran a first experiment without activating cognitive biases (0% of agents
affected). Figure 7 shows the results.
Figure 7: Mobility distribution resulting from experiment 1, without cognitive biases
We can then see that this distribution is quite far from what is expected. First, the proportions of mobility modes are
notcorrect: thenumberofcyclistsistoohigh(288versusaround194expected)andthenumberofpublictransportusers
is too low (155 versus around 220 expected). Second, the ranking order of the modes relative to each other is not even
respected: public transport should come first (according to our surveyed population) but is only third in this simulation.
For the simulation to be considered as realistic, it is necessary that we can at least reproduce the observed rankings.
Experiment 2: with cognitive biases. Figure 8 shows the results of a second experiment, where cognitive biases
wereactivated. Theseresultsareclosertowhatisexpected. Therankingofthemodesbyproportionofusersisrespected.
However, the number of car drivers remains a little too high, while the number of walkers is too low.
Figure 8: Results of experiment 2: distribution of mobility with cognitive biases
5 Conclusion
The processing of the questionnaire data clearly showed that the choice of a means of daily transport is not always made
rationally. We were also able to show that the confirmation bias could play a role in the irrationality of this choice. This
questionnaire associated with previous work in the project allowed to design and implement an agent-based simulation
taking into account confirmation bias and overestimation bias in the agents’ decisions.
In view of our results, the implementation of cognitive biases in an agent-based simulation seems to be an interesting
avenue to make it more realistic. However, for the results to be better, these biases should be better formalized so that
they function as in our cognitive system. For this, it will be necessary to carry out in-depth work in cognitive sciences to
understand their real functioning.
In addition, one way to improve our simulation is to implement a form of interaction between the agents, which is not
yet taken into account in our current model. Indeed, some cognitive biases such as reactance emerge from interactions
between agents, and decisions are also influenced by social biases (social pressure, sheep effect). Future work is therefore
needed to improve the simulation with such social aspects.
Acknowledgements
This internship was co-supervised by Marie LEFEVRE from Univ. Claude Bernard Lyon 1, LIRIS lab. This work is part
of the ANR project SwITCh funded by the French National Research Agency under number ANR-19-CE22-0003.
8References
[1] C. Adam. Interactive simulation of inertia created by mobility habits. In 54th International Simulation and Gaming
conference, 2023.
[2] C.Adam.Simulatingtheimpactofcognitivebiasesonthemobilitytransition.In54thISAGAConference(Simulation
and Gaming), 2023.
[3] O. Brette, T. Buhler, N. Lazaric, and K. Mar´echal. Reconsidering the nature and effects of habits in urban trans-
portation behavior. Journal of Institutional Economics, 10(3):399–426, 2014.
[4] J. Ehrlinger, W. O. Readinger, and B. Kim. Decision-making and cognitive biases. Encyclopedia of mental health,
12(3):83–7, 2016.
[5] M. Hilbert. Toward a synthesis of cognitive biases : how noisy information processing can bias human decision
making. Psychological bulletin, 138(2):211, 2012.
[6] M. Huyghe. Les leviers pour une mobilit´e en transition. Ecologik, 2018.
[7] A. Jacquier and C. Adam. Agent-based modelling of habits in urban mobility. In GAMA Days 2021, 2021.
[8] A.JacquierandC.Adam.Choiceofmobility: anagent-basedapproach.InSpatialAnalysisandGeomatics(SAGEO),
pages 127–138, 2021.
[9] P. Taillandier, B. Gaudou, A. Grignard, Q.-N. Huynh, N. Marilleau, P. Caillou, D. Philippon, and A. Drogoul.
Building, composing and experimenting complex spatial models with the gama platform. GeoInformatica, 23:299–
322, 2019.
[10] A. Tversky and D. Kahneman. Judgment under uncertainty: Heuristics and biases: Biases in judgments reveal some
heuristics of thinking under uncertainty. science, 185(4157):1124–1131, 1974.
Appendix
In this annex, we report the detailed average perceptions of how well each mobility mode satisfies each criteria, over
different populations: the general population, and the subpopulation of users of each mode. These are the values used to
initialise the agent population in the simulation.
9(a) Global population of 625 respondents
(b) Bus users
(c) Cyclists
(d) Car drivers
(e) Pedestrians
Figure 9: Comparing the average evaluations of the 4 modes, by subpopulation
10