1
On-Demand Myoelectric Control Using Wake
Gestures to Eliminate False Activations During
Activities of Daily Living
Ethan Eddy , Member, IEEE, Evan Campbell , Member, IEEE, Scott Bateman ,
and Erik Scheme , Senior Member, IEEE
Abstract—While myoelectric control has recently become a Despiteitshistoryofsuccesswithintheprostheticscommu-
focusofincreasedresearchasapossibleflexiblehands-freeinput nity [5], the use of myoelectric control for human-computer
modality, current control approaches are prone to inadvertent
interaction (HCI) as a general-purpose input modality only
false activations in real-world conditions. In this work, a novel
materialized in the early 2000s [6]. In this early exploration
myoelectriccontrolparadigm—on-demandmyoelectriccontrol—
is proposed, designed, and evaluated, to reduce the number of period, most HCI researchers embraced the best practices
unrelated muscle movements that are incorrectly interpreted as for myoelectric control as established over decades by the
inputgestures.Byleveragingtheconceptofwakegestures,users prosthetics community [3]. The issue, however, is that these
were able to switch between a dedicated control mode and a
control schemes, initially designed for the continuous micro-
sleepmode,effectivelyeliminatinginadvertentactivationsduring
adjustment of a prosthetic limb, fundamentally differ from
activities of daily living (ADLs). The feasibility of wake gestures
was demonstrated in this work through two online ubiquitous those required for general-purpose ubiquitous use cases. Cor-
EMG control tasks with varying difficulty levels; dismissing an respondingly, there has been a prevailing perception that
alarmandcontrollingarobot.Theproposedcontrolschemewas myoelectric control lacks the robustness required for real-
able to appropriately ignore almost all non-targeted muscular
world general-purpose use, often being characterized as an
inputsduringADLs(>99.9%)whilemaintainingsufficientsensi-
“imprecise” input modality [7].
tivityforreliablemodeswitchingduringintentionalwakegesture
elicitation. These results highlight the potential of wake gestures A fundamental distinction between myoelectric control for
asacriticalsteptowardsenablingubiquitousmyoelectriccontrol- poweredprosthesesandgeneral-purposeinputisthedifference
based on-demand input for a wide range of applications. between dedicated and on-demand input. Dedicated control
IndexTerms—MyoelectricControl,GestureRecognition,Wake refers to a system that is always classifying EMG as input
Gesture, Electromyography, False Activations intent, often with an ‘other’ or ‘no movement’ class acting
as a ‘do nothing’ command. Controlling a prosthetic device
oftenassumesdedicatedcontinuouscontrol,whereindividuals
I. INTRODUCTION
constantly adjust their prosthesis based on predictions occur-
With new opportunities emerging with mixed reality, smart ring on milliseconds worth of data [8]. In these cases, the
homes,andotherconnectedtechnologies,modern-dayhuman- classification problem is considered to be closed-set, where
computer interaction is rapidly evolving [1]. As we increas- the EMG inputs to the system are assumed to correspond to
ingly engage within ubiquitous computing environments (i.e., one of the N classes used for training. The closed-set contin-
computing anywhere and everywhere), there is a renewed uous control assumption is a seemingly appropriate approach
need for always-available inputs that are both reliable and for prosthesis control because amputees primarily engage in
robust. Myoelectric control, which involves the recognition dedicated single-task device control; that is, it is assumed that
of muscle-based inputs (or gestures) via the electromyogram theyonlyactivatethemusclesoftheirresiduallimbtocontrol
(EMG) signals generated during muscular contractions [2], is the prosthesis. In turn, the prosthesis is always on, ready to
an attractive solution due to its potential intuitiveness, sub- be controlled, and there is no other task to be performed.
tlety, and ability to work in real-world scenarios where other This is not always the case for a user of a ‘general purpose’
technologies may not [3]. By leveraging machine learning myoelectriccontrolsystem,whereintermittentcontrolisoften
to extract distinctive patterns of muscle activity to predict desirable. For example, imagine controlling a slideshow with
gestural intent [4], EMG has the potential to unlock many anEMGdeviceandstoppingtotypeonthekeyboardtobring
interesting and unique interaction opportunities. upawebsitetoshowtheaudience.Inthissituation,typingon
thekeyboardmightproducemuscleinputsthatareunexpected
E. Eddy, E. Campbell, and E. Scheme are with the Institute of intheclosed-set,inadvertentlyadvancingtheslidedeck.So,a
Biomedical Engineering and the Department of Electrical Engineering, dedicatedcontrolschemeinthesesettingsprecludestheability
University of New Brunswick, Fredericton, Canada; eeddy@unb.ca,
for users to perform additional activities without worrying
evan.campbell1@unb.ca, escheme@unb.ca.
S. Bateman is with the HCI and SPECTRAL Labs, University of New about inadvertent activations, an essential requirement for any
Brunswick,Fredericton,Canada;scottb@unb.ca ubiquitous input technology.
*This work has been submitted for possible publication. Copyright may
A highly desirable characteristic of general-purpose myo-
be transferred without notice, after which this version may no longer be
accessible. electriccontrol wouldbeto enablesituationalinput inubiqui-
4202
beF
51
]CH.sc[
1v05001.2042:viXra2
tous environments. For example, controlling a music player these control systems, the EMG signal is first filtered to
while walking to work, subtly accessing information on a removeunwantednoise,windowed(i.e.,splitintoframeswith
mixed-realitydisplaywhileinthegrocerystore,ordismissing apredefinedlengthandincrementthatgovernsthecontroller’s
a phone call while driving [9]. However, the dedicated and responsiveness), features are extracted, and finally, a classifier
continuousmyoelectriccontrolschemespreviouslyexploredin continuouslyoutputsaclass(i.e.gesture)prediction.Although
the HCIliterature (e.g., [6],[10], [11]) have struggledto offer thesesystemsenabletherecognitionofadiversesetofinputs,
such capabilities. To realize the required level of robustness, theyarepronetofalseactivationswhenout-of-setgesturesare
on-demandmyoelectriccontrolmayofferpromisethroughthe elicited [15]. While some have sought to limit the impact of
intentional activation and deactivation of a dedicated control unwanted inputs through techniques like rejection [16], [17],
mode. Toward this goal, an on-demand myoelectric control current myoelectric control systems still assume a closed-set
system based on wake gestures is proposed, designed, and environment, forcing user behaviours into a dedicated input
evaluated. Similar to the now familiar wake words “Hey mode.Inturn,theadoptionofthesededicatedcontinuouscon-
Google” or “Hey Siri”, a widely familiar gesture—a finger trolschemesforotherapplicationsinHCIhasbeenmisguided.
snap—is identified as a toggle to easily transition between
modes. B. The False Activation Problem
Leveraging the added temporal information encoded in
Myoelectric control began to receive interest within the
dynamic sequences of muscle contractions, these patterns
general human-machine interaction community in the early
are better differentiated from other patterns of EMG elicited
2000s following its history of success for prosthesis control
during ADLs [3]. In this work, a straightforward Dynamic
[3]. Since then, it has been explored for a variety of applica-
TimeWarping(DTW)[12]basedtemplatematchingapproach
tions, including drone control [10], pen augmentation [18],
wasfoundtoenabletherejectionofinadvertentmuscleinputs
and human-robot interaction [19], and many have worked
while remaining largely resilient to possible variations in
to progress algorithms and approaches in offline settings
gesture dynamics.
[20], [21]. Despite this extensive exploration, a generally
To evaluate the proposed on-demand myoelectric control
overlooked critical issue is separating intentional (closed-set)
approach, 20 individuals with varying degrees of experience
inputs from unintentional (open-set) ones. Generally, current
with EMG used the system during various activities of daily
systems suffer from the problem of all actions turning into
living(ADLs),includingwalking,writing,driving,typing,and
device commands (akin to the ”Midas Touch” problem [22]
phone use. While performing the ADLs, participants were
whereby all actions, intentional or not, are associated with
randomly cued to complete a secondary task using EMG as
an input command). In particular, this issue has been exac-
control (either using a gesture to dismiss an alarm or con-
erbated by offline studies and simulated online evaluations
trolling a remote-controlled robot around an obstacle course).
that inadequately represent the real-world ubiquitous use of
Theproposedsystemignored>99.9%ofallinadvertentinputs
myoelectric control. As highlighted by Chang et al. , this
duringthesetaskswhilereliablyrecognizingthewakegesture
is particularly troublesome as there is a direct overlap in
whenintentionallyactivated.Theseresultssuggestapromising
feature space between many commonly used control gestures
path forward for myoelectric control as a robust, on-demand,
(e.g., hand open/close and wrist flexion/extension) and typical
general-purpose ubiquitous input modality.
activitiesofdailyliving(ADLs),meaningthatfalseactivations
are inevitable with the current continuous control paradigm
II. RELATEDWORK [23].
A. Myoelectric Control
C. Wake Words
Since the 1960s, myoelectric control has primarily evolved
to enable amputees to control powered prostheses [5], [3]. Similarly to myoelectric control, speech recognition strug-
The early conventional control schemes took a one-muscle, gles with unintended activations when the user is not delib-
one-function approach, where individual antagonistic muscles erately engaging with the system. This led to the adoption
controlled a single degree of freedom (e.g., opening and clos- of wake words [24]—a simple and unique input that can
ing the prosthesis) [13]. While simple and practical, the input toggle or wake up the system when desired. Despite debates
space of these systems was limited, requiring co-contractions on the optimality of wake words from the perspective of
(i.e., the co-activation of both antagonistic muscles) to switch designing ideal interactive systems [24], they continue to be
the prosthesis mode (e.g., switching from hand open/close integrated into widely adopted commercial devices, such as
mode to wrist flexion/extension mode). Not only was this the iPhone (Siri), Microsoft (Cortana), Google Assistant, and
cognitively and physically cumbersome, but it often resulted Amazon Alexa – highlighting their practicality and real-world
ininadvertentfalseactivations—leadingtouserfrustrationand robustness. Correspondingly, it is conceivable that leveraging
device abandonment [14]. such an approach could be advantageous for solving the false
In 2003, Englehart et al. set the standard for the more activation problem for myoelectric control [25].
intuitive, dedicated continuous pattern-recognition-based my- While myoelectric control researchers have now acknowl-
oelectric control systems [8] that are adopted today world- edged the challenge of out-of-set inputs [15], very few have
wide, both commercially for prosthesis control and for the explored the concept of wake gestures. Kumar et al. showed
majority of EMG-based gesture recognition research [3]. In thepotentialofwakegesturesformyoelectriccontrol,buttheir3
pilot work was limited to offline data, and importantly, the differentiate the gesture from the No Movement class. Some
out-of-set inputs used for validation were the other gestures of the design considerations for EMG wake gestures are
collectedinthestudyratherthanADLs,limitingitsreal-world described below.
generalizability [26]. Tavakoli et al. proposed the concept of 1) The Trade-off Between False Positives and False Neg-
pulse-basedlockingmechanisms,however,thesewerespecifi- atives: When designing wake gesture systems, there is a
cally designed for prosthesis control use-cases [27], [28]. The fundamental trade-off between false negatives and false pos-
commercialMyoArmbandbyThalmicLabsleveragedawake itives. In general, a more restrictive system (i.e., requiring
gesture (a double-finger tap) and an automatic two-second more confidence in a true positive) will make it potentially
timeout to enable moded entry into the underlying gesture more difficult for the user to elicit a gesture that will be
recognizer. The Myo approach, however, arguably lacked the recognized, resulting in increased false negatives. Although
requisite robustness for real-world use [29], [30], [31], with falsenegatives(missingintendedinputs)areundesirable,wake
many indicating that it was overly sensitive, lacked reliability, gesture systems should be optimized to prioritize suppressing
andwassometimeschallengingtotrigger123.Additionally,this false positives. This is because, while false negatives require
device is now discontinued, and its design, implementation, the user to re-elicit a command, false positives produce unin-
and evaluation were never externally validated or publicly tentional and potentially confusing actions or commands that
released, meaning there is currently no way to evaluate or impose additional time and attention costs to correct [33]. For
baseline the wake gesture approach Myo took. Correspond- example, a robot could erroneously move in an unintended
ingly, this work seeks to build on and set the standard for direction, or a phone call could be inadvertently ended—both
what the Myo Armband started by designing, developing, and of which require additional input to recover to the original
validatingaframeworkthatvastlyimprovesthebasisforusing state.
EMG as a ubiquitous input modality. 2) Intuitiveness and Social Acceptability: In the work by
Pomykalski et al. [34] that investigated the use of wake
III. METHODS gestures via computer vision, the social acceptability of the
A. The On-Demand Myoelectric Control Pipeline selected gesture was highlighted as a crucial consideration
among participants. Fortunately, compared to other input
In the proposed on-demand myoelectric control system, the
modalities like computer vision or speech recognition, my-
predictions from the underlying classifier (constantly being
oelectric control’s subtlety enhances its appropriateness since
generated) are silenced until the wake gesture activates the
gestures can be made discretely in inconspicuous positions
system,changingittoan‘input’mode.Subsequently,anaddi-
if desired, which is not often possible with modalities like
tional independent layer has been integrated into the pipeline
accelerometers and computer vision. Another important con-
(see Figure 1), facilitating the activation or deactivation of
sideration is the effort and intuitiveness of the chosen gesture.
the output, thus affording the ability to ignore inadvertent
Althoughlongergesturesequencesor“secrethandshakes”that
device commands when desired. Upon toggling the system
chain multiple gestures could reduce both the potential false
into the input mode, the classifier predictions are sent to the
positives and false negatives, they come at the cost of pro-
device, enabling control until a subsequent deactivation event
longing system activation time and decreasing intuitiveness.
is recognized and the system is put back into its sleep state.
3) Repeatability and Separability: The repeatability of the
This deactivation could occur through a period of inactivity
gestureisameasurementofthesimilaritybetweentwogesture
(the strategy of many smart home systems), through the
templates, indicating a user’s ability to consistently match the
detection of the wake gesture, or the detection of a separate
gesture. While users are accustomed to controlling for this in
sleep gesture.
speech recognition, it is arguably more difficult for muscle-
based inputs which require synergistic muscle coordination
B. Design Considerations for Wake Gesture Systems
and regulation through proprioception. Similarly, the separa-
Comparedtovoice-activatedwakewords,EMG-basedwake bilityofthegestureisameasureofitsdistance(ordifference)
gestures present distinct challenges, as mastering precise un- from all other gestures and unrelated muscle activations.
derlyingpatternsofmusclecontractionstoimprovethesepara- Selected wake gestures must have appropriate separability in
bilitybetweengestureswhilemaintainingsufficientrepeatabil- the underlying EMG feature space and adequate repeatability
ity is difficult. For example, amputees often undergo lengthy forconsistenttemplatematching.Thisshouldnotbeconfused
training regimes to accurately control their prostheses, with with kinematically separable gestures (or postures) such as
someturningtoseriousgamesforlearning[32].Thischallenge those used in computer-vision-based systems, which may or
becomes even more apparent for general-purpose use due may not elicit meaningful EMG activity.
to differences between hand positions (or postures) and the
elicited EMG. For example, a user could position the hand
C. Participants and Hardware
intoanopenposturebutwithverylowlevelsofEMG,making
it difficult for the underlying myoelectric control model to As approved by the Research and Ethics Board at the
University of New Brunswick (on file as REB 2022-122), 20
1https://www.youtube.com/watch?v=Ns2VZaWA9CE
participants (between the ages of 20 and 31) were recruited
2https://www.pcmag.com/reviews/myo-gesture-control-armband
forthisstudy.Theparticipantshadarangeofexperiencewith
3https://www.tomsguide.com/us/myo-gesture-control-armband,review-
2870.html myoelectric control—with most having minimal to none. The4
Fig.1. Themyoelectriccontrolpipelineforenablingon-demandinput.TheentiresystemisavailableinLibEMG,atoolkitformyoelectriccontrol[9].
experiment lasted approximately 1.5 hours, and participation and Slope Sign Changes) [37] was used to describe each
wasentirelyvoluntary,withnorewardsorincentivesprovided. window of EMG for classification. A proportional velocity
control scheme was also adopted, meaning that each class
prediction was accompanied by an associated speed, as is
common for prosthesis control [38].
2) Wake Gesture Recognition System: The wake gesture
recognition system (i.e., the ‘wake gesture recognition’ block
in Figure 1), which is independent of the aforementioned
continuous control model, employed a simple Dynamic Time
Fig.2. TheMyoArmband,apreviouslycommerciallyavailablesurface-EMG
wearabledevice. Warping (DTW) approach similar to that proposed in the
offline study by Kumar et al. [26]. This approach was used as
All data in this experiment were recorded using the Myo
it enables the recognition of dynamic gestures by evaluating
Armband (see Figure 2), a previously commercially available
the Euclidean distance between two multi-variate time series
surface-EMG wearable device recording EMG at 200 Hz
(i.e., templates) after accounting for different warpings [12].
across eight channels. The Myo Armband was chosen due
It has been shown to have better wake gesture detection
to its ease-of-use, prevalence in the HCI literature, and its
performancethannon-temporallyencodedalgorithmsbecause
previous use within the consumer market. At the start of the
itenablessmallvariationsinthewaythatgesturesareelicited
session, participants placed the armband on their dominant
[26]. As highlighted below, 20 ground-truth templates were
forearm, at approximately 1/3 of the length of the forearm,
recorded for each participant and used as target templates.
proximal to the elbow. EMG data were recorded for the
Each template (one second of raw EMG data) was split into
entire session to enable the post hoc analysis of the system’s
windows of 150 ms with 50 ms increments as proposed
performance.
in [26] and confirmed via pilot studies. Compared to the
continuousclassifier,theshorterwindowlengthandincrement
D. Model Training were chosen to improve the temporal resolution of the DTW.
Finally, the Root Mean Square (RMS) feature was extracted
1) Continuous Myoelectric Control System: For each par-
from each of the eight channels.
ticipant,apersonalized,continuousmyoelectriccontrolmodel
The threshold used for the DTW was computed as follows:
was trained to discriminate between five gestures: Wrist
Flexion, Wrist Extension, Hand Open, Hand Close, and No N
(cid:88)
Movement (Rest). These gestures were chosen as they were D = dist(t ,t ) (1)
1 2
also employed by the Myo Armband and are widely adopted i=1
in research [11]. This was the underlying classification model where N is the unique combination of all two templates,
used for both tasks highlighted in Section III-F. To train this t is one of the twenty templates, t is another of the unique
1 2
model, participants were prompted to elicit the displayed ges- templates,iisthecurrentuniquepairoftemplates,dististhe
ture in a traditional screen-guided training session (i.e., where DTWalignmentcostbetweentwomultivariatetimeseries,and
users follow along with images on a screen indicating which D is a vector of distances from all templates to the others.
contraction they should be eliciting) [35]. Five repetitions of
D
moderate-intensity ramp contractions (i.e., contractions start- T = +sσ (2)
ing from rest) of three seconds each were captured for each thresh N
of the five input classes. where T is the wake gesture model’s threshold, σ is
thresh
The underlying continuous classifier (i.e., the ‘classifier’ the standard deviation of the vector D, and s is the number
block in Figure 1) was a Linear Discriminant Analysis (LDA) of standard deviations away from the mean distance between
model—a simple machine learning model commonly used for templates allowed.
prosthesiscontrol[36].AllEMGdataweresplitintowindows
ofsize200mswith100msincrements,resultingintenclassi- For the wake gesture recognition system, one-second tem-
fierpredictionspersecond.Hudgins’TimeDomainfeatureset plates were passed through the DTW model every 50 ms
(i.e.,MeanAbsoluteValue,ZeroCrossings,WaveformLength, using a sliding window. The average distance of each new5
Fig.3. Anexampleofaparticipantdismissinganalarmbyunlockingthesystemwithafingersnap,subsequentlyextendingtheirwristtodismissthealarm,
andsnappingtheirfingeragaintoturnthesystemoff.
template to all the gesture templates in the training set was E. Activities of Daily Living (ADLs)
computed and compared to the tuned threshold T . If the
thresh After training the system to recognize the wake gesture
average distance between the new template and the training
and the five continuous control gestures, it was evaluated
set was below the predefined threshold, the template was
during a representative set of ADLs. The activities chosen to
classified as a finger snap gesture (toggling the control mode
evaluatethecontrolsystemcamefromconversationswithpilot
between sleep and input). A majority vote was then taken
participantsabouttheactivitiestheyspendthemosttimedoing
over five subsequent predictions (250 ms) to further improve
throughout the day. While these tasks do not represent all
the algorithm’s robustness to false activations. An example
possible variations of everyday activities, they were meant to
decisionstreamofthethresholdsofincomingEMGtemplates
encompass various tasks whereby EMG-based inputs may be
is shown in Figure 3. Users were provided with an activation
useful (e.g., a music player while walking or a gesture-based
and deactivation audio stimulus (similar to the generated
keyboard augmentation). Two minutes of data were recorded
sound when plugging in and removing a USB stick from a
for each activity, and each activity was repeated across both
computer) to indicate when they had successfully activated
tasks for a total of 20 (2 minutes x 2 tasks x 5 activities)
and deactivated the system.
minutes of ADL data per participant. These activities were
presented randomly to the participants for each task. The
following is an overview of the five ADLs evaluated in this
To calibrate the wake gesture recognition system, partic-
study:
ipants were prompted to snap their fingers within a one-
second data capture period for 20 repetitions. The finger snap • Walking:Participantswereaskedtowalkonastationary
gesturewasselectedbasedonpreviouswakegestureworkfor treadmill at a slow walking speed of 2 km/hr.
computer vision [34], initial pilot studies, and because finger • Writing: Participants were given a book, paper, and a
snapsareinherentlydynamic,playingintothestrengthsofthe penandwereaskedtowriteapassagewhileoccasionally
temporal nature of the DTW approach used for detection. changing pages.
• Typing: Participants were asked to type at a comfortable
speed and perform an untimed typing test4.
Following data acquisition, the wake gesture recognition • Driving: Participants used a Thrustmaster TMX 5 force
model was tuned. Participants were guided through a one- feedback driving simulator (which vibrated during driv-
minute unstructured session where mock ADL data were ing) and the RaceRoom Racing Experience game to
captured to obtain the ideal distance threshold (see Equation simulate a realistic driving experience.
2). Additionally, participants were asked to elicit gestures that • Phone: Participants were asked to complete common
might incorrectly activate the system, such as tapping and phone activities including responding to text messages,
waving their fingers. This data was then used to generate the scrolling through social media, and any other phone-
false positive rate (FPR) of a receiver operating characteristic related tasks.
(ROC)curve.Thepointnearestthetopleftcornerthathadno • Other: Participants elicited a variety of other actions,
falsepositiveswaschosenasthethreshold,asthisrepresented such as standing up from their chairs, scratching their
the model’s best true positive rate (its ability to recognize noses,grabbingtheirphonesoutoftheirbackpacks,tying
the training templates as finger snaps) while ensuring a false
positive rate of zero (its ability to ignore all data recorded 4https://official-typing-test.com/test/untimed.html
during the one minute of mock data). 5https://www.thrustmaster.com/en-us/products/tmx-force-feedback/6
their shoes, talking with their hands, etc. Although these 2) Task 2: Alarm Deactivation: The second task was sim-
activitieswerenotdirectlyprompted,theyendedupbeing plerandinvolveddismissinganalarm.Participantssnappedto
additional tasks that further tested the resilience of the activate the system, extended their wrist to silence the alarm,
wake gesture algorithm. and then snapped to deactivate the system. Although easier
andonlyrequiringafewseconds,thistaskaimedtosimulatea
moreubiquitoususecaseofsystemcontrolwhereparticipants
F. Myoelectric Control Tasks
were not required to completely switch contexts. This meant
The proposed on-demand myoelectric control system was
users dismissed the alarm while continuing to perform the
evaluated in two unique and fundamentally different tasks.
activity they were doing (such as while driving) or took a
These tasks were evaluated in the context of each ADL
momentary pause (such as when writing).
presented above. The first task involved a complete context
switch, as participants navigated a robot around an obstacle
G. Data Collection, Interview, and Survey
course. The second task represented the ubiquitous use of
myoelectric control and involved dismissing an alarm. Users A set of seven other potential wake gestures was collected
were periodically prompted to address each task, with notifi- attheendofthedatacollectiontoevaluatethegeneralizability
cations recurring four times within each two-minute activity of our approach. These gestures were hand open + wrist
of daily living at 30-second intervals. When prompted, users pronation (pressing a ‘button’), finger gun (with recoil), hand
would stop the ADL activity they were doing to engage open (pulse), double middle finger tap, wrist roll (pronation
with the particular task. It is important to note that we thensupination),wristextension(flickright),andwristflexion
werenotconcernedaboutparticipants’performancewithinthe (flick left). Ten repetitions of each gesture were acquired. Fi-
dedicated control tasks nor with the control enabled by the nally,participantscompletedaLikert-stylesurvey,wheretheir
classifier, as this study was focused on establishing the on- experience with the system was assessed alongside supple-
demand control framework with a focus on the DTW-based mentary informalinterviews. In theseunstructured interviews,
wake gesture recognition system. Correspondingly, the tasks participants were asked how the system could be improved
were meant to serve as a realistic environment to evaluate the and their preferences on the tradeoff between true positives
intentional activation of the wake gesture. and false negatives.
IV. RESULTS
A. Non Wake Gesture Approach
The distribution of unintended class activations that would
have occurred during the ADLs if no wake gesture was used
is shown in Figure 5 - Left. This was computed post hoc
by running the dedicated continuous classifier (outlined in
Section III-D1) on the ADL data recorded when not actively
controlling the Sphero during Task 1. These results suggest
Fig. 4. A representation of the Sphero task that participants were required thatwhenperformingtheADLs,participantsweremoreoften
to complete. The task was considered done when the participant moved the
than not eliciting one of the dedicated control gestures. This
Spherofromtargets1→2→3→4→1.
suggests that a dedicated control system (relying only on the
1) Task 1: Sphero: The first task was the control of a no movement class for inadvertent activations, as is typical in
Sphero—a spherical robot that can roll across the ground at prosthetics) would result in spurious unintended activations if
various speeds. In this task, participants had to control the not governed by a wake gesture. This was consistent across
robot around a 5x5 foot course (exemplified in Figure 4). mostADLs,withtheexceptionofwalking(whichrequiredno
After travelling from spot 1 → 2 → 3 → 4 → 1, the task use of the hands). In theory, this would have meant that the
was considered complete. Note that this course had to be Spherorobotwouldhavebeensporadicallymovingallaround
modified for two participants: one who suffered from muscle the room.
fatigueduetoanunderlyinginjuryunrelatedtotheexperiment While the prosthetics community has acknowledged that
and one who had challenges eliciting a repeatable hand-open myoelectric control is an open-set problem through concepts
contraction. The mapping from gestures to the robot control like rejection (i.e., rejecting classifier outputs that fall below
were Hand Open (Move Away), Hand Close (Move Toward), a predefined confidence threshold), our results show that such
Wrist Flexion (Move Left), Wrist Extension (Move Right), techniques do not work for ignoring out-of-set inputs during
and No Movement (Do Nothing). The flexion and extension ADLs, as highlighted in Figure 5 - Right. Here, the dedicated
commands were reversed for left-handed users to improve continuous classifier’s receiver-operating characteristic (ROC)
intuitiveness. When prompted, the participants walked over to curve is shown if a confidence-based rejection scheme had
the course, snapped to turn the robot on, navigated it through been used. This plot indicates that such approaches are only
the obstacle course, snapped to turn the robot off, and then slightly better than randomly guessing if a given input should
returned to their respective activities. The only activity the be rejected. These results reinforce the need for specialized
user continued to perform during control was walking on the strategies to deal with inadvertent muscle-based inputs when
treadmill. leveraging myoelectric control.7
Fig. 5. Left: Distribution of class activations averaged across participants during ADLs. Right: The average ROC curve across participants when using
confidence-based rejection across a range of threshold values. The TPR is the classifier’s performance on the steady-state training data, and the FPR is its
abilitytorejectfalseactivationsduringADLtasksrecordedduringtheexperiment.
B. Wake Gesture System Performance
The number of true positives, false positives, and false
negativeswererecordedthroughouttheexperimenttoevaluate
the online performance of the wake gesture system. False
positiveswerecountedwheneverthesystemstategottoggled,
but the user did not snap. In contrast, false negatives were
counted whenever an individual elicited a snap gesture, and
the system did not get toggled. The number of true negatives
(i.e., correctly rejected activity) was determined post hoc by
evaluating the total number of decisions made by the wake
gesture system on the recorded data from each task.
The confusion matrices presented in Figure 6 denote the
false negatives (times that the participant snapped but the
Fig.6. Aconfusionmatrixforeachtask,showingthepredictedandtruelabels
system ignored it, bottom left), false positives (times that the
foreachdecisionduringtheonlineevaluationofthewakegesturesystem.
system was inadvertently activated, top right), true positives
(correctly identified snaps, bottom right), and true negatives
(correctly ignored other inputs, top left). The number of true end of the experiment. This outcome was thought to have
positiveswasconsistentbydesignacrossparticipantsandtasks been induced by the consistent activation and deactivation of
(4 per activity x 5 activities x 2 toggles (one for on and one the system, which would be atypical in realistic ubiquitous
for off) = 40). The near-zero false positive rate indicates the settings. The second outlier (z-score > 3) had seven false
goal of effectively eliminating inadvertent activations while positives. This outlier was likely because the threshold for
maintaining an reasonable true positive rate of 75.1% and this participant was inadvertently set too high during the
81.1% for the two respective tasks was achieved. A non- initializationofthewakegesturealgorithm,failingtoproperly
parametric Wilcoxon signed-rank test was run to check for favour false negatives over false positives. It is deduced that
statistical significance between the number of false negatives this would not have occurred if an adaptive approach that
between the two tasks. The test results revealed a significant enabledcontinuoustuningthroughouttheexperimenthadbeen
difference (z=2.56, p=0.011), indicating that participants had implemented.
slightly more difficulty replicating the wake gesture template
during the alarm task. C. Evaluating Other Wake Gestures
The results of two subjects were withheld from the con- The post hoc performance of each of the seven gestures
fusion matrices and their respective analyses as they were acquired at the end of the study was evaluated by training
deemed outliers. The first outlier (z-score > 3) had 141 an offline wake gesture recognition system (as presented in
false negatives, indicating this participant far exceeded the Section III-D2) and running it over all of the ADL data
99.6 percentile of the distribution observed across the other acquired during both tasks. Figure 7 shows the area under the
subjects. Further, there was justification for their removal ROCcurve(AUC)percentageacrossparticipants.TheAUCis
as they reported having excessive muscle fatigue toward the theintegraloftheROCcurveforasingleparticipant,resulting8
inavaluebetweenzeroandone,indicatingthemodel’sability having to redo the wake gesture once was not a big deal
to accept deliberate activations and reject inadvertent input. A since snapping is “so quick and easy”. Another participant
perfect wake gesture system would have an AUC percentage described that over-rejecting is like the “casing on the big red
of 100%, indicating that it can ignore all ADL data while button” (i.e., it was an added protection against undesirable
accepting all the training gesture templates. A non-parametric consequences) emphasizing that they preferred the extra layer
Friedman test with a Finner posthoc comparison was used of protection against the possibility of inadvertent activations.
to check for significant differences between the AUCs of the However,itshouldbenotedthatmanyparticipantscommented
different gestures, with the only significant difference being that the more false negatives that occurred in succession, the
foundbetweenthebuttonpressandwristextensiongestures(p more frustrated they became. Another participant questioned
< 0.005). This highlights the generalizability of this approach the social acceptability of the snap gesture due to the noise
to a broader subset of gesture inputs beyond the finger snap it makes, highlighting the use of other, more discrete wake
used in this study. Note that the finger snap was not included gestures.Ingeneral,however,theconsensuswasthatthesnap
in this analysis because establishing its AUC post hoc isn’t wake gesture was intuitive and natural, with one participant
feasible due to the presence of deliberate snap wake gestures suggesting that it was an easier way to activate a system than
during the ADL tasks. voice-activated smart home systems.
Fig.8. TheresultsfromthesubjectiveLikert-stylequestionnaireevaluating
userperceptionoftheon-demandmyoelectriccontrolsystem.
V. DISCUSSION
This work proposes, evaluates, and sets a baseline for a
novel myoelectric control paradigm—on-demand myoelectric
control—forextendingthecapabilitiesofmuscle-basedinputs
to ubiquitous environments. The resilience of the proposed
wake gesture approach to inadvertent activations was demon-
Fig.7. Left:TheAUCpercentagewhenusingeachwakegestureandrunning
strated during everyday activities, including writing, walking,
thesystemposthocontheADLdata.Notethatforvisualizationpurposesthe
outliershavebeenremoved.Right:TheaverageROCcurveforeachgesture typing, driving, and phone interaction. A traditional dedicated
showstheTPR(itsabilitytorecognizeitstemplates)andtheFPR(itsability classification approach would not have worked during these
toignoretheADLdatarecordedduringthesession).
tasksduetotheconstantunintentionalrecognitionofmuscular
inputs.Theproposedtemplate-basedapproachforrecognizing
a discrete finger snap to toggle the dedicated control system
D. User Survey and Interview
effectivelyreducedfalseactivations.Ingeneral,itcouldignore
Finally, to capture participants’subjective feelings on using
all inadvertent activations during the set of ADLs while
EMG-based wake gestures, they completed a Likert-style
maintaining adequate recognition rates of the wake gesture
questionnaire,presentedinFigure8.Ingeneral,theperception
to enable reliable, ubiquitous input. While this work provides
of the system was positive, despite the intentional over-
a solid foundation for the future of on-demand general-
rejection of some deliberate activations. The most critical
purpose myoelectric control, more work is needed to advance
participant(the‘stronglydisagree’fortheaccidentaltriggering
myoelectric control to a widely adopted ubiquitous input
of the wake gesture) was the outlier participant mentioned
modality. With this in mind, this section critiques this work
above, who still only had seven false positives in the en-
and highlights future research directions to better characterize
tire experiment, further highlighting their detriment to user
its contributions.
experience. Through informal interviews with participants,
there was a consensus that a wake gesture system should
A. The Tension Between False Negatives and False Positives
over-reject potential activities to ensure no false positives, as
dealing with these errors requires more effort from the user. Foranybinaryclassificationproblem,theabilityofasystem
Moreover, it was generally agreed that false negatives were toignoreinadvertentactivationswillalwaysbeatoddswithits
not overly cumbersome, with one participant even noting that ability to recognize true positives. Improving (or decreasing)9
the false negative rate will increase the number of false C. Algorithmic Improvements and Advancements
positivesandviceversa,unlesstheunderlyingseparabilityand
This work evaluated a simple time series distance measure-
repeatability are improved (e.g. better features, more sensors).
ment(DTW)tomeasurethedistancebetweentargettemplates
Whilethewakegesturesystemproposedinthisstudyachieved
and potential wake gestures. The issue, however, is that this
amedianfalsepositiverateof0.0%,thiscameatthecostofan
approach scales linearly with the number of templates and
increased false negative rate (18.9% and 24.9% in the Sphero
does not lend well to cross-user models or reuse across
and alarm tasks, respectively). This meant that participants
sessions. Future work should explore other algorithms (e.g.,
had to evoke the wake gesture approximately one out of
deep learning) or more robust feature sets to improve the
five times more than once. Although seemingly undesirable,
resilience of wake gesture systems to such factors. However,
post-study interviews with participants confirmed that these
one interesting thing to note is the importance that DTW
falsenegativesweremuchpreferredtoinadvertentactivations,
playedinconsideringthetemporalprofileofthegesturerather
corroborating previous work evaluating the tradeoff between
than traditional machine learning approaches that assume
the two [33]. Interestingly, this was noted even though 18/20
stationarity.Forexample,whenthetemporalstructureofwrist
participants were not impacted by false positives during the
flicks was leveraged (extension and flexion), they could be
experiment, as the control schemes were deliberately tuned
activelydiscernedfromtheADLdata(i.e.,theAUCwashigh).
this way. A significant pain point discussed by many of the
Thiswasnotthecasewhenrecognizingthestaticcontractions
participants, however, was when they were required to repeat
of flexion and extension, where the LDA classifier could not
the wake gesture more than a few times. This highlights the
differentiate these non-dynamic inputs from the ADLs. These
needforuser-adjustablethresholdsoradaptivealgorithmsthat
results highlight a promising path forward for using dynamic
actively detect successive intentional activations (and poten-
gestures within HCI applications [3].
tiallytemporarilyincreasethethreshold),reducingthenumber
ofconsecutivefalsenegatives.Additionally,futureworkcould Other modalities, such as IMUs, will often be available
improvethesystemonlinebyincorporatingnewtemplatesthat when considering wearable devices, lending to potentially
lead to a successful interaction session, continuously adapting morerobustopportunitiesforwakegesturedetection.Combin-
the system. Generally, however, now that a baseline has been ing modalities for wake gesture recognition is an interesting
set, future work should focus on increasing the true positive area for future work. Another outcome was the significant
rate while maintaining a false positive rate of 0%. difference in TPR between the Sphero and Alarm tasks. It is
conceivable that without switching contexts, users were more
distracted when eliciting the wake gesture, thus leading to
less repeatable gestures. Future work should consider how
B. Other Applications for Wake Gestures to train algorithms to become resilient to such confounding
factors through real-time adaptation or more representative
One seemingly promising use of wake gestures could be datacollection.Finally,althoughtheproposedapproachcould
during prosthesis control, where there is still a high abandon- not be compared against the original Myo Armband control
mentrateofmyoelectricprostheses[14].Suchawakegesture scheme due to the removal of all documentation and software
approach would enable amputees to selectively toggle their from the web, it has been nearly ten years since its discontin-
prostheses into an active state when desired and an inactive uation.Inthistime,massiveimprovementshavebeenmadeto
state when performing activities in which their prostheses are EMG hardware and in machine learning. In turn, the research
not needed. Beyond simply an on/off switch, amputees could communityismoreequippedthanevertosolvethechallenges
locktheirprosthesisinspecificgraspswithoutworryingabout faced by the Myo Armband, particularly in unlocking EMG
spurious activations (such as when holding a warm cup of as a widely applicable ubiquitous input.
coffee). Future work should evaluate the efficacy of wake
gestures in these prosthesis control settings.
Beyond myoelectric control, this work is generalizable to VI. CONCLUSION
anyubiquitousinputmodalityinwhichfalseactivationscould
occur. Novel input modalities, including myoelectric control, This work takes a meaningful step toward the real-world
are often evaluated in highly constrained settings. However, viability of myoelectric control as a widely applicable ubiqui-
any interaction techniques that rely on sensing modalities that tousinput.Inparticular,theresultssuggestthatwakegestures
do not have a general default inactive state (i.e., that have are a viable solution for enabling on-demand myoelectric
to worry about inadvertent activations) will struggle to find control, effectively eliminating inadvertent activations during
adoption within real-world use cases. For example, although everyday ubiquitous tasks. In an online evaluation, near-
researchers can achieve high recognition accuracy on IMU- perfect performance in rejecting unintended device inputs
based gesture recognition tasks like air-drawing [39], how while maintaining adequate robustness for two myoelectric
can these systems be enabled in real-world scenarios when control tasks is achieved (dismissing an alarm and controlling
using our hands for other tasks? As highlighted in this work, a robot). Moving forward, researchers should consider using
optimizing offline recognition and evaluating these modalities wakegestureswhendesigninginteractivesystems,particularly
in constrained settings is inadequate if the goal is to progress when using sensed inputs that may be inadvertently activated
these technologies toward widespread consumer adoption. during unrelated activities of daily living.10
REFERENCES [20] E.Campbell,J.A.Cameron,andE.Scheme,“Feasibilityofdata-driven
emg signal generation using a deep generative model,” in 2020 42nd
[1] M. Weiser, “The computer for the 21st century,” SIGMOBILE Mob. AnnualInternationalConferenceoftheIEEEEngineeringinMedicine
Comput.Commun.Rev.,vol.3,p.3–11,jul1999. &BiologySociety(EMBC),pp.3755–3758,IEEE,2020.
[2] W. Guo, X. Sheng, H. Liu, and X. Zhu, “Toward an enhanced hu- [21] E.Campbell,A.Phinyomark,andE.Scheme,“Deepcross-usermodels
man–machineinterfaceforupper-limbprosthesiscontrolwithcombined reducethetrainingburdeninmyoelectriccontrol,”FrontiersinNeuro-
emgandnirssignals,”IEEETransactionsonHuman-MachineSystems, science,vol.15,p.657958,2021.
vol.47,no.4,pp.564–575,2017. [22] R. J. K. Jacob, “The use of eye movements in human-computer inter-
[3] E.Eddy,E.J.Scheme,andS.Bateman,“Aframeworkandcalltoaction actiontechniques:Whatyoulookatiswhatyouget,”ACMTrans.Inf.
forthefuturedevelopmentofemg-basedinputinhci,”inProceedings Syst.,vol.9,p.152–169,apr1991.
ofthe2023CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputingSystems, [23] J.Chang,A.Phinyomark,S.Bateman,andE.Scheme,“Wearableemg-
CHI’23,(NewYork,NY,USA),AssociationforComputingMachinery, based gesture recognition systems during activities of daily living: An
2023. exploratorystudy,”in202042ndAnnualInternationalConferenceofthe
[4] E.SchemeandK.Englehart,“Electromyogrampatternrecognitionfor IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC), pp. 3448–
controlofpoweredupper-limbprostheses:stateoftheartandchallenges 3451,2020.
forclinicaluse,”JournalofRehabilitationResearchandDevelopment, [24] H.JungandH.Kim,“Findingcontextualmeaningofthewakeword,”in
vol.48,no.6,pp.643–659,2011. Proceedingsofthe1stInternationalConferenceonConversationalUser
Interfaces,CUI’19,(NewYork,NY,USA),AssociationforComputing
[5] J. Baits, R. Todd, and J. Nightingale, “Paper 10: The feasibility of an
adaptivecontrolschemeforartificialprehension,”inProceedingsofthe Machinery,2019.
InstitutionofMechanicalEngineers,ConferenceProceedings,vol.183, [25] E. Kurtog˘lu, A. C. Gurbuz, E. A. Malaia, D. Griffin, C. Crawford,
and S. Z. Gurbuz, “Asl trigger recognition in mixed activity/signing
pp.54–59,SAGEPublicationsSageUK:London,England,1968.
sequences for rf sensor-based user interfaces,” IEEE Transactions on
[6] T. S. Saponas, D. S. Tan, D. Morris, and R. Balakrishnan, “Demon-
Human-MachineSystems,vol.52,no.4,pp.699–712,2022.
strating the feasibility of using forearm electromyography for muscle-
[26] P.Kumar,A.Phinyomark,andE.Scheme,“Verification-baseddesignof
computer interfaces,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference on
arobustemgwakeword,”in202143rdAnnualInternationalConference
HumanFactorsinComputingSystems,CHI’08,(NewYork,NY,USA),
of the IEEE Engineering in Medicine & Biology Society (EMBC),
pp.515–524,AssociationforComputingMachinery,Apr.2008.
pp.638–642,2021.
[7] J.Karolus,S.Thanheiser,D.Peterson,N.Viot,T.Kosch,A.Schmidt,
[27] M. Tavakoli, C. Benussi, and J. L. Lourenco, “Single channel surface
and P. W. Wozniak, “Imprecise but fun: Playful interaction using
emg control of advanced prosthetic hands: A simple, low cost and
electromyography,” Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. Interact., vol. 6, sep
efficientapproach,”ExpertSystemswithApplications,vol.79,pp.322–
2022.
332,2017.
[8] K. Englehart and B. Hudgins, “A robust, real-time control scheme for
[28] M. Tavakoli, C. Benussi, P. Alhais Lopes, L. B. Osorio, and A. T.
multifunction myoelectric control,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical
de Almeida, “Robust hand gesture recognition with a double channel
Engineering,vol.50,no.7,pp.848–854,2003.
surface emg wearable armband and svm classifier,” Biomedical Signal
[9] E. Eddy, E. Campbell, A. Phinyomark, S. Bateman, and E. Scheme,
ProcessingandControl,vol.46,pp.121–130,2018.
“Libemg: An open source library to facilitate the exploration of myo-
[29] M.Cognolato,M.Atzori,D.Faccio,C.Tiengo,F.Bassetto,R.Gassert,
electriccontrol,”IEEEAccess,vol.11,pp.87380–87397,2023.
andH.Muller,“Handgestureclassificationintransradialamputeesusing
[10] Y.DoshiandD.Nath,“Designingadronecontrollerusingelectromyo-
themyoarmbandclassifier,”in20187thIEEEInternationalConference
graphy signals,” in 2021 International Conference on Communication
on Biomedical Robotics and Biomechatronics (Biorob), pp. 156–161,
informationandComputingTechnology(ICCICT),pp.1–6,2021.
2018.
[11] S. Benatti, E. Farella, and L. Benini, “Towards emg control interface
[30] C.H.Fong,M.Billinghurst,Z.S.See,andH.Esmaeili,“Peppergram
for smart garments,” in Proceedings of the 2014 ACM International
with interactive control,” in 2016 22nd International Conference on
Symposium on Wearable Computers: Adjunct Program, ISWC ’14
VirtualSystem&Multimedia(VSMM),pp.1–5,2016.
Adjunct,(NewYork,NY,USA),p.163–170,AssociationforComputing
[31] F.Kerber,P.Lessel,andA.Kru¨ger,“Same-sidehandinteractionswith
Machinery,2014.
arm-placed devices using emg,” in Proceedings of the 33rd Annual
[12] H.SakoeandS.Chiba,“Dynamicprogrammingalgorithmoptimization ACMConferenceExtendedAbstractsonHumanFactorsinComputing
forspokenwordrecognition,”IEEETransactionsonAcoustics,Speech, Systems,CHIEA’15,(NewYork,NY,USA),p.1367–1372,Association
andSignalProcessing,vol.26,no.1,pp.43–49,1978.
forComputingMachinery,2015.
[13] M.M.White,W.Zhang,A.T.Winslow,M.Zahabi,F.Zhang,H.Huang, [32] A.Tabor,S.Bateman,E.Scheme,D.R.Flatla,andK.Gerling,“Design-
and D. B. Kaber, “Usability comparison of conventional direct control inggame-basedmyoelectricprosthesistraining,”inProceedingsofthe
versus pattern recognition control of transradial prostheses,” IEEE 2017 CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, CHI
Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, vol. 47, no. 6, pp. 1146– ’17,(NewYork,NY,USA),p.1352–1363,AssociationforComputing
1157,2017. Machinery,2017.
[14] K. Østlie, I. M. Lesjø, R. J. Franklin, B. Garfelt, O. H. Skjeldal, [33] B.Lafreniere,T.R.Jonker,S.Santosa,M.Parent,M.Glueck,T.Gross-
and P. Magnus, “Prosthesis rejection in acquired major upper-limb man,H.Benko,andD.Wigdor,“Falsepositivesvs.falsenegatives:The
amputees: a population-based survey,” Disability and Rehabilitation: effectsofrecoverytimeandcognitivecostsoninputerrorpreference,”
AssistiveTechnology,vol.7,no.4,pp.294–303,2012.PMID:22112174. in The 34th Annual ACM Symposium on User Interface Software and
[15] L.Wu,X.Zhang,X.Zhang,X.Chen,andX.Chen,“Metriclearningfor Technology, UIST ’21, (New York, NY, USA), p. 54–68, Association
novelmotionrejectioninhigh-densitymyoelectricpatternrecognition,” forComputingMachinery,2021.
Knowledge-BasedSystems,vol.227,p.107165,2021. [34] P.Pomykalski,M.P.Woz´niak,P.W.Woz´niak,K.Grudzien´,S.Zhao,and
[16] E. J. Scheme, B. S. Hudgins, and K. B. Englehart, “Confidence-based A. Romanowski, “Considering wake gestures for smart assistant use,”
rejection for improved pattern recognition myoelectric control,” IEEE inExtendedAbstractsofthe2020CHIConferenceonHumanFactors
TransactionsonBiomedicalEngineering,vol.60,no.6,pp.1563–1570, in Computing Systems, CHI EA ’20, (New York, NY, USA), p. 1–8,
2013. AssociationforComputingMachinery,2020.
[17] T. Bao, S. A. R. Zaidi, S. Q. Xie, P. Yang, and Z.-Q. Zhang, “Cnn [35] C. L. Chicoine, A. M. Simon, and L. J. Hargrove, “Prosthesis-guided
confidenceestimationforrejection-basedhandgestureclassificationin training of pattern recognition-controlled myoelectric prosthesis,” in
myoelectric control,” IEEE Transactions on Human-Machine Systems, 2012 Annual International Conference of the IEEE Engineering in
vol.52,no.1,pp.99–109,2022. MedicineandBiologySociety,pp.1876–1879,2012.
[18] F.Matulic,B.Vogel,N.Kimura,andD.Vogel,“Elicitingpen-holding [36] E. Campbell, A. Phinyomark, and E. Scheme, “Linear discriminant
posturesforgeneralinputwithsuitabilityforemgarmbanddetection,” analysis with bayesian risk parameters for myoelectric control,” in
inProceedingsofthe2019ACMInternationalConferenceonInteractive 2019 IEEE Global Conference on Signal and Information Processing
Surfaces and Spaces, ISS ’19, (New York, NY, USA), p. 89–100, (GlobalSIP),pp.1–5,IEEE,2019.
AssociationforComputingMachinery,2019. [37] B.Hudgins,P.Parker,andR.Scott,“Anewstrategyformultifunction
[19] J.-i.Furukawa,S.Chiyohara,T.Teramae,A.Takai,andJ.Morimoto,“A myoelectric control,” IEEE Transactions on Biomedical Engineering,
collaborativefilteringapproachtowardplug-and-playmyoelectricrobot vol.40,no.1,pp.82–94,1993.
control,”IEEETransactionsonHuman-MachineSystems,vol.51,no.5, [38] E. Scheme, B. Lock, L. Hargrove, W. Hill, U. Kuruganti, and K. En-
pp.514–523,2021. glehart, “Motion normalized proportional control for improved pattern11
recognition-based myoelectric control,” IEEE Transactions on Neural
Systems and Rehabilitation Engineering, vol. 22, no. 1, pp. 149–157,
2014.
[39] J.Younas,H.Margarito,S.Bian,andP.Lukowicz,“Fingerairwriting
- movement reconstruction with low-costimu sensor,” in MobiQuitous
2020 - 17th EAI International Conference on Mobile and Ubiquitous
Systems:Computing,NetworkingandServices,MobiQuitous’20,(New
York,NY,USA),p.69–75,AssociationforComputingMachinery,2021.