ESTIMATING THE DISTRIBUTION OF PARAMETERS IN
DIFFERENTIAL EQUATIONS WITH REPEATED
CROSS-SECTIONAL DATA∗
HYEONTAE JO†, SUNG WOONG CHO‡, AND HYUNG JU HWANG§
Abstract. Differential equations are pivotal in modeling and understanding the dynamics of
various systems, offering insights into their future states through parameter estimation fitted to
time series data. In fields such as economy, politics, and biology, the observation data points in
thetimeseriesareoftenindependentlyobtained(i.e.,RepeatedCross-Sectional(RCS)data). With
RCS data, we found that traditional methods for parameter estimation in differential equations,
suchasusingmeanvaluesoftimetrajectoriesorGaussianProcess-basedtrajectorygeneration,have
limitations in estimating the shape of parameter distributions, often leading to a significant loss of
data information. To address this issue, we introduce a novel method, Estimation of Parameter
Distribution(EPD),providingaccuratedistributionofparameterswithoutlossofdatainformation.
EPD operates in three main steps: generating synthetic time trajectories by randomly selecting
observed values at each time point, estimating parameters of a differential equation that minimize
the discrepancy between these trajectories and the true solution of the equation, and selecting the
parameters depending on the scale of discrepancy. We then evaluated the performance of EPD
across several models, including exponential growth, logistic population models, and target cell-
limitedmodelswithdelayedvirusproduction,demonstratingitssuperiorityincapturingtheshape
ofparameterdistributions. Furthermore, weappliedEPDtoreal-worlddatasets, capturingvarious
shapesofparameterdistributionsratherthananormaldistribution. Theseresultseffectivelyaddress
theheterogeneitywithinsystems,markingasubstantialprogressioninaccuratelymodelingsystems
usingRCSdata. Thus,EPDmarksasignificantadvancementinaccuratelymodelingsystemswith
RCSdata,enablingadeeperunderstandingofsystemdynamicsandparametervariability.
Key words. differential equation, parameter estimation, repeated cross-sectional data, distri-
butionofparameters
MSC codes. 62G07,62G09,62P10,65D10
1. Introduction. Differential equations play a crucial role in modeling the evo-
lutionofvarioussystems,offeringscientificandmechanisticinsightsintophysicaland
biological phenomena and enabling predictions of their future states. These phenom-
ena can be analyzed by parameters of the differential equation that fit its solutions
to time series data. However, in systems such as economy, politics, or biology, data
observations are often Repeated Cross-Sectional (RCS) (i.e., data is collected over
timemeasuringthesamevariableswithdifferentsamplesorpopulationsateachtime
point) [2, 3, 18, 24, 5]. For example, Sara, et al. analyzed the degree of tumor
size suppression over time in rats with different types of drugs, using an exponential
growth model [14]. As mice died during the experiment, observation data from the
∗SubmittedtotheeditorsApril24,2024.
Funding: HyungJuHwangwassupportedbytheNationalResearchFoundationofKorea(NRF)
grantfundedbytheKoreagovernment(MSIT)(No. RS-2023-00219980andRS-2022-00165268)and
by Institute for Information & Communications Technology Promotion (IITP) grant funded by
the Korea government(MSIP) (No.2019-0-01906, Artificial Intelligence Graduate School Program
(POSTECH).HyeontaeJowassupportedbyaKoreaUniversityGrant.
†First author. Department of Mathematics, Korea University Sejong Campus, Sejong 30019,
Republic of Korea and Biomedical Mathematics Group, Pioneer Research Center for Mathemat-
ical and Computational Sciences, Institute for Basic Science, Daejeon, 34126, Republic of Ko-
rea(korea htj@korea.ac.kr).
‡Equal contribution. Stochastic Analysis and Application Research Center, Korea Advanced
InstituteofScienceandTechnology,Daejeon34141,RepublicofKorea(swcho95kr@kaist.ac.kr).
§CorrespondingAuthor. DepartmentofMathematics&GraduateSchoolofAI,PohangUniversity
ofScienceandTechnology,Pohang37673,RepublicofKorea(hjhwang@postech.ac.kr).
1
4202
rpA
32
]LM.tats[
1v37841.4042:viXraexperiment can not be connected per time (i.e., RCS data). For other cases, Jeong
et al. utilized time series data on the PER protein levels in Drosophila to analyze
neuron-dependent molecular properties [11]. However, measuring PER levels at each
time point necessitated the sacrifice of the flies, thus limitations in the collection of
RCS data inevitably happened. RCS data also includes regular surveys in society
thatcollectthechangingopinionsofdifferentindividuals. PublicpollsbyGallup,the
MichiganSurveyofConsumers[7,10],recordsofcongressionalrollcalls[13],Supreme
Court cases [19], and presidential public remarks [27] are all examples of RCS data.
Fittingtheparameterswithcross-sectionaldataortime-seriesdataisfeasiblewith
classical optimization methods, yet handling RCS data poses a significant challenge.
Whileseveralmethodshavebeenused,theirapplicabilityisconstrained. Forexample,
onecommonmethodinvolvesusingthemeanvaluesateachtimepointforparameter
estimation[11]. WhilethissimplifiestheanalysisofRCSdata,itsignificantlyreduces
thedatainformation. Topreservethedatainformation,GaussianProcess-basedtime
series generation (GP) is utilized for model calibration. Specifically, GP produces
continuous-time trajectories through the mean and covariance of RCS data, enabling
us to use traditional parameter estimation techniques. Nonetheless, since the GP
method relies solely on the mean and covariance, the estimation results from GP-
based algorithms tend to be unimodal [20, 6, 29, 4]. Thus, this approach can fail
when the underlying distribution is not unimodal, potentially leading to an incorrect
estimationoftheshapeofparameterdistributionsandalossofdatainformation[12].
In this paper, we introduce a novel approach, Estimation of Parameter Distri-
bution (EPD), to infer parameter distributions from RCS data in systems modeling.
Our proposed method stands out for its ability to accurately and precisely determine
the parameter distributions in various systems through the following two steps: In
the first step, we randomly choose one observed value for every time point, creating
an artificial time trajectory. Next, we estimate the parameters p of the differential
equation that minimize the difference between the time trajectory and its solution,
denoted by L(p). In the second step, by repeating the first step N times, we obtain
a collection of parameter sets p along with their respective differences L(p ), for
n n
n=1,...,N. Next, we define the probability that each p came from the true parame-
ter distribution based on the {L(p )}, and draw the distribution by collecting only p
n
selected based on their probability values. Through this process, we show that EPD
accurately captures true parameter distributions for the following models: 1) expo-
nential growth, 2) logistic population models [28], and 3) target cell-limited model
with delayed virus production [6, 23, 15],
In this study, we found that previous methods fail to estimate the distribution
of parameters when the distributions do not follow a normal distribution, leading to
the loss of data information Figure 1. To address this, we developed an EPD that
can accurately estimate the shape of the parameter distribution, resulting in a more
comprehensive,deeper,andbetterunderstandingofthedata. Hence,byanalyzingthe
shape of these parameter distributions, we can deduce the underlying circumstances
and dynamics of the system in question.
2. The parameter estimation problem: a general description of our
problems and suggested methods.
2.1. Problem formulation. We propose the method for estimating the dis-
tribution of parameters within the time evolutionary differential equation (ODE),
2Fig.1. ParameterestimationintheexponentialgrowthmodelwithRepeatedCross-
Sectional (RCS) data. An exponential growth model y′(t) = ay(t) represents the amount of
population, y(t), changes over time, t. We then estimated parameter a that can fit the model to
a given RCS data (a-b). When the true parameter distribution of a is unimodal (a, top-panel),
corresponding RCS data is generated by parameters a, and populations per time do not diverge (a,
top).In this case, previous methods, such as Gaussian Process (GP) or All Possible combinations
(AP), can estimate true parameter distributions (bottom) (a, bottom). When the true parameter
distribution of a is bimodal (b, top-penal), populations per time diverge (b, top). In this case,
previous methods fail to estimate the shape of true parameters (b, bottom).
represented as:
(2.1) y′(t)=f[y(t),p,t]
where y =y(t)∈Rny represents the nonnegative population size with dimension n
y
at time t. The parameter set p ∈ Rnp represents biological or physical properties
such as the growth rate or the carrying capacity for the population, respectively.
The problem is to estimate the distribution of the parameter p when the observation
data corresponding to y(t), Y, is given as RCS data (Figure 2a, left). Specifically,
Y includes a set of observed data points at each time step t , Y , for i = 1,2,··· ,T,
i i
where T is the total count of time steps. Each Y includes J observed data points at
i
time t , (i.e., Y = {y (t ),y (t ),...,y (t )}). As the data Y not only have different
i i 1 i 2 i J i
observation values per time t but also are independent (i.e., RCS data), each y (t )
i i j
can have different parameter values p. That is, we try to estimate the distribution of
parameter p, rather than a single fixed value p.
2.2. Development of EPD, estimating the distribution of parameters.
To estimate parameters corresponding to RCS data, we construct N artificial tra-
jectories, denoted as {y˜ }N , aligned with specific time points {t }T (Figure 2a,
n n=1 i i=1
right). Specifically, for each t , we randomly chose one observation value, y , from
i ij
Y with 1 ≤ i ≤ J. We assume this selection probability to be equivalent. We then
i j
3Fig.2. ParameterestimationintheexponentialgrowthmodelwithRepeatedCross-
Sectional (RCS) data. An exponential growth model y′(t) = ay(t) represents the amount of
population, y(t), changing over time, t. We then estimated parameter a that can fit the model to
a given RCS data (a-b). When the true parameter distribution of a is unimodal (a, top-panel),
corresponding RCS data is generated by parameters a, and populations per time do not diverge (a,
top). In this case, previous methods, such as Gaussian Process (GP) or All Possible combinations
(AP), can estimate true parameter distributions (bottom) (a, bottom). When the true parameter
distribution of a is bimodal (b, top-penal), populations per time diverge (b, top). In this case,
previous methods fail to estimate the shape of true parameters (b, bottom).
consider {y } as the artificial time trajectory y˜. Repeating this N times, we can
ij
obtain n artificial time trajectories {y˜ }N . Remarkably, the likelihood of choosing
n n=1
the trajectory y˜ (·), given the observations {Y }T , can be formulated as follows:
n i i=1
P({y˜ |{Y }T })=P(y˜ (t )=y ,y˜ (t )=y ,...,y˜ (t )=y )
n i i=1 n 1 1j n 2 2j n n nj
=ΠT P(y˜ (t )=y ))=ΠT 1/J =(1/J)T.
i=1 n i ij i=1
Next, we estimate the parameter p corresponding to n-th artificial trajectory
n
y˜ . For this, our method utilizes a deterministic least squares optimization to reduce
n
the difference between y˜ and solution of (2.1) with p , y¯ . Specifically, we solve
n n n
equation (2.1) with p to obtain the corresponding trajectory y¯ through LSODA
n n
algorithm [9, 25], as follows:
(2.2) y¯ (t;p)=y(f,y(0),t;p),∀p.
n
Theobjectivefunctionfortheoptimizationisdefinedasthesumofsquareddeviations
betweenthelogarithmicallytransformedobserveddataandthemodelpredictions. For
a given trajectory y˜ , it can be formulated as:
n
4T
(cid:88)
(2.3) L(p)= (log (y¯ (t ;p)+1)−log (y˜ (t )+1))2.
10 n i 10 n i
i=1
TominimizeL(p),weemployLMFIT[16]packageinPythontoapplytheleastsquare
algorithm. ThroughthenumericalsolutionoftheODEforeachy˜ , weobtaintheset
n
of parameters p .
n
As y˜ are not real continuous observation trajectories but artificial, we need to
n
determine whether each y˜ is reasonable or not. For this determination, we create
n
the accept probability a , which depends on how well the model (2.1) fits with the
n
estimated parameters p (Figure 2b). The probability a is calculated via a logistic
n n
transformation applied to the previously computed residuals L(p ) (representing the
n
goodness of fit) as follows:
2
(2.4) a =2− ,
n (cid:16) (cid:16) (cid:17)(cid:17)
1+exp −C L(pn)−minnL(pn)
maxnL(pn)−minnL(pn)
where L(p ) denotes the objective function values in (2.3) for each fit, and C > 0
n
represents a scaling factor that can be adjusted for improved accuracy. In contrast
to MCMC, which iteratively refines parameter estimates to converge on the posterior
distribution, our method decides on accepting or rejecting parameter sets based on
their computed likelihood after explicitly minimizing a predefined objective function.
Specifically, a parameter set p is accepted if it satisfies:
n
a >u where u ∼Unif(0,1),
n n n
where a set {u }N is independently sampled from an identical uniform distribution
n n=1
over n. It ensures a probabilistic assessment of parameter set acceptance based on
their respective goodness of fit. Note that when C equals to zero, all estimated
parameterswillbeaccepted. ThiscasewillbereferredtoasAllPossiblecombinations
(AP) because it considers every estimated result without further refinement.
3. Evaluating EPD performance in estimating parameter distributions
using simulation datasets. In this section, we evaluated the performance of EPD
in estimating the distribution of parameters with simulation data. For this task,
we employed three distinct dynamical systems: an exponential growth model for de-
tecting cell dynamics heterogeneity, a logistic regression model for simulating protein
generationin[28],andatargetcell-limitedmodelforunderstandingvirusinfectiondy-
namics[1,17]. Withtheseevaluations,weshowtheadaptabilityandrobustpotential
of EPD in accurately identifying the true parameter distributions and in forecasting
systembehaviorseveninthepresenceofnoise. Togeneratethedistributionofpsyn-
thetically, we first consider H distinct centers {pcenter}H which imply the peaks of
h h=1
parameters across various clusters. The large value of H can pose parameter hetero-
geneity. We conduct uniform random sampling independently within pre-established
bounds to generate parameter distribution around these centers. Specifically, we ran-
domly select S values for the parameters {p }S around pcenter within their
(h−1)S+i i=1 h
respective bounds as follows:
p ∼Unif((p ) ,(p ) ),
(h−1)s+i L h U h
5where Unif((p ) ,(p ) ) represents the uniform distribution between (p ) and
L h U h L h
(p ) . This results in HS sampled parameter sets which are utilized to construct
U h
trajectories and hence generate RCS data related to diverse biological experiment
scenarios. To generate synthetic RCS data, we resolve the ODE in (2.1) for each
parametersetp. Forthis,weusetheLSODAalgorithm,whichcanadjustthebalance
between stiff and non-stiff structures of solutions, with initial conditions y(0) at time
t=0,
y˜(t;p)=y(f,y(0),t;p),p∈{p ,...,p }.
1 HS
We remark that the initial value y(0) is determined by the experimental setup or an
existing dataset. The above ODE solving mechanism yields totally HS trajectories
which will be designated as RCS data. Specifically, it is assumed that we can only
access HS data points at each observational time point t for i=1,2,...,T, where T
i
is the total number of time steps, instead of a set of fully connected trajectories.
3.1. EPD can infer the various shapes of underlying parameter dis-
tribution of the simple exponential growth model. The exponential growth
model can be used to analyze the growth patterns in population dynamics,
y′ =ay,
where y(t) represents the number of populations at time t and a is the population
growthrate. WeevaluatedtheperformanceofEPDinestimatingtrueparameterdis-
tributionsthatreflectagivendatasetthroughtheexponentialgrowthmodel. Forthis
evaluation, we first generated a simulation dataset through a numerical solver with
different five growth rates a obtained from an unimodal distribution (Figure 3a).
Specifically, the simulation dataset consists of five snapshot data at time points
t = 0,0.25,0.5,0.75, and 1. Notably, we assume each observed value is not time-
traceable,(i.e.,RCSdata). ToapplythisdatasettoEPD,wegenerated1,000trajecto-
rieswithobservationvaluesrandomlyselectedateachtimepoint. Foreachtrajectory,
we assigned an acceptance probability that reflects the likelihood of the trajectory’s
parameters being derived from the true parameter distribution (See Method for de-
tails). Through this process, we showed that EPD can accurately estimate the shape
of true parameter distribution (i.e., unimodal distribution) (Figure 3a, right-EPD).
Furthermore, EPD also can estimate the same distribution even when the data was
subjected to multiplicative noise at levels of 3% and 10%, respectively. Subsequently,
we extended the evaluation task with different datasets, reflecting different shapes of
parameter distributions: a bimodal and a trimodal distribution (Figure 3(b-c), left),
respectively. Ineachcase,EPDconsistentlyinferredthetrueparameterdistributions
evenwhenhavingthenoise(Figure3(b-c),right). Hence,thesesimulationresultsun-
derscore that EPD accurately estimates the true parameter distributions that reflect
the dataset.
3.2. EPD can infer the various shapes of underlying parameter distri-
bution of the logistic population model. Thelogisticpopulationmodelhasbeen
utilized to understand the growth dynamics of the level of protein over time t, y(t):
y′ =ry(1−y/K),
where y quantifies protein levels over time, r is the growth rate, and K represents
the maximum sustainable population size that the environment can support. To
6Fig.3. AccurateestimationoftruedistributionsbyEPDindatasetsexhibitinguni-
modal, bimodal, and trimodal parameter distributions within an Exponential Growth
Model. (a) When the true parameter distribution is unimodal, we applied EPD on the observed
data (left) and estimated the parameters (right). Notably, EPD remained accurate even when we
added 3% or 10% multiplicative noise to the data (b, c). Likewise, EPD was confirmed to estimate
Bimodal and Trimodal parameter distributions effectively.
evaluate the estimation performance of EPD with this model, we initially assume an
unimodaldistributionfortheparameters,centeredaroundpeaksof(2.8,1.0)asatrue
parameterdistribution. Subsequently,wegeneratedthe12numericalsolutionsforthe
parameter (r,K) sampled from this distribution. These 12 solutions were then used
torecordobservationdataatt=5,10,15,and20months,withaninitialproteinlevel
of y(0)=0.0001 (Figure 4a, left). To apply this dataset to EPD, we generated 1,000
trajectorieswithobservationvaluesrandomlyselectedateachtimepoint. Similarlyto
theresultsforthefirstexponentialmodel,EPDdemonstrateditsefficacyinaccurately
estimating true parameter distributions (Figure 4a, right). For the case when the
true distribution is bimodal or trimodal, we included sets of parameters near centers
(4.0,0.6),(1.6,1.4)and(1.6,0.6),(4.0,0.9),(2.0,1.3),respectively(Figure4(b-c),left).
AfterweappliedEPDtothesedatasetsseparately,wevalidatedEPDcanestimatethe
true parameter distributions regardless of the shape (Figure 4(b-c), right). Notably,
EPD estimated the interpolation of two centers of true parameters. This implies
EPD can detect all possible combinations of scenarios for (r,K). That is, in terms of
marginal distribution for each parameter, EPD still shows a high level of accuracy in
predicting these distributions.
7Fig.4. Estimationofparameterdistributionforthelogisticgrowthmodel. Themodel
includetwoparametersrandk. Forthescenariosofunimodal,bimodal,andtrimodaldistributions,
we used RCS data on the left side and estimated the parameter distribution on the right side.
3.3. EPD can infer the various shapes of underlying parameter dis-
tribution of target cell-limited models with delayed virus production. We
additionally performed a benchmark study in estimating the parameter distributions
of a target cell-limited model with delayed virus production, characterized by four
principalpopulations: susceptibleepithelialcellsT,eclipsephaseI , activeviruspro-
1
ductionI ,andtheviruspopulationV.Withthefourvariables,thetargetcell-limited
2
8Table 1
Parametervaluesfordifferentdistributiontypeswithinthetargetcell-limitedmodelusingsyn-
thetic data
Distribution β p c κ δ K
δ
type (×10−4) (×101) (×106) (×104)
Unimodal 2.40 1.60 1.30 4.00 1.60 4.50
Bimodal 2.88 1.44 1.82 5.20 1.28 3.15
2.16 2.08 0.91 3.20 1.76 4.95
Trimodal 2.88 1.12 1.56 4.00 1.44 4.50
1.68 2.24 1.82 5.60 1.60 7.20
2.16 2.08 0.78 2.40 1.92 2.25
model can be described by the following differential equations:
dT
=−βTV,
dt
dI
1 =βTV −κI ,
dt 1
dI δI2
2 =κI − ,
dt 1 K +I
d 2
dV
=pI −cV.
dt 2
Specifically, susceptible cells T are infected by the virus proportional to V with pro-
portionalconstantβ. Subsequently,theinfectedcellsentertheeclipsephaseI before
1
progressing to active virus production I . Virus production is regulated at a specific
2
rateppercell, whilethevirusV iseliminatedataclearancerate c, andinfectedcells
I are removed according to the function I /(K +I ), where K represents the half-
2 2 δ 2 δ
saturation constant. To validate the predictive performance of EPD with this model,
we obtained a RCS dataset for T,I ,I , and V that is generated by 12 different sets
1 2
of parameters. Specifically, parameters were chosen near the center (2.4×10−4, 1.6,
13.0, 4.0, 1.6×106, 4.5×105) from [23] (Figure 5a, left). Using 12 sets of parame-
ters sampled from this distribution, we obtained simulation data over 12 days with
initialconditions[T(0),I (0),I (0),V(0)]=[107,75,0,0].WethenapplyEPDtothis
1 2
dataset, predicting original parameter distributions (Figure 5a, right). Surprisingly,
even when the shape of true parameter distributions is bi- or trimodal (See Table 1
for center values), EPD can accurately estimate true parameter distributions p and
K (Figure 5(b-c)). The estimation result of remaining parameters, β, κ, K , and δ,
δ δ
were provided in (Figure 6).
4. Application of EPD to real-world datasets.
4.1. Logistic model. We fitted the logistic model to amyloid-β 40 (Aβ40) and
amyloid-β 42 (Aβ42) datasets, utilizing them as biomarkers for diagnosing dementia
[28, 26, 8]. In the experimental datasets, the number of (Aβ40) and (Aβ42) were
recorded at four different time points at 4, 8, 12, and 18 months and each time point
had12-13independentobservationsamples(Figure7(a-b),left). Wethennormalized
the levels of (Aβ40) and (Aβ42) (measured in picograms per milliliter), so that the
9Fig. 5. Estimation results on the parameter distribution for a target cell-limited
model with delayed virus production. This model describes four components T, I1, I2, and
V over time. We explore three different parameter distributions: unimodal (a), bimodal (b), and
trimodal(c). Foreachcase, weusedRCSdataforfourpopulations(left)andpresentedestimation
results for two parameters p and K (right) among the six parameters contained in the model.
δ
peakvalueobservedin12-month-oldmicewassetto1.0. AsthedataisRCStype,we
utilized EPD for inferring the shape of parameter distribution. Our results indicate
significantheterogeneityinthegrowthdynamicsofamyloidbeta,asdemonstratedby
distinct centers of parameters for both growth rates and population capacities (Fig-
ure 7(a-b), right). As the heterogeneity that shows the progression of amyloid beta
accumulationcanvarysignificantlyacrossdifferentpopulationsubsets, theestimated
parameter distribution implies the importance of personalized diagnostic and ther-
apeutic strategies in combating dementia. Furthermore, we observed that no single
parameter could effectively account for the trajectories that included data points at
the high rate of amyloid Aβ42 at 8 months or Aβ40 at 12 months. It implies that
when the mouse reaches a certain rate of amyloid Aβ40 or 42 early in their life, it
cannot survive for a long time.
4.2. Target cell-limited model. Wefittedthetargetcell-limitedmodeltothe
virusdataset, obtainedfrom[23]. Inthedataset, dailyviralloads(V)weremeasured
from groups of BALB/cJ mice infected with influenza A/Puerto Rico/8/34 (H1N1)
virus (PR8) (Figure 8, left). The mice received an intranasal administration of a
dose of 75 TCID50 of the PR8 virus at the initial time point (t = 0), where TCID50
is the concentration required to infect 50% of the cell cultures [21, 22]. Unlike the
previous estimation tasks, only the value of V is observable out of all the populations
inthemodel,thustheparameterestimationwasperformedusingonlytheviralloads.
Data was collected over 12 days, with 10 animals sampled per time point. For faster
computation, we only utilized four time points observed at 1, 3, 7, and 8. With this
RCS data, we apply EPD for estimating parameter distributions with a target cell-
10Fig.6. Estimationresultsfortheparameterdistributionwithinatargetcell-limited
model based on synthetic data. We estimated the distributions of β c, κ, and δ, corresponding
to data in (Figure 5, left T(t)−V(t)), respectively. First, we applied EPD to data generated from
parameters that share similar scales (Figure 5(a), left T(t)−V(t)). As a result, EPD is capable
of accurately estimating the parameters (Left). Furthermore, With data generated from parameters
with different scales (Figure 5(b-c), left), EPD can infer the true parameter distributions (Middle
and Right, respectively). That is, EPD can estimate the true distribution of parameters even when
theydonotfollowthenormaldistribution. Notably,thepredictiondoesnotcontaintheinterpolation
of the centers as not previously in the logistic model.
limitedmodelwithdelayedvirusproduction(Figure8,right). Surprisingly,thisresult
shows that two distributions of the parameters β and K have at least three centers.
δ
The estimation result of remaining parameters, β, κ, K , and δ, were provided in
δ
(Figure 9). That is, given that EPD not only can accurately predict parameters
but also corresponding results show the heterogeneity of parameters. Thus, when
it is near the value from the previous research, our results suggest the existence
of multiple parameter sets that can represent this dataset, beyond those previously
identified parameters.
5. Discussion. In conclusion, this paper introduces the Estimation of Parame-
ter Distribution (EPD) method for inferring parameter distributions from Repeated
Cross-Sectional data in systems modeling. Unlike previous approaches, which of-
ten overlooked data heterogeneity and resulted in information loss, EPD enables a
more precise and accurate determination of parameter distributions across a variety
of systems. By estimating parameter distributions, EPD facilitates a deeper under-
standing of the underlying dynamics of these systems. Consequently, this paper not
only advances our capacity to model and predict system behaviors more effectively
but also highlights the critical need to account for data variability and distribution
when analyzing complex systems.
11Fig. 7. Estimation results for real experimental datasets on amyloid beta accumu-
lation using a logistic model with EPD. (a) amyloid beta 40, (b) amyloid beta 42. The left
plotshowstheaccumulationofamyloidbetaat4,8,12,and18months. Wepresenttheestimation
results for this dataset using EPD on the right. The left plot also includes some trajectories corre-
sponding to the parameters estimated on the right.
Wehaveseverallimitationsforfuturedirections. SinceEPDutilizedODESolver,
we need to choose a suitable ODESolver that can solve the given dynamical system.
Second, parameters were selected from a large set of synthetic trajectories. Through
thisprocess,computationalcostsareproportionaltothenumberoftrajectories. Thus,
a suitable choice of the number of trajectories is needed.
DeterminingtheappropriatescalingfactorC >0,intheacceptprobability(2.4),
iscriticalforEPD,becauseitinfluencesthelikelihoodofacceptingagivenparameter
p, even when the objective function value L(p) in (2.3) remains unchanged. For
example, a higher positive scaling factor leads to only the parameter resulting in a
lower objective function value being accepted. While a large scaling factor might
suggest that EPD estimations become more precise due to focusing on lower loss
values,weshouldbecarefulofitsmagnitude,especiallywhendealingwithparameter
heterogeneity (Figure 10). A large scaling factor will result in the acceptance of only
thoseparameterswithminimallossvalues. Itpotentiallyexcludessuitableestimations
near certain other centers if there exist noticeable differences in loss values between
12Fig. 8. Estimation results of EPD for a real experimental virus infection dataset
using a target cell-limited model with delayed production. Black dots represent the virus
populationV overtimet,theonlymeasurablefactoramongthefourcomponentsinthemodel(left).
ArtificialtrajectoriesusingEPDweresimultaneouslyprovidedonthesamegraph(left,redcurves).
Two parameters corresponding to the artificial trajectories, p and K , were estimated (right, red
δ
dots). The other parameters, β, κ, K ,and δ, are detailed in Figure 9
δ
Fig. 9. Estimation results for a real experimental virus infection dataset. We esti-
matedthefourparametersβ,c,κ,δ thatfitthetargetcell-limitedmodeltothegivenRCSdata[23].
We discovered that the estimated parameter distributions contain heterogeneity for all parameters,
similar tothe estimatesfor p and K . Unlike previous resultsin [6], our findingsdo not followthe
δ
normal distribution shape. Nevertheless, all these predictions could be a reasonable guess because
they can reconstruct the trajectories through the equation (2.2).
13Fig.10. Acceptprobabilityan foreachscalingfactorC inEPDThreeimagesrepresent
theacceptprobabilityofeachestimatedparameterbyAPmethodwithinanexponentialgrowthmodel
across three scaling factors: C = 1 (left), C = 100 (Middle), C = 10000 (Right). In all images,
estimatedparametersfromeachartificialtrajectoryaremarkedbybluedots. Thegreylinesrepresent
the true value of the growth rate parameter a in the model.
parameters around different centers.
Finally, we can consider other transformations when constructing accept proba-
bility. We currently apply the logistic transformation to the loss function. Without
any transformation, the acceptance probability is directly proportional to the loss
functionvalue,whichhasnosignificantdistinctionbetweenparameterswithdifferent
loss values. The logistic transformation helped EPD to select a parameter with much
less objective function value. In future research, we will clarify whether this trans-
formation is optimal by providing rigorous proof or conducting various experiments
with other transformations.
14REFERENCES
[1] P. Baccam, C. Beauchemin, C. A. Macken, F. G. Hayden, and A. S. Perelson,Kinetics
of influenza a virus infection in humans,Journalofvirology,80(2006),pp.7590–7599.
[2] N. Beck and J. N. Katz, Random coefficient models for time-series—cross-section data:
Monte carlo experiments,PoliticalAnalysis,15(2007),pp.182–195.
[3] N. Beck and J. N. Katz, Modeling dynamics in time-series–cross-section political economy
data,Annualreviewofpoliticalscience,14(2011),pp.331–352.
[4] M.BinoisandR.B.Gramacy,hetgp: Heteroskedasticgaussianprocessmodelingandsequen-
tial design in r,(2021).
[5] A. Bryman,Social research methods,Oxforduniversitypress,2016.
[6] M. Chung, M. Binois, R. B. Gramacy, J. M. Bardsley, D. J. Moquin, A. P. Smith, and
A.M.Smith,Parameteranduncertaintyestimationfordynamicalsystemsusingsurrogate
stochasticprocesses,SIAMJournalonScientificComputing,41(2019),pp.A2212–A2238.
[7] H. D. Clarke, M. C. Stewart, M. Ault, and E. Elliott, Men, women and the dynamics
of presidential approval,BritishJournalofPoliticalScience,35(2005),pp.31–51.
[8] W.Hao,S.Lenhart,andJ.R.Petrella,Optimalanti-amyloid-betatherapyforalzheimer’s
disease via a personalized mathematical model, PLoS computational biology, 18 (2022),
p.e1010481.
[9] A.C.Hindmarsh,Odepack,asystemizedcollectionofodesolvers,Scientificcomputing,(1983).
[10] D.J.Hopkins,Whoseeconomy? perceptionsofnationaleconomicperformanceduringunequal
growth,PublicOpinionQuarterly,76(2012),pp.50–71.
[11] E.M.Jeong,M.Kwon,E.Cho,S.H.Lee,H.Kim,E.Y.Kim,andJ.K.Kim,Systematic
modeling-driven experiments identify distinct molecular clockworks underlying hierarchi-
callyorganizedpacemakerneurons,ProceedingsoftheNationalAcademyofSciences,119
(2022),p.e2113403119.
[12] H. Jo, H. Hong, H. J. Hwang, W. Chang, and J. K. Kim,Density physics-informed neural
networks reveal sources of cell heterogeneity in signal transduction,Patterns,5(2024).
[13] M.J.Lebo,A.J.McGlynn,andG.Koger,Strategicpartygovernment: Partyinfluencein
congress, 1789–2000,AmericanJournalofPoliticalScience,51(2007),pp.464–481.
[14] S. Lundsten, D. Spiegelberg, N. R. Raval, and M. Nestor,The radiosensitizer onalespib
increases complete remission in 177 lu-dotatate-treated mice bearing neuroendocrine tu-
mor xenografts, European journal of nuclear medicine and molecular imaging, 47 (2020),
pp.980–990.
[15] M.A.Myers,A.P.Smith,L.C.Lane,D.J.Moquin,R.Aogo,S.Woolard,P.Thomas,
P.Vogel,andA.M.Smith,Dynamically linking influenza virus infection kinetics, lung
injury, inflammation, and disease severity,Elife,10(2021),p.e68864.
[16] M. Newville, T. Stensitzki, D. B. Allen, M. Rawlik, A. Ingargiola, and A. Nelson,
Lmfit: Non-linear least-square minimization and curve-fitting for python, Astrophysics
SourceCodeLibrary,(2016),pp.ascl–1606.
[17] M. Nowak and R. M. May, Virus dynamics: mathematical principles of immunology and
virology: mathematical principles of immunology and virology, Oxford University Press,
UK,2000.
[18] X.Pan,Repeatedcross-sectionaldesign,inEncyclopediaofgerontologyandpopulationaging,
Springer,2022,pp.4246–4250.
[19] J.A.SegalandH.J.Spaeth,TheSupremeCourtandtheattitudinalmodelrevisited,Cam-
bridgeUniversityPress,2002.
[20] A.M.Smith,Host-pathogenkineticsduringinfluenzainfectionandcoinfection: insightsfrom
predictive modeling,Immunologicalreviews,285(2018),pp.97–112.
[21] A. M. Smith, F. R. Adler, J. L. McAuley, R. N. Gutenkunst, R. M. Ribeiro, J. A.
McCullers, and A. S. Perelson, Effect of 1918 pb1-f2 expression on influenza a virus
infection kinetics,PLoScomputationalbiology,7(2011),p.e1001081.
[22] A. M. Smith, F. R. Adler, R. M. Ribeiro, R. N. Gutenkunst, J. L. McAuley, J. A.
McCullers, and A. S. Perelson, Kinetics of coinfection with influenza a virus and
streptococcus pneumoniae,PLoSpathogens,9(2013),p.e1003238.
[23] A. P. Smith and A. M. Smith,Influenza virus infection model with density dependence sup-
ports biphasic viral decay,Frontiersinmicrobiology,9(2018),p.355204.
[24] G.W.J.M.Stevens,S.VanDorsselaer,M.Boer,S.DeRoos,E.Duinhof,T.TerBogt,
R.VanDenEijnden,L.Kuyper,D.Visser,W.A.M.Vollebergh,etal.,HBSC2017.
Gezondheid en welzijn van jongeren in Nederland,UtrechtUniversity,2018.
[25] P. Virtanen, R. Gommers, T. E. Oliphant, M. Haberland, T. Reddy, D. Cournapeau,
E. Burovski, P. Peterson, W. Weckesser, J. Bright, et al.,Scipy 1.0: fundamental
15algorithms for scientific computing in python,Naturemethods,17(2020),pp.261–272.
[26] A. Whittington, D. J. Sharp, and R. N. Gunn, Spatiotemporal distribution of β-amyloid
in alzheimer disease is the result of heterogeneous regional carrying capacities,Journalof
NuclearMedicine,59(2018),pp.822–827.
[27] B. D. Wood,The myth of presidential representation,CambridgeUniversityPress,2009.
[28] Y.YadaandH.Naoki,Few-shotpredictionofamyloidβ accumulationfrommainlyunpaired
data on biomarker candidates,NPJSystemsBiologyandApplications,9(2023),p.59.
[29] Q.-H. Zhang and Y.-Q. Ni, Improved most likely heteroscedastic gaussian process regres-
sionviabayesianresidualmomentestimator,IEEETransactionsonSignalProcessing,68
(2020),pp.3450–3460.
16