Original Research Article
DIGITALHEALTH
Co-creation and evaluation of an app to support Volume10:1–12
©TheAuthor(s)2024
reminiscence therapy interventions for older Articlereuseguidelines:
sagepub.com/journals-permissions
DOI:10.1177/20552076241261849
people with dementia
journals.sagepub.com/home/dhj
Iván De-Rosende-Celeiro1 , Virginia Francisco-Gilmartín2,
Susana Bautista-Blasco3 and Adriana Ávila-Álvarez4
Abstract
Objective: The objectives encompassed (1) the creation of Recuerdame, a digital app specifically designed for occupational
therapists, aiming to support these professionals in the processes of planning, organizing, developing, and documenting
reminiscencetherapies forolderpeoplewithdementia,and(2)theevaluation ofthedesignedprototype throughapartici-
patory and user-centered design approach, exploring the perceptions of end-users.
Methods:Thisexploratoryresearchusedamixed-methodsdesign.Theappwasdevelopedintwophases.Inthefirstphase,
the research team identified the requirements and designed a prototype. In the second phase, experienced occupational
therapists evaluated the prototype.
Results:Theresearchteamdeterminedtheapp’srequiredfunctionalities,groupedintoeightmajorthemes:registerrelated
personsandcaregivers;recordthepatient’slifestorymemories;prepareareminiscencetherapysession;conductasession;
end a session; assess the patient; automatically generate a life story; other requirements. The first phase ended with the
development of a prototype. In the second phase, eight occupational therapists performed a series of tasks using all the
application’sfunctionalities.Mostofthesetaskswereveryeasy(SingleEaseQuestion).Thelevelofusabilitywasconsidered
excellent (SystemUsability Scale). Participants believed thattheapp wouldsave practitionerstime,enrich therapy sessions
andimprovetheireffectiveness.Thequalitativeresultsweresummarizedintwobroadthemes:(a)acceptabilityoftheapp;
and (b) areas for improvement.
Conclusions: Participating occupational therapists generally agreed that the co-designed app appearsto bea versatile tool
that empowers these professionals to manage reminiscence interventions.
Keywords
Information and communication technology, technology development, reminiscence, occupational therapy, professional
practice, dementia, ageing
Submissiondate:31July2023;Acceptancedate:29May2024
Introduction
1FacultaddeCienciasdelaSalud,UniversidadedaCoruña,ACoruña,Spain
Dementiaisaneurodegenerativedisorderthatisbecoming
2DepartamentodeIngenieríadelSoftwareeInteligenciaArtificial,Facultad
amajorandincreasinglyprevalentpublichealthandsocial deInformática,UniversidadComplutensedeMadrid,Madrid,Spain
problem around the world.1 In 2019, it was estimated that 3EscuelaPolitécnicaSuperior,UniversidadFranciscodeVitoria,Madrid,Spain
some55millionpeopleworldwidewerelivingwithdemen-
4FacultaddeCienciasdelaSalud,UniversidadedaCoruña,ACoruña,Spain
tia.2 This neurocognitive disorder gradually reduces func- Correspondingauthor:
IvánDe-Rosende-Celeiro,FacultaddeCienciasdelaSalud,Universidadeda
tions such as memory, communication or problem-solving
Coruña,CampusUniversitariodeOza,s/n,15006,ACoruña,Spain.
skills, severely limiting the ability to perform everyday Email:ivan.de.rosende.celeiro@udc.es
CreativeCommonsNonCommercial-NoDerivsCCBY-NC-ND:ThisarticleisdistributedunderthetermsoftheCreativeCommonsAttribution-
NonCommercial-NoDerivs4.0License(https://creativecommons.org/licenses/by-nc-nd/4.0/)whichpermitsnon-commercialuse,reproduction
anddistributionoftheworkaspublishedwithoutadaptationoralteration,withoutfurtherpermissionprovidedtheoriginalworkisattributedasspecifiedon
theSAGEandOpenAccesspage(https://us.sagepub.com/en-us/nam/open-access-at-sage).2 DIGITAL HEALTH
tasks. Researchers are turning to non-pharmacological Cochranemeta-analysisusedICTinnovationsduringthera-
approaches to enhance the well-being and quality of life peutic interventions.4
of the affected population.3 Psychosocial interventions by Against this backdrop, our study addresses the gap in
professionals such as occupational therapists, increasingly research on ICT tools for reminiscence and life story ther-
use reminiscence and life story work therapies in treating apies in treating dementia. We present Recuerdame, a
dementia.4 These consist of narrating and discussing past digital app tailored for occupational therapists, with the
experiences in one’s own life, with another person or in aim of simplifying and optimizing their workflow. Our
group sessions.5 Typically, people with dementia are hypothesis suggests that Recuerdame can enhance thera-
better able to recall episodes from their earlier life, espe- peutic processes, supporting professionals in planning,
cially from childhood and early adulthood, than more organizing, developing, and documenting reminiscence
recent events.6 Reminiscence therapy takes advantage of sessions.Theresearchobjectivesencompassedthecreation
this and stimulates cognitive activity through a strengths- ofRecuerdameandtheevaluationoftheprototypethrough
basedapproach,thuspromotingengagementandcommuni- a participatory and user-centered design approach, explor-
cation in a climate of greater self-confidence.4,7 Therapists ing the perceptions of end-users.
useawidevarietyofmemorytriggersandtangibleprompts,
suchasphotographs,objectsfromthepast,historicalmate-
rials, music, or recordings.8 Methods
Severalmeta-analysesandreviewsofscientificliterature
Study design
show that the use of psychosocial interventions based on
reminiscence and life story therapies can be effective. A This research project used a mixed-methods design.
2022 meta-analysis of 29 randomized controlled trials or Qualitative and quantitative information was collected
quasi-experimental studies into the effectiveness of these between January and June 2023 in order to draw general
therapies found improvements in cognitive function, conclusionsabouttheperspectivesofend-users.Thequali-
qualityoflife,depressiveandneuropsychiatricsymptoms.9
tative research applied the conventional content analysis
The effect sizes for each outcome ranged from small to method with anexploratory approach.
moderate.9 Another meta-analysis suggested that reminis-
cenceworkmaybeanalternativetopharmacologicaltreat-
mentintreatingdepressionamongpeoplewithdementia.10 Procedures and data collection
The authors evaluated 24 randomized controlled clinical Theappwasdevelopedintwophases.Inthefirstphase,the
trials,identifyingamediumeffectsizeondepressivesymp-
researchteamconductedananalysistoidentifytherequire-
tomologiesandimprovementsinaspectssuchasqualityof
ments for the app and designed a prototype. In the second
life or behavioral symptoms.10 Similarly, the Cochrane
phase, an exploratory study of the prototype was carried
meta-analysis concluded that reminiscence and life story
out from the perspective of end-users. According to the
therapies canimprove quality oflife, cognition, communi-
principles of a participatory and user-centered
cation, and mood.4 Finally, a systematic review of studies
approach,16,17 characterized by the active involvement of
on the efficacy of life story books found that this therapy
future users in the app development process (co-creation),
had positive effects on the autobiographical memory and
considering the user perspective from the design stage, a
depression among those with dementia, improving the
sample of experienced occupational therapists evaluated
quality of relationships with caregivers and mitigating the
the prototype.
burden on informal caregivers.11
Morerecently,therehasbeengrowinginterestintheuse
of digital tools as a mean to facilitate reminiscence strat- Initial prototype design phase. In the first phase, the
egies, using information and communication technologies members of the research team and the developers worked
(ICT) such as multimedia mobile applications, computer- together to design an initial prototype of the application.
assisted programs or digital memory books.12,13 However, Recuerdame is part of a larger funded research project
the availability of technology-aided applications continues (CANTOR) that included a multidisciplinary research
to be very limited. A 2023 meta-analysis of ICT-based team consisting of four experts with PhDs in computer
interventionsforpeoplewithdementiafoundonlytworan- science (Complutense University of Madrid, Spain) and
domizedcontrolledexperimentalstudiesdealingwithrem- occupational therapy (University of A Coruna, Spain).
iniscence and life story therapies.14 In two systematic The two experts in computer science, with an average of
reviews into the use of digital technologies, published in 10 years of research experience in the field, conducted all
2020 and 2021, the small number of studies led the the interviews included in the study. The interviewers had
authorstorecommendthatthedevelopmentofmultimedia previous experience in conducting interviews. The two
toolstosupportthesetherapiesshouldbeatopresearchpri- expert occupational therapists, with an average of 22
ority.8,15 Significantly, none of the studies analyzed in the years of research experience, described their generalDe-Rosende-Celeiro et al. 3
technology proficiency as “medium”. Four developers, all to the two occupational therapists of the research team,
graduates in computer science, also participated in the who were asked to perform a series of tasks (described in
project. Table2)usingalltheappfunctionalities.Aftercompleting
The occupational therapists of the research team deter- each task, these occupational therapists responded to the
mined the overall concept, User Interface (UI) and User Single Ease Question (SEQ)19–21 rating the difficulty of
Experience (UX) of the app. A semi-structured discovery the task using a 7-point Likert-type scale (1: very difficult
interview was conducted with these two therapists of the to 7: very easy). The question was: “How difficult was it
research team to identify the required functionalities of to do this task altogether?”. The mean SEQ response was
the app. In the interview the therapists told of their own from5.3to5.6points.Thisbenchmarkhelpedtodetermine
experience using reminiscence therapy with people living whichtasksareparticularlyeasyordifficultfortheevalua-
with dementia.18 An interview schedule for predetermined tors, with a view to making improvements. Once the final
topics was created, taking available literature as a refer- design was agreed upon by the research team, the develo-
ence,12,13 but allowed for free-flowing responses and pers proceeded to create a functionalprototype.
ideas byusing open-ended questions (Table 1).
Once the required functionalities were decided,the two
Evaluation phase. After a functional prototype of the app
experts in computer science of the research team and the
wasdeveloped,itwasevaluatedusingtheoreticalsampling
developers created a prototype. This was then presented
with a group of experienced occupational therapists, none
of them belonging to the research team.
Table1. Semi-structuredinterviews:predeterminedtopicsand
Participants and recruitment. Participants in the second
open-endedquestions.
phase were selected based on their ability to provide input
relevant to the research objectives. The study population
Initialprototypedesignphaseinterview
consisted of occupational therapists with extensive experi-
ence in the field of therapeutic care for older people with
Reminiscencetherapy
dementia.Theinclusioncriteriaforthetheoreticalsampling
-Whatisreminiscencetherapy?
-Whatisthistypeoftherapyusedfor?
Table2. Initialprototypedesignphase:SingleEaseQuestion
Lifestory questionnaire(n=2)
-Whatisalifestory?
-Whatdotheselifestoriesinclude(audio,text,images…)?
Sequence Tasks Mean
-Howshouldtheselifestoriesbeshowntobeusefulintheir
therapies?
1 Accesstoapatient 7
Workflowoftheapptobedesigned
2 Createareminiscencesession 7
-Whatwouldyouneedfromacomputerapptohelpyouwith
reminiscence-basedtherapies?
3 Endareminiscencesessionandcreatethe 4.5
-Howwouldyouuseanappthatshowedyoulifestories?
follow-upreport
-Howwouldyoulikethememoriestobeorderedinthelife
story?Bydate?Alphabetically?Bylabels(family,friends,
4 Performaclinicalassessmentofapatient 7
hobbies,travel…)?
-Wouldyouneedtoperformsearchesintheapp?Whatdata? 5 Modifyasessioninapatient’scalendar 7
Whichcriteria?
-Wouldyouneedtodosomekindofmonitoringofthepatient’s
6 Automaticallygeneratealifestory 7
evolution?Whatdatashouldberetainedfromonesessionto
another? 7 Identifyrelatedpersonsfromaspecific 6.5
-Doyouhaveanyfurthercommentsonthedigitalapptobe memory
designed?
8 Addanexistingmediafiletoamemory 6
Evaluationphaseinterview
9 Addarelatedperson 7
-Whatdidyouthinkoftheapp?
-Isthereanyfeatureofthisappthatyouparticularlylike? 10 Writeanemailtoapatient 4.5
-Isthereanyfeatureofthisappthatyouparticularlydislike?
-Isthereanythingyouwouldchangeaboutthisapp?Please 11 Signoff 7
specifythechangesyouwouldmake
-Doyouhaveanyfurthercommentsaboutthisapp? Itemsarescoredona7-pointLikert-typescalefrom1(verydifficult)to7
(veryeasy).4 DIGITAL HEALTH
were:(1)currentlyapracticingprofessionalinoccupational prototype’s usability using the Spanish version of the
therapyinthefieldofdementia;and(2)aminimumoffive System Usability Scale (SUS), a well-established tool for
yearsofexperienceasanoccupationaltherapistinthisfield. assessing system usability.23 This version proved to be
ThesamplewasdrawnfromonlywithintheSpanishprov- valid and reliable for assessing the usability of electronic
ince of A Coruña, for reasons of accessibility and sample toolsinhealthcaresettings.23TheSUSconsistsoftenstate-
control. A professor of the Occupational Therapy at the ments(Table4)ratedona5-pointLikert-typescale,from1
University of A Coruña, with extensive knowledge of the (strongly disagree) to 5 (strongly agree). Of the ten state-
networkofcare forolderpeopleintheprovince,proposed ments,fivearepositive(1,3,5,7,and9)andfivearenega-
aninitiallistofkeyinformants.Theseproposedinformants tive (2, 4, 6, 8, and 10). The total score ranges from 0 to
were initially approached via email by the research team, 100. Scores above 68 indicate above-average usability,
who explained the scope and objectives of the research while scores exceeding 85indicate excellent usability.23
and requested their participation. The final sample size Therapistswerethengivenanadhocquantitativeques-
was reached by saturation; that is, when conducting a tionnairetomeasure theirperceptions ofthepotentialben-
new interview did not provide new data.22 efitsofusingtheappinreminiscence/lifestorytherapy.The
Inthissecond phase,allthe invited therapists agreed to questionnaire, consisting of 8 statements (Table 5), was
participate. The saturation point of the discourse was meticulously crafted with questions grouped into the
reached in the eight interviews, given the homogeneity of domains of ‘time savings’, ‘enrichment of therapy’, and
therecruitedprofile.Therefore,eightexperiencedtherapists ‘improvement of effectiveness’. The Likert-type scale
were recruited for the assessment of the functional proto- used for responses ranged from 1 (strongly disagree) to 5
type. The mean age of the sample was 35.4 years (SD (strongly agree). Prior to its implementation, the question-
2.03). 87.5% of the participants were women. All partici- naire underwent validation through pilot testing, ensuring
pants applied therapeutic interventions based on reminis- clarity, relevance, and effectiveness. Adjustments were
cence and life story therapy within their professional made based on feedback, and the final questionnaire was
practiceincareinstitutionsforolderpeoplewithdementia. administered during evaluation sessions through Google
One participant was also a psychologist. Four therapists Forms for convenience and accessibility, following com-
worked in a day care center, three in a nursing home, and prehensive testing of the onlineplatform.
one worked with an association. Their experience in the The evaluation sessions concluded with a semi-
use of reminiscence therapy averaged 8.25 years (median, structured interview, allowing participants to expand on
Q1—Q3=5.5–10, range 5–20) while their level of tech- theirviews.Togathermorein-depthqualitativeinformation
nical proficiency was self-assessed as “medium” by six ontheperceivedvalueoftheapp,participantsrespondedto
therapists,“high”byone,and“low”byanotherparticipant. a set of open-ended questions (see Table 1).
Procedures. The evaluation of the functional prototype
was conducted by the computer science experts within the Ethical statement
research team. Individual evaluators accessed Recuerdame
This research was approved by the Research Ethics
as a web application, utilizing their personal computers
CommitteeoftheUniversityofACoruña.Allparticipants
and accessing it through their installed browsers. On
were fully informed, orally and in writing, about the
average, the evaluation process lasted approximately
research objectives and procedures, including video and
63min, with each session being conducted independently
audio recording, and signed an informed consent form
andfeaturingasingleevaluator. Theseevaluationsessions
before participating in the study. The research adhered to
were facilitated through Google Meet, with the computer
the Declaration of Helsinki.24 Data was securely stored to
science experts conducting the sessions. Only the
safeguard confidentiality, in accordance with the
researcher and the participant were present during the ses-
European Union General Data Protection Regulation.
sions. Evaluators shared their screens to enable expert
observation of their interactions with the Recuerdame app
throughout the process. Brief field notes were made
Analysis
during the evaluation session.
Thevideoconferencesessionsbeganwithademoofthe Thequantitativedatawasanalyzedusingdescriptivestatis-
app by the research team to provide participants with a tics.Thecategoricalvariableswerereportedasfrequencies
generaloverviewofhowitworked.Subsequently,occupa- andpercentages.TheShapiro–Wilktestwasusedtodeter-
tional therapists engaged in a series of tasks using minethenormaldistribution.Thevariablesthatfolloweda
Recuerdame (described in Table 3), covering all aspects normaldistributionweredescribedusingthemeanandthe
of the application’s functionalities. Following the comple- standard deviation (SD); those that did not follow the
tion of each task, evaluators responded to the SEQ. Once normal distribution and the ordinal variables, were
the entire tasks set was concluded, testers evaluated the describedusingthemedianandthefirstandthirdquartilesDe-Rosende-Celeiro et al. 5
Table3. Evaluationphase:singleeasequestionquestionnaire(n=8).
Sequence Tasks Median Q1—Q3
1 Reminiscencesessionsandmemories 7 6–7
Selectapatient,reviewthelistofsessionsandidentifywhichsessionswerecompleted.Selecta
sessionandreviewitsdata.Selectamemoryandreviewitsdata.Detectneedsforimprovement
2 Reminiscencesessionreports 6.5 6–7
Searchtheavailablesessionreports.Selectasessionreport,reviewitsdata,detectneedsfor
improvement,andgenerateaPDFreport
3 Clinicalassessmentreports 7 6.25–7
Searchavailableclinicalassessmentreports.Selectareport,reviewitsdata,detectneedsfor
improvement,andgenerateaPDFreport
4 Automaticgenerationofthelifestory 7 6–7
Generatethelifestoryofapatientwithmemoriesofaspecificstageofthelifeandofaspecifictime
interval.Generatealifestorybook,interactwiththephotocarousel,andidentifyneedsfor
improvement.GenerateaPDFdocument,reviewitsdata,anddetectimprovementneeds
5 Editmemories 6 6–6
Consultthelistofmemories,selectaspecificmemory,reviewitsdata,anddetectimprovement
needs.Modifyagivenmemoryandaddmaterialssuchasimages
6 Peoplerelatedtothepatient 7 5.25–7
Searchforpeoplerelatedtoapatient,selectaparticularperson,reviewavailabledataonthat
person,determineimprovementneeds,andsortthelistofrelatedpersonsbyrelationshiptype
7 Patientcalendarwithscheduleofsessions 6 6–7
Reviewthecalendarwiththelistofsessionsscheduledforthepatient.Selectagivensession,review
itsdata,andmodifyit.Createanewsession
8 Createandeditareminiscencesession 6 5–6
Createanewsession,addamemory,addanimage,andsavethesession.Modifythecreatedsession,
endit,andgeneratethesessionreport
9 Createandeditaclinicalassessment 7 6.25–7
Createanewclinicalassessmentofapatient,saveit,andmodifyit
10 Patientregistration 7 7–7
Addanewpatientintheapp
11 Caregiverregistration 6.5 6–7
Registeranewcaregiverintheappandlinkhim/hertoapatient
Itemsarescoredona7-pointLikert-typescalefrom1(verydifficult)to7(veryeasy).
Q1,firstquartile;Q3,thirdquartile.
(Q1–Q3). Statistical analyses were conducted using IBM questions were analyzed using thematic analysis, identify-
SPSS 25.0. ing, analyzing, and reporting patterns within the data.25,26
All interview sessions were audio-recorded and tran- The content was analyzed in a classical way.27 The
scribed verbatim by trained members of the research team themes of analysis were extracted in a mixed way, from
who were present during the evaluation sessions. To the interview guides and those emerging from the data.
ensure accuracy, recordings were conscientiously played Eachsentenceorparagraphwasassignedcodessummariz-
back during the transcription process, and transcripts were ingitsmeaningwhichwerethengroupedaccordingtotheir
cross-checked against the audio recordings to identify and similarity. After identifying these patterns, key descriptive
correct any discrepancies. Transcripts were not returned themes and sub-themes were formed. In the co-creation
to participants for comment. Responses to the open phase, this analysis was carried out by the two computer6 DIGITAL HEALTH
Table4. Evaluationphase:systemusabilityscale(n=8).
No. Items Median Q1—Q3
1 IthinkthatIwouldliketousethissystemfrequently 5 4–5
2 Ifoundthesystemunnecessarilycomplex 1 1–1.75
3 Ithoughtthesystemwaseasytouse 5 4–5
4 IthinkthatIwouldneedthesupportofatechnicalpersontobeabletousethissystem 1 1–2
5 Ifoundthevariousfunctionsinthissystemwerewellintegrated 4.5 4–5
6 Ithoughttherewastoomuchinconsistencyinthissystem 1.5 1–2
7 Iwouldimaginethatmostpeoplewouldlearntousethissystemveryquickly 5 4–5
8 Ifoundthesystemverycumbersometouse 1 1–1.75
9 Ifeltveryconfidentusingthesystem 5 4.25–5
10 IneededtolearnalotofthingsbeforeIcouldgetgoingwiththissystem 1 1–2
Itemsarescoredona5-pointLikert-typescalefrom1(stronglydisagree)to5(stronglyagree).
Q1,firstquartile;Q3,thirdquartile.
Table5. Evaluationphase:benefitsofusingtheappinreminiscenceandlifestoryinterventions(n=8).
Items Median Q1—Q3
Ibelievethattheuseoftheappwouldreducethetimeneededtorecordinformationabouttheperson’smemoriesand 4 4–5
biography
Ibelievethattheuseoftheappwouldallowmetosavetimeinthepreparationoftherapysessions 4.5 4–5
IbelievethattheuseoftheappwouldreducethetimeIspendlocatingmemoriesandbiographicalmaterialsofthesubject 5 4.25–5
relevanttotherapy
Ibelievethattheuseoftheappwouldallowmetosavetimeinthetaskofrecordinginformationaboutthedevelopmentof 4 4–4.75
thetherapysessions
IbelievethattheuseoftheappwouldreducethetimeIspendtrackingtheperson’sprogress 4 4–5
Ibelievethattheuseoftheappwouldallowmetostreamlinethereminiscenceandlifestorybasedtherapies 4 4–4.75
Ibelievethatusingtheapptoobtainmultimedianarrativesoflifestorieswouldenrichtherapy 5 4.25–5
Ibelievethattheuseoftheappduringmytherapysessionswouldmakethemmoreeffective 5 4–5
Itemsarescoredona5-pointLikert-typescalefrom1(stronglydisagree)to5(stronglyagree).
Q1,firstquartile;Q3,thirdquartile.
science experts; in the evaluation phase, the final themes Textual quotations were selected to illustrate the sub-
were decided by consensus among the four members of themes and all quotes were translated into English. The
the research team. Any discrepancies were discussed. 32-item Consolidated Criteria for Reporting Qualitative
Through discussions, a consensus on the underlying Studies(COREQ)checklist28wasusedtoensurestandard-
themes was agreed upon and those results are presented. izationofreportingandrigor(SupplementaryAppendix1).De-Rosende-Celeiro et al. 7
Results End a reminiscence session. At the end of a session, the
therapistshouldbeabletocreateafollow-upreport,includ-
Initial prototype design phase ing the therapist’s overall impression, the preservation of
the memories worked with, and the emotional reaction
App requirements. The semi-structured interviews with the
therapists of the research team to determine the app’s that each memory evoked in the patient. The app should
allow the therapist to consult all these reports at any time.
required functionalities revealed that Recuerdame should
allow the practitioner to perform a set of specific tasks.
These are described below, grouped into eight major Assessthepatient. Theappshouldalsoallowthetherap-
themes. isttoenteraperiodicassessmentofthepatient,inorderto
havearecordoftheevolutionoftheircondition.Thisclin-
ical assessment will include relevant information such as
Register related persons and caregivers. The app should
diagnosis (e.g., type of dementia and date of diagnosis),
allow the therapist to register people involved in the
stage of the condition (e.g., Global Deterioration Scale
patient’s life history and their caregivers. The following
stage), results of standardized assessment scales, other
information may be added: name, type of relationship,
observations of the therapist, and the overall impression
and contact information. The digital tool should allow the ofthepatient’sgeneralcondition(whetherithasimproved,
practitioner to send emails to these registeredpersons.
worsened, or remains stable). Lastly, it should allow the
therapisttoconsulttheseevaluationsatanytimeandgener-
Record the patient’s life story memories. It should allow ate reports with their results.
the therapist to record the patient’s life story memories at
any time. This record should include information such as Automatically generate a life story. The therapist should
a description of the memory, location, date, type (child- be able to generate multimedia narratives of life stories
hood,adolescence,youngadult,adult,andolderadult),cat-
withvideos/audiosandimagesextractedfromthepatient’s
egory (e.g., family, friends, work, hobbies, and pets), memories or the creation and printing of a book with the
peoplerelatedtothememory(e.g.,caregiversorrelatives), photos/images accompanying the life history events. This
and preservation status (memory preserved,at risk of loss, videoorbookshouldincludeadescriptionofthesememor-
or lost). The practitioner should be able to record the ies. To create the life story, the therapist should be able to
emotion the memory evokes in the patient and label it as filter the events by type, date, and/or categories.
positive-neutral-negative, as well as the degree to which
the memory produces a positive mood on a quantitative Other requirements. Other requirements suggested
scale (e.g., from 0 to 10). The therapist should also be during this stage were: (1) the app should allow a patient
able to add the multimedia material related to each to beassignedto several therapists;(2) itmust becompat-
memory(photos,images,audios,orvideos)andincorporate iblewithcomputersandtablets;(3)theappshouldbeeasy
descriptive information of the stored material (e.g., loca- to use, regardless of the therapist’s technical ability; (4) it
tion, description, date, and life cycle stage). The digital should be efficient; it must save as much time as possible
tool will allow the therapist to search for memories and forthetherapists;and(5)itshouldremainconsistent,facili-
consult a list of allrecordedmemories. tating the learnability and useof the app.
App prototype. Once these requirements were clarified, the
Prepare a reminiscence therapy session. To do this, the
app will allow the therapist to view the patient’s life story developers proceeded to design the first prototype. This
designwasthenevaluatedbythetherapistsoftheresearch
and attached reports, helping them to decide the nature of
team. Table 2presents thetherapists’ ratings of the degree
the session to be conducted. The practitioner can create
ofdifficultyoftheassessmenttasksperformedwiththefirst
the new reminiscence session by specifying a date, objec-
prototype, on the SEQ tool. Most of the tasks (63.6%)
tives, description and the life story memories the therapist
received the maximum score (i.e., very easy). Only two
wishes to work with, along with the related multimedia
tasks were scored below the mean response on the SEQ
materials to be used.
(5.3 and 5.6 points): ending a reminiscence session and
writing anemail to a patient.
Conduct a reminiscence session. During the session, the Basedontheresultsoftheevaluation,theresearchteam
appwillshowthetherapistallthedatafromthepreviously anddevelopersagreedonthefollowingchanges:(1)clearer
preparedsession.Duringthesession,theappshouldallow instructions for use and modified wording for clarity; the
thepractitionertomodifyexistingmemories,incorporating names of certain features of the app were changed: the
newdataobtainedduringthesession,andtoaddmemories follow-up reports were renamed “session reports”, “types”
not included previously in the patient’s life story. of memories, was changed to “life stages”; (2) two new8 DIGITAL HEALTH
fields wereaddedtothe session creationform: barriersand dynamismtothetherapies”and“enrichthem[therapeutic
facilitators;(3)thefunctiontoendasessionwasnotintuitive, interventions]”. Some therapists emphasized that the app
and a more prominent button was added; (4) in the clinical enables the comprehensive management of a “complex
assessment form, a field was added for non-standardized process”, consisting of “a wide variety of tasks": “[the
assessment instruments used by the therapist; and (5) the app]coversverywellallthehardworkthatisdoneinrem-
optiontosortandfiltermemoriesusingdifferentparameters iniscence therapies”.The following excerptfrom onepar-
wasadded(location,relatedpersons,preservationstatus,and ticipant illustrated this clearly: “It’s good that [the app]
emotionthememoryevokesinthepatient).Oncethedesign serves to address everything… from recording each
wasagreedupon,thedeveloperscreatedafunctionalproto- patient’s memories to creating life story books with one
typethatwasevaluatedinthesecondphase. click”. Several therapists pointed out the possibilities that
it offers for managing the task of retrieving information
about patients’ memories. For example, one participant
Evaluation phase
noted that “stored information can be retrieved at any
Quantitative data time…easily and quickly”.
SEQinstrument. Table3showsthedegreeofdifficultyof
assessment tasks according to the therapists’ responses to Rangeofpotentialbenefits. Allparticipantsagreedthatthe
the SEQ. All tasks received scores between 6 and 7 appwaspotentiallybeneficialfortherapistsinreminiscence
points. Most tasks received a median score of 7 points therapy.Commentsontheperceivedusefulnessofthetool
(54.5%), i.e., the maximum possible score. include:“[theapp]isveryuseful”;“itwouldhelpusalot”.
Most of the experts stressed that this app streamlines con-
SUSinstrument. Onascalefrom0to100,themeantotal siderably the management of the therapeutic process in
scoreoftheSUSquestionnairewas90.3points(SD9.68). several ways: “Although there is some initial work to
Table 4shows the scores for each of the SUS items. enter all the data collected from the patient, but then the
whole process to apply the therapy is much shorter”;
Potential benefits. Regarding the potential benefits of “[The app] allows access to all the information needed
using the app in reminiscence/life story therapy, the during therapy in a very agile way”. Another commented
scores by therapists ranged from 4 to 5 points (medians), that it also expedites clinical assessments of patients: “for
indicating that participants believed the digital tool would the [clinical] follow-up of each patient, it is not necessary
save practitioners time, enrich therapy sessions and to consult written documents, because all the information
improve their effectiveness(Table 5). is digitized, and it is accessed very quickly”. Regarding
the storage of information, some participants reported this
Qualitativedata. Analyzingtheresponsestotheopen-ended functionality gave them feelings of “security” and
“trust”.Thiswassupportedbyotherqualitativecomments:
questions of therapist interviews, two broad themes were
“you keep everything in a safe place [i.e., in the app]”;
established to summarize the qualitative results of the
“sincetheappisstoringalltheinformationthatisincorpo-
secondphase:(a)acceptabilityoftheappforreminiscence
rated,usingitgivesmeconfidencebecauseIknowthatthe
and life story therapy; and(b) areas for improvement.
savedinformationisnotgoingtobelost”.Oneparticipant
notedthatdigitalstorageofdocumentsremovestheneedto
Acceptability of the app for reminiscence and life story
keepmaterialsrelatedtomemories:“once[lifestorydocu-
therapy. The therapists looked favorably on incorporating
ments]arerecordedintheapp,theycanbereturnedtothe
theRecuerdameappintotherapyusingreminiscencestrat-
family…andIfinditreassuringtoseethatnothingneedsto
egies.Thisthemeencompassesthreesub-themes:(1)views
onpositivefeatures;(2)rangeofpotentialbenefits;and(3)
bekeptoutsideofit”.Manyparticipantsattachedparticular
importance to the benefits of the automatic creation of life
expectations of use.
stories.Forexample,onetherapistcommentedontheposi-
Views on positive features. This sub-theme refers to the tive impact this can have on patients’ self-confidence,
content and functionalities of the tool that therapists viewing pleasant photos of their life story books and
viewedpositively.Therewasconsensusamongparticipants showing them to loved ones: “it is very helpful to be able
thattheappwas“simple”,“friendly”,“intuitive”,and“easy to print out the person’s life story…we give them the life
to use”. One therapist said that “it is very comfortable to story book and the patients will proudly show it to their
use”. Similarly, another participant explained: “I had no relatives, reinforcing their self-esteem and the value of
doubts about using it”. Functionalities such as the auto- their personal identity”. Another expert agreed with the
matic generation of personalized life stories using selected potentially beneficial effect of sharing life story books
criteria or the possibility of easily locating and presenting with those closest to them: “it is very positive that printed
stored multimedia content were positively valued by most life story materials can be shared with people who are
of the participants, observing that these “bring more important to the patient”.De-Rosende-Celeiro et al. 9
Expectationsofuse. Thissub-themeshowstheunanimous Recommendations on additional functionalities. Finally, this
desireofthetherapiststousetheappinthefuturetofacili- sub-theme included the participant’s views on other func-
tatetheirworkusingreminiscenceandlifestorystrategies. tionalities to be added to the app. Two participants pro-
Thefollowingquotesillustratethis:“OfcourseIwould…I posed adding features related to music, with the aim of
woulduseitonmypatientsdaily”;“Iwouldliketohavethis incorporating its therapeutic potential into reminiscence
app at my workplace… to make better use of my work strategies:
time”; “[the app] it has so many advantages that I would
definitely useit in my work every day”. “Itwouldbeveryinterestingtorecordintheappthefavor-
itesongsandsingersoftheperson…Playingthesongsof
their lives would liven up the sessions and music always
Areas for improvement. This main theme captured the facilitatesandfavorsthememoriesoftheirbiographies”.
therapists’ perceptions on areas for improvement of the
prototype.Analysisrevealedtwosub-themes:(1)suggested “Undoubtedly,musicisagreattherapeuticallyinreminis-
changes to improve features and functionalities; and (2) cencetherapies…Itwouldbenicetolinktheapptoweb-
recommendations on additional functionalities. sites like YouTube, where you can search for favorite
songs from different stages of the patient’s life and play
themduringtherapeuticactivities”.
Suggested changes to improve features and functionalities.
This sub-theme incorporated all the recommendations
Another suggested improvement was to add an internet
madebyparticipantstoimprovethefeaturesandfunction-
searchengineto“searchwebpagesforphotographsofsig-
alities of the app. Some participants proposed improving
nificant places in the lives of patients”, related to past
thedesignandvisualaspects,tobettercapturetheattention
moments and the present, to “review the memories that
of those with dementia and encourage their interest in the
these locations evoke”,as well as linking the app with the
content and information:
walk-through function available in Google Street View,
whichallowsusersto“walkthroughstreets,neighborhoods
“Isuggestmakingit[theapp]moreeye-catchingattheper-
andplacesthatwereimportantintheperson’slifestory…
ceptionlevel”.
commenting onthe patients’ memories ofwhere they lived
and what they experiencedin each place”.
“Thefontsizeandthewaythephotosarepresentedarenot
veryappealingtopatients”.
Discussion
“The design could be improved, so that it can better
capturepatients’attentionandencouragethemtointeract TheobjectiveofthisstudywastodeveloptheRecuerdame
withallthepossibilitiesofferedbytheapp”. app,tohelpoccupationaltherapistscarryoutreminiscence
andlifestorytherapywitholderpeoplewithdementia.Itis
Participantsalsocommentedthattheappshouldprovide importanttonotethattheprocessofreminiscencetherapyis
more information on several key elements of therapy: (1) verytime-consuming,involvingnotonlythetimeallocated
more patient information, adding, for example, file to sessions with patients, but also the time needed, both
numbers, marital status, employment history, past and beforeandafterthe sessions, tocollectandstoreabundant
presentleisureinterestsandhobbies;(2)moredataoncare- biographical information about each patient, planning
givers and related persons, including relevant information objectivesandpreparingcontent,recordingandmonitoring
about them (for example, their profession), as well as the patient’s evolution, etc..29–31 Studies have shown that
“remarks” field to add additional details (for example, the ICT tools have the potential to streamline a significant
characteristics of their relationship with the patient); and part of these tasks, particularly recording biographical
(3)moreinformationaboutthetherapysessions,clarifying materials and personalized memories, preparing structured
certainaspectssuchasthesequenceofactivities,location,a intervention sessions or monitoring the progress of sub-
quantitativeassessmentofthedegreeofparticipation,thera- jects.13 The results of this study partially support our
pist’s judgment about the need to repeat the session, and hypothesis, as occupational therapists generally agreed
proposals for improvements in future sessions. Finally, that Recuerdame could reduce therapy preparation time,
further suggestions included minor changes to the clinical enhance session delivery, and potentially improve overall
assessmentreports:addingafieldforthetherapist’ssigna- effectiveness.
ture;indicatingthescorerangesforeachassessmentinstru- Theparticipatoryanduser-centeredapproachadoptedin
ment; and visualization of the patient’s evolution using designing the app encouraged the active involvement of
graphs, detailing the scores in assessment instruments in future users throughout the entire process. As previous
different clinical evaluations. research has pointed out, this methodology is beneficial in10 DIGITAL HEALTH
several ways: designers generally lack specific knowledge therapy.Thepositivetherapistfeedbackprovidesevidence
of the needs in the field is compensated by the vision and ofthepotentialbenefitsRecuerdameoffersinareassuchas
broadexperienceoftherapists;thequalityandeffectiveness collecting therapy materials, facilitating reminiscence ses-
of the technology is enhanced, with a closer connection sions, andmonitoring individual progress.
between the app functionalities and the practical realities The identified functionalities in our application carry
of the therapeutic tasks it is intended to support; there is paramountimportanceduetotheirholisticapproach,cover-
less need for alterations and corrections in later phases of ing the entire spectrum of tasks involved in reminiscence
development; and, consequently, the tool finds greater therapy. This comprehensive nature distinguishes
acceptancebypotentialuser.32Inourstudy,aninterdiscip- Recuerdame from existing tools, as it consolidates various
linary research team, with a health sciences and computer functions into a singular, user-friendly platform.
science background, worked to co-develop a prototype. Comparatively, while other tools may serve specific func-
The therapists in the team determined the tasks that the tions individually, our co-creation process ensured that
appshouldfacilitateanddesignedafunctionaltoolthatsuc- Recuerdame seamlessly integrates these functionalities.
cessfullyincorporatedallthesetasks,whichwerequantita- This integration is crucial in providing therapists with an
tively evaluated as easyto perform. all-encompassing tool that streamlines their workflow.
In the second phase of our research, we evaluated the Furthermore, lessons learned from applying co-creation
perceptions of a sample of occupational therapists. The methodologiesunderscorethesignificanceofcollaboration
prototype was positively judged by participants: the vast with end-users. The iterative feedback loops and active
majority of the functions of the tool were considered easy involvementofoccupationaltherapistsin thedevelopment
to perform by therapists (SEQ questionnaire), the level of processnotonlyenhancedthetool’sfunctionalitiesbutalso
usability of the tool was considered excellent according to ensured its practicality and user acceptance. The nuanced
the SUS questionnaire, and the quantitative data obtained understandinggained through co-creation hasimplications
indicated the acceptability of the app. One of the most beyond the development of Recuerdame, contributing to a
popularfeatureswasthepossibilityofautomaticallyobtain- broader understanding of effective co-creation in the
ing multimedia narratives of life stories, with different context of therapeutic tools for dementia care.
formats and themes. The literature has highlighted that In essence, our study introduces a novel technological
incorporating digital life story books and videos allows solution (Recuerdame) and sheds light on the importance
thedevelopmentofanattractivemulti-sensoryenvironment of comprehensive functionalities, distinctiveness from
especially conducive to cognitive stimulation, which can existing tools, and the insights gained from applying
favor more meaningful therapeutic experiences for people co-creation methodologies. We believe that these insights
with dementia, adapted to their individual profile of needs enrich the scientific literature in the field of reminiscence
and interests.8,33 Based on these findings, the Recuerdame therapy for individuals with dementia.
app appears to be a versatile and innovative tool that Looking ahead, while well-received by occupational
empowers occupational therapists to manage reminiscence therapists, Recuerdame prompts further refinement, espe-
and life story interventions comprehensively, efficiently, cially given its prototype status. Therapist feedback has
and dynamically. been instrumental, identifying opportunities for feature
This work represents a novel exploration in Spain improvement and offering recommendations. Future itera-
regarding the co-development of a digital application spe- tions aim to address these areas, embracing an iterative
cifically designed to enhance reminiscence interventions andcollaborativeapproachtoenhanceoveralleffectiveness
for older people with dementia. Globally, research in this anduserexperience.Despitethethoroughidentificationof
domain remains sparse, predominantly consisting of pre- functionalities during the co-design process, the dynamic
liminary evaluations of the efficacy of diverse ICT nature of practical application revealed nuanced insights
systems in delivering personalized reminiscence therapies in the form of recommendations on additional functional-
to those with dementia. Prior assessments have predomin- itiesduringtheevaluationphase.Thispromptsustorecon-
antlyfocusedonaspectsrelatedtothefunctioningandwell- sider the synergy between co-design and evaluation. In
being of older people with dementia, using case studies or subsequentiterations,ouraimistointensifytheintegration
pre-postdesignswithlimitedsamplesizes.8,12,14,15Incon- of insights garnered during the evaluation phase into the
trast,ourresearchcentersonsupportingprofessionalsinthe co-design process.
field.Weaimednotonlytosimplifytheirpracticebutalso InthisinitialiterationofRecuerdame,ourprimaryfocus
todiminishthedemandsontheirtimeandresources.Adis- has centered on occupational therapists as the primary
tinctivecontributionofthisstudyliesinthedevelopmentof end-users, engaging intensively with the tool. However, it
a technological system designed to optimize the myriad is crucial not to overlook the pivotal roles of individuals
tasks performed by occupational therapists. The withdementia,whoactivelyparticipateintherapysessions,
co-designedapplicationstandsasatrailblazer,comprehen- interacting with the tool by, for instance, viewing images
sivelyaddressingallaspectsofimplementingreminiscence crafted by therapists or watching videos capturing theirDe-Rosende-Celeiro et al. 11
life stories. Similarly, caregivers play a crucial role and appinprofessionalpracticesettings,andanalyzingtheper-
stand to benefit from the tool, potentially using it at home spectives of other healthcare professionals.
to preserve and share memories with individuals with
dementia. Our commitment extends to broadening the Acknowledgements: The authors thank all the therapists who
co-design process to include individuals with dementia participated in the evaluation phase for their time and
and their caregivers, recognizing their integral roles. contributions to this research. Additionally, we thank the
Ethical considerations for future iterations include imple- studentsCristinaBarquilla,PatriciaDíez,SantiagoMarcoMulas
mentingarobustandtransparentconsentprocessforindivi- andEvaVerdúfortheircontributiontotheprototypes.
dualswithdementia.Stringentmeasureswillbeinplaceto
obtain explicit consent and ensure clear communication
Contributorship:Allauthorsconceivedthestudy.IDCandAAA
regarding data use,storage, and protection. wereinvolvedinprotocoldevelopment,gainingethicalapproval,
Despite these contributions, we acknowledge limita- participant recruitment and data analysis. VFG and SBB were
tions. Firstly, saturationwas reachedafter eight interviews involved in protocol development and data collection. IDC
which is a small sample size, although samples of this wrote the manuscript as the first author. All authors read,
size are common in qualitative research.34 Another limita- reviewed,andapprovedthefinalversionofthemanuscript.
tion is that the study was limited to a particular region
and the results may not be extrapolatable to all Spanish Declaration of conflicting interests: The authors declared no
occupational therapy professionals in the field of care for potential conflicts of interest with respect to the research,
peoplelivingwithdementia.Werecognizethatthepercep- authorship,and/orpublicationofthisarticle.
tionofthistypeofdigitalapplicationmaydifferdepending
on the political, territorial or social context. On the other
Ethical approval: The Research Ethics Committee of the
hand, participants were predominantly women. The com-
University of A Coruña (Spain) approved this study
position of the sample was adjusted to the gender profile
(identificationcode2022-024).
characteristic of the occupational therapy profession in
Western countries.35 However, previous studies have sug-
gested there may be differences in the use and adaptation Funding: Theauthorsdisclosedreceiptofthefollowingfinancial
to digital tools between genders.36 Finally, our research support for the research, authorship, and/or publication of this
article: This work was supported by the Spanish Ministry of
tested the application exclusively in anassessmentsetting,
ScienceandInnovation,(grantnumberPID2019-108927RB-I00).
withoutusingitintheirprofessionalpractice.Weconsider
it necessary to point out that there may be differences
between our findings and the feedback provided by thera- Guarantor: IDC
pists when integrating the tool into their daily practice
with the population of people with dementia. In addition,
ORCID iD: Iván De-Rosende-Celeiro https://orcid.org/0000-
this study reflected the perceptions of occupational
0002-4569-2050
therapy experts. Consequently, future research should
evaluate the useofthisdigitaltoolinprofessional practice
settings and explore the perspectives of other healthcare Supplemental material: Supplementalmaterialforthisarticleis
professionalprofiles. availableonline.
References
Conclusions
1. Alzheimer’sAssociation.2022Alzheimer’sdiseasefactsand
Participating occupational therapists generally agreed that figures. Alzheimers Dement J Alzheimers Assoc 2022; 18:
the technological solution co-designed in this study 700–789.
appears to be a versatile tool that empowers these profes- 2. World Health Organization. Global status report on the
sionals to manage reminiscence interventions. The study public health response to dementia. Geneva: World Health
findings suggested the usability and acceptability of Organization,2021.
Recuerdame. As end-users, occupational therapists were 3. Cammisuli DM, Danti S, Bosinelli F, et al. Non-
pharmacological interventions for people with Alzheimer’s
overwhelmingly positive about the use of this digital tool
disease: a critical review of the scientific literature from the
in reminiscence interventions with older people with
dementia.Futureresearchshouldrefinetheapp,addressing
lasttenyears.EurGeriatrMed2016;7:57–64.
4. Woods B, O’Philbin L, Farrell EM, et al. Reminiscence
opportunities for improvement identified by participants,
therapyfordementia.CochraneDatabaseSystRev2018;3:
throughaniterativeandcollaborativeapproach.Inaddition,
CD001120.
more research is needed in this scientific field with the 5. Dempsey L, Murphy K, Cooney A, et al. Reminiscence in
objectivesofincludingpeoplewithdementiaandtheircare- dementia: a concept analysis. Dement Lond Engl 2014; 13:
giversintheco-designprocess,learningabouttheuseofthe 176–192.12 DIGITAL HEALTH
6. MorrisRG.Recentdevelopmentsintheneuropsychologyof 22. Carpenter C and Suto M. Qualitative research for occupa-
dementia.IntRevPsychiatry1994;6:85–107. tional and physical therapists: a practical guide [Internet].
7. SchweitzerP.Reminiscenceindementiacare.IntJReminisc Oxford, UK: Wiley, 2008, Available from: http://eu.wiley.
LifeRev2013;1:42–47. com/WileyCDA/WileyTitle/productCd-1405144351.html.
8. CuevasPEG,DavidsonPM,MejillaJL,etal.Reminiscence 23. Sevilla-Gonzalez MDR, Moreno Loaeza L, Lazaro-Carrera
therapyforolderadultswithAlzheimer’sdisease:aliterature LS, et al. Spanish version of the system usability scale for
review.IntJMentHealthNurs2020;29:364–371. the assessment of electronic tools: development and valid-
9. SaragihID,TonapaSI,YaoCT,etal.Effectsofreminiscence ation.JMIRHumFactors2020;7:e21161.
therapy in people with dementia: a systematic review and 24. World Medical Association. World Medical Association
meta-analysis. J Psychiatr Ment Health Nurs 2022; 29: Declaration of Helsinki: ethical principles for medical
883–903. researchinvolvinghumansubjects.JAMA2013;310:2191–
10. Park K, Lee S, Yang J, et al. A systematic review and 2194.
meta-analysis on the effect of reminiscence therapy 25. Braun V and Clarke V. Using thematic analysis in psych-
for people with dementia. Int Psychogeriatr 2019; 31: ology.QualResPsychol2006;3:77–101.
1581–1597. 26. Green J and Thorogood N. Qualitative Methods for Health
11. ElfrinkTR,ZuidemaSU,KunzM,etal.Lifestorybooksfor Research.3rded.London:Sage,2014.
peoplewithdementia:asystematicreview.IntPsychogeriatr 27. GraneheimUHandLundmanB.Qualitativecontentanalysis
2018;30:1797–1811. in nursing research: concepts, procedures and measures to
12. SubramaniamPandWoodsB.Towardsthetherapeuticuseof achieve trustworthiness. Nurse Educ Today 2004; 24: 105–
information and communication technology in reminiscence 112.
work for people with dementia: a systematic review. Int J 28. Tong A, Sainsbury P and Craig J. Consolidated criteria for
ComputHealthc2010;1:106–125. reporting qualitative research (COREQ): a 32-item checklist
13. LazarA,ThompsonHandDemirisG.Asystematicreviewof for interviews and focus groups. Int J Qual Health Care
theuseoftechnologyforreminiscencetherapy.HealthEduc 2007;19:349–357.
BehavOffPublSocPublicHealthEduc2014;41:51S–61S. 29. GowansG,CampbellJ,AlmN,etal.Designingamultimedia
14. Cho E, Shin J, Seok JW, et al. The effectiveness of non- conversation aid for reminiscence therapy in dementia care
pharmacologicalinterventionsusinginformationandcommu- environments. In: CHI ‘04 extended abstracts on human
nicationtechnologiesforbehavioralandpsychologicalsymp- factors in computing systems [internet]. New York, NY,
tomsofdementia:asystematicreviewandmeta-analysis.IntJ USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2004 [cited
NursStud2022;138:104392. 2023 Jan 9], pp.825–836. (CHI EA ‘04). Available from:
15. DequanterS,GagnonMP,NdiayeMA,etal.Theeffectiveness https://doi.org/10.1145/985921.985943
of e-health solutions for aging with cognitive impairment: a 30. Paay J, Kjeldskov J, Aaen I, et al. User-centred iterative
systematicreview.Gerontologist2021;61:e373–e394. designofasmartwatchsystemsupportingspontaneousremin-
16. BanoMandZowghiD.Userinvolvementinsoftwaredevelop- iscence therapy for people living with dementia. Health
ment and system success: a systematic literature review. In: InformaticsJ2022;28:14604582221106002.
Proceedings of the 17th International Conference on 31. Moon S and Park K. The effect of digital reminiscence
Evaluation and Assessment in Software Engineering therapy on people with dementia: a pilot randomized con-
[Internet], New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing trolledtrial.BMCGeriatr2020;20:166.
Machinery. 2013 [cited 2023 Jan 11]. p. 125–130. (EASE 32. Damodaran L. User involvement in the systems design
‘13).Availablefrom:https://doi.org/10.1145/2460999.2461017 process-apracticalguideforusers.BehavInfTechnol1996;
17. KujalaS.Userinvolvement:areviewofthebenefitsandchal- 15:363–377.
lenges.BehavInfTechnol2003;22:1–16. 33. YasudaK,KuwabaraK,KuwaharaN,etal.Effectivenessof
18. Bridges J, Gray W, Box G, et al. Discovery interviews: a personalised reminiscence photo videos for individuals with
mechanism for user involvement. Int J Older People Nurs dementia.NeuropsycholRehabil2009;19:603–619.
2008;3:206–210. 34. GuestG,BunceAandJohnsonL.Howmanyinterviewsare
19. LewisJR.Usabilitytesting.In:SalvendyG(eds)Handbook enough?:an experimentwithdata saturation andvariability.
of human factors and ergonomics. 4th ed. New York, NY: FieldMethods2006;18:59–82.
JohnWiley&Sons,2012,pp.1267–1312. 35. Ledgerd R. World federation of occupational therapists.
20. LewisJR.Usability:lessonslearned…andyettobelearned. WFOT report: WFOT human resources project 2018 and
IntJHuman–ComputerInteract2014;30:663–684. 2020.WorldFedOccupTherBull2020;76:69–74.
21. Sauro J and Lewis JR. Quantifying the User Experience: 36. Goswami A and Dutta S. Gender differences in technology
Practical Statistics for User Research. 2nd ed. Cambridge, usage—A literature review. Open J Bus Manag 2016; 4:
MA:Elsevier/Morgan-Kaufmann,2016. 51–59.