Affective State Detection using fNIRs and Machine
Learning
Ritam Ghosh
Dept. of Electrical Engineering
Vanderbilt University
Nashville, USA
ritam.ghosh@Vanderbilt.Edu
Abstract — Affective states regulate our day to day to observers and is not scalable. Computer vision techniques
function and has a tremendous effect on mental and physical have been used to automate the process of detecting affective
health. Detection of affective states is of utmost importance for states from facial expressions [7] but those techniques can
mental health monitoring, smart entertainment selection and suffer from bias in the training dataset due to the fact that
dynamic workload management. In this paper, we discussed individual subjects have different expressions corresponding
relevant literature on affective state detection using physiology to different affective states and they might choose to
data, the benefits and limitations of different sensors and
deliberately mask their expressions if they do not want to
methods used for collecting physiology data, and our rationale
reveal their emotions.
for selecting functional near-infrared spectroscopy. We present
the design of an experiment involving nine subjects to evoke the On the other hand, physiology depends on the autonomic
affective states of meditation, amusement and cognitive load and nervous system which controls the involuntary functions of
the results of the attempt to classify using machine learning. A the body and cannot be voluntarily controlled or suppressed.
mean accuracy of 83.04% was achieved in three class Also, physiology is largely consistent among individuals and
classification with an individual model; 84.39% accuracy was hence provide a reliable and consistent measurement of
achieved for a group model and 60.57% accuracy was achieved affective states.
for subject independent model using leave one out cross
validation. It was found that prediction accuracy for cognitive In this paper, relevant literature on affective state detection
load was higher (evoked using a pen and paper task) than the using physiology data is discussed. An experiment to classify
other two classes (evoked using computer bases tasks). To verify affective states of meditation, amusement and high cognitive
that this discrepancy was not due to motor skills involved in the load using functional near infrared spectroscopy is described
pen and paper task, a second experiment was conducted using and the results are discussed in detail. A mean accuracy of
four participants and the results of that experiment has also 83.04% was achieved in three class classification with an
been presented in the paper. individual model; 84.39% accuracy was achieved for a group
model and 60.57% accuracy was achieved for subject
Keywords—affective states, fNIRs, brain imaging, BCI
independent model using leave one out cross validation.
I. INTRODUCTION
II. RELATED WORK
Affective states regulate our daily function and has a
Autonomic physiological responses are highly correlated
tremendous effect on our mental and physical health. A lot of
to affective states, and these responses can be measured by
research has been undertaken recently on detection and
various non-invasive sensors. The most used sensors are
classification of affective states using automated techniques.
Electrocardiogram (ECG), Electroencephalography (EEG),
Knowledge of affective states can be used in various
PPG or blood volume pulse (BVP), Electrodermal Activity
applications like judging the mental health of a subject and
(EDA) or Galvanic Skin Response (GSR). These signals are
evaluating the effectiveness of any therapy or intervention,
commonly chosen due to their strong correlation to affective
particularly for people in the autism spectrum, who do not
states like stress, which is one of the most significant and
exhibit similar facial expressions as neurotypical individuals
widely researched affective state. Sensors like thermal
[1,2]. Affective states like amusement or sorrow can provide
imaging and accelerometers are also used.
insights into an individual’s mental state. Quantitative
measurement of stress or cognitive overload are used for Table 1 shows some of the existing work done on
various applications like adaptive difficulty control of games measurement of affective states using physiology data and
or other physical activities [3,4], dynamic workload represents the state of the art in this field. The authors in [8]
management to ensure optimum productivity and preventing created a public dataset WESAD which has been featured in
overburdening of employees in the workplace [5,6]. An various other works. It is a multimodal dataset containing
accurate and automated real time measurement of affective BVP, EDA, temperature and accelerometer sensor data
states can be used as feedback to a controller to control the corresponding to stressed and not stressed affective states. It
intensity of the administered stimulus. is a labelled dataset with 15 participants. The authors provided
a benchmark of 88.25% accuracy using the leave one subject
Various methods are used to measure affective states like
out validation method and similar results have been replicated
measuring the concentration of various hormones in the blood
by some other studies as well. While attempting to replicate
stream, judging affective state from facial expressions, body
the results, it was observed that baseline vs. stress
movements and gestures etc. While affective state
classification was trivial and not indicative of stress detection.
measurement from bloodwork is very accurate, it is intrusive,
If the model is fed data corresponding to any other affective
requires clinical practitioners and is not real-time. A trained
state, the prediction will still be that of stress. This is because
human observer can provide real time affective state
individual participant data is normalized with respect to the
assessment based on facial expressions and body movements
baseline and then the problem is reduced to classification of
but that requires specialized human labor. Also, they are
values that have very distinct proximity to zero. Similar
susceptible to human bias, will be inconsistent in betweenmethods have been used by the authors in [9], achieving a set was shuffled before being divided into training and testing
96.5% classification accuracy for a subject independent sets. This is a common practice in many machine-learning
model. The studies described in [12,13] used similar methods applications but may not be an appropriate method for dealing
using thermal imaging and heart rate variability sensors and with physiology signals since physiology signals change
achieved above 80% subject independent classification slowly and continuously, and when sampled at a high enough
accuracy. The authors in [10] have created a group model for frequency, the values of successive samples are very similar.
stressed/ not stressed binary classification with 250 Hence if the data is shuffled prior to dividing it into training
participants and achieved 81.5% classification accuracy with and testing sets, the training set contains values that are very
neural networks using 5-fold cross validation method. Li et al. similar to that of the testing set, and hence the model
[11] achieved above 99.5% accuracy in a baseline/ stress/ effectively is exposed to the testing set data during the training
amusement classification task. Such high accuracies were process.
possible due to a ‘look ahead’ bias, where the entire sample
TABLE I: Related Work
Authors Number Labels Modalities Classifiers Validation Prediction
of subjects method rate
Schmidt 15 Stress/ BVP, Random LOSO 88.25%
et al. [8] not stressed EDA, Temp, forest
Acc
Youngjun 17 Stress/ BVP, Neural LOSO 96.5%
et al. [9] not stressed Temp network
Taylor et 250 Stress/ SC, temp, Neural 5-fold 81.5%
al. [10] not stressed accelerometer Network cross
validation
Li et al. 15 Baseline/ BVP, CNN, 10-fold 99.8%,
[11] stress/ EDA, Temp, MLP cross 99.55%
amusement Acc validation
Cardone 10 Stress/ Thermal SVR LOSO 0.80 AUC
et al. [12] not stressed Imaging
Castaldo 42 Stress/ Heart rate SVM LOSO 88%
et al. [13] not stressed variability
three affective states: meditation, amusement, and high
III. OBJECTIVE OF THE STUDY
cognitive load. These three affective states were initially
In the related works section, most of the prior work chosen because these can be evoked reliably on various
discussed has performed a binary classification of stress/ not participants and will provide a good starting point from which
stressed and one has performed a three-class classification of the study can be expanded to include other affective states.
stressed/ amused/ baseline. Humans are capable of a large The fNIRs is a relatively new sensor and not many open-
number of affective states which have varying degree of source datasets for affective state detection using fNIRs is
proximity to each other in the affective state spectrum and available. This study will also serve to validate the usability
using a binary model to predict a certain affective state is and reliability of this sensor for this purpose.
unreliable. This is due to the fact that if the model is trained
on only two affective states or one affective state and
IV. NEAR INFRARED SPECTROSCOPY
baseline, any other affective state that the model is not trained There are several physiological sensors in use such as
on will be wrongly classified. Also, careful attention must be functional magnetic resonance imaging (FMRI), EEG, ECG,
paid to ensure that the measured values are caused by the heart rate variability, skin conductance etc. that have been
target affective state only, and not by some other activity that used in many studies. Each of these sensors have their own
the participant might be performing simultaneously. To advantages and disadvantages. FMRI has excellent spatial
address these concerns, ideally an experiment to evoke all resolution and is resilient to environmental factors, but the
apparatus required is bulky and expensive and is not portable,
affective states individually and exclusively should be
hence is of limited practical use for the scope of applications
performed, which in reality is very difficult because the same
discussed in this paper. EEG, ECG and accelerometers have
stimulus may evoke different affective states in different
very high temporal resolution which makes them suitable for
participants based on their individual preferences and life
activity recognition because they can detect short duration
experiences. In this study, the experiment will aim to evoke
motions. But they are also susceptible to contamination byhigh frequency noise and motion artefacts which require
complicated filtering in software. They are also influenced by
ambient temperature, activities of the participants and hence
have difficulty separating the effects of affective state vs
activities of the participants.
Over the last decade and half, optical brain imaging using
functional near infrared spectroscopy (fNIRs) have gained
traction and have been used in various settings. The key
feature of fNIRs sensor is that it measures the concentration
changes of oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin in the
different regions of the brain, which is a relatively slow
process, hence the signal is not contaminated by any motion
artefacts. The sensor consists of a series of infrared LEDs of
Fig. 2. Optical pathway of infrared light from emitter to detectors
one or more wavelengths and a series of photodiodes. The
LEDs emit infrared light which travels into the scull cavity
and the reflected light is received by the photodiodes. The
wavelengths are selected such that at those wavelengths, skin V. DATA PREPROCESSING
and bone are transparent to light. Hence the only components The data collected by fNIRs consist of three signals per
to reflect light are water, oxygenated and deoxygenated channel: reflection of light of wavelength 730nm, reflection of
hemoglobin. Fig. 1 shows the absorption spectrum of these light of wavelength 850nm and reading when LEDs of both
three components. From the figure, it can be seen that at wavelengths are turned off. While the data is relatively noise
wavelengths between 700nm to 900nm, only oxygenated and free, it does contain a few other signals that are not of
deoxygenated hemoglobin has significant response to light, importance to our application. These signals include regular
with their response being almost identical at 790nm. This is fluctuations due to heartbeat (1-1.5 Hz), respiration (0.2-0.3
called the isosbestic point. Typically, a wavelength is selected Hz) and Mayer’s wave (0.1 Hz), which are the cyclic waves
on either side of this isosbestic point to selectively measure in arterial blood pressure brought about by oscillations in
the response from the oxygenated and deoxygenated baroreceptor and chemoreceptor reflex control systems. These
hemoglobin in blood. are eliminated by filtering the signal using a 0.1Hz low pass
filter.
The optical path followed by the light from the emitter to
the detector depends on the beam angle of the LED and the The photodiodes also receive small amounts of ambient
distance between the LEDs and the photo diodes. Fig. 2 shows light which result in some current. This current is measured
an LED with two detectors at two different distances. It can be while the LEDs are turned off, called the dark current. The
seen that the photodiode located closer to the LED receives dark current represents the sum of the bias current in the
light through a shallower optical path than the photo diode that photodiodes and current due to ambient light. This value is
is located further away. Shallower optical paths lead to subtracted from the signal to eliminate any device and
measurement of oxygenated and deoxygenated hemoglobin ambience specific bias.
concentration changes in the superficial capillaries in the skin
and the deeper optical pathways measure those changes in the Small facial movements like moving eyebrows and
tissues of the brain. Hence, by measuring the short optical blinking may have some effect on the blood concentration in
pathways, called ‘short channel’ signals, concentration the superficial capillaries which also influence the readings of
changes due to activities like blinking, eye-brow movements the sensor. These are eliminated by taking the short channel
can be detected and eliminated from the long channel signals data and subtracting it from the long channel data.
to further reduce motion artefacts.
This concludes the denoising of the signal. Then the
baseline data collected in the first few minutes of the
experiment is subtracted from the signal to account for
individual differences in participants. Then the signal is
decomposed into four features per channel: oxygenated
hemoglobin concentration (HbO) from 850nm data,
deoxygenated hemoglobin concentration (HbR) from 730nm
data, total hemoglobin concentration (HbT = HbO + HbR) and
oxygen consumption (Oxy = HbO – HbR).
The device used in this study is a 16 channel fNIR device
manufactured by fNIRDevices (www.fnirdevices.com) which
uses 4 dual wavelength LEDs (730nm and 850nm) and 10
photodiodes. The optodes or optical imaging regions are
located in between each photodiode and LED pair. Fig. 3
shows the optode layout of a typical fNIR device. This results
in 16 optodes that provide the 16 channels of data. This device
also contains two reference channels that are located close to
Fig. 1. Absorption spectrum of water, oxygenated and deoxygenated the LEDs which provide the short channel measurement. The
blood LEDs are switched on at different wavelengths and turned off
alternately and the measurements are taken, which results in a
total of 48 channel of data (730nm, 850nm and ambient times16). After the preprocessing steps mentioned above, the final VI. EXPERIMENT
feature set includes 16 * (HbO, HbR, HbT and Oxy) resulting
An experiment was conducted with the aim of eliciting
in 64 features per sample. Fig. 4 shows a raw signal trace and
different affective states in a controlled environment in order
fig. 5 shows a processed signal trace.
to test the accuracy of classification of the affective states
using fNIR data. 10 participants were recruited for the
experiment, data for 1 participant had to be discarded due to
faulty sensor readings. Among them were 5 males (mean age
25.4 std. 2.05) and 4 females (mean age 25.5 std. 3.35). The
experiment protocol was as follows: 2 minutes of baseline data
collection during which the participants were instructed to sit
idle. This data is important to account for individual
differences as well as the effects of prior activity, caffeine
intake etc. This was followed by three four-minute sessions of
meditation while listening to a guided meditation music, four
minutes of watching stand-up comedy by a comedian of their
choice and four minutes of continuously writing the Fibonacci
sequence with a pen and paper. The data was collected at a
sampling frequency of 4 Hz. The sessions were timed with one
minute of dead band in between to allow the participant to
Fig. 3. Optode layout of a typical fNIR device
fully switch affective states before data collection in order to
prevent false labelling. Fig. 6 shows a participant wearing the
fNIR headset.
Fig. 6. A participant wearing the fNIR headset before an experiment
VII. RESULTS
Fig. 4. Raw fNIR signal, pink denotes oxygenated hemoglobin
Three intended use cases were identified for the machine
concentration, violet denotes deoxygenated hemoglobin concentration and
green denotes dark current learning models:
1) The model will be used to predict the affective state of
one particular individual, whose historic data can be
accessed
2) The model will be used to predict the affective state of
a group of individuals, whose historic data can be accessed
3) The model will be used to predict the affective state of
unknown individuals, whose historic data can not be
accessed
The first two use cases can be applied in workplaces or
nursing homes or any such settings where the same
individual/ group of individuals will use the system over a
period of time. The third use case is important for
deployment, where no knowledge of the end user is available.
To address these use cases, three different machine
learning models were trained:
Case 1:
Fig. 5. Processed fNIR signal, orange represents HbO, brown represents The individual model was trained on 80% of an
HbR, red represents HbT and blue represents Oxy individual’s data and tested on the remaining 20% of theindividual’s data. This was repeated 100 times for each
individual. During each run, a contiguous 20% of the data
from each of the classes were set aside for testing, and then
the training set and testing set were shuffled. It was ensured
that each class had the same number of samples to keep the
training data balanced, and shuffling was performed after
dividing the dataset into training and testing sets to prevent
the look-ahead bias discussed at the end of section II.
Random forest and ANN’s performed the best, with
ANNs slightly outperforming the random forest. A neural
network with 64 input nodes, 2 hidden layers with 128 nodes
each and an output layer with 3 nodes was used for the
individual model. This model was intentionally overfitted to
some extent because it is supposed to have access to each
individual’s prior data and does not need to generalize Fig. 7 Individual model error diagram
between participants. The hidden layers had ‘relu’ as
activation function and the final layer used softmax. The
Case 2:
‘Adam’ optimizer was used from the Keras library in python
with sparse categorical cross entropy as the loss function. The
The group model was trained on 80% of all participants’
best results were obtained using training parameters of batch
data combined and tested on the remaining 20% of all
size 5 and 8 epochs.
participants’ data. Again, the data was divided into training
Table 2 shows the mean, max, min and standard deviation
and testing sets prior to shuffling to prevent the look-ahead
of accuracies of each individual participant and fig. 7 shows
bias. For the group model, a neural network with 64 input
the error diagram.
nodes, 2 hidden layers with 256 nodes each and an output
layer with 3 nodes was used. The model used the same
Table II. Individual model performance
activation function and loss as the previous model. The
Metric Mean Std. Max Min training parameters were batch size of 40 and 5 epochs. The
Participant 79.96% 7.30% 93.16% 69.99% table 3 shows the performance of the group model and fig. 8
1 shows the confusion matrix.
Participant 78.99% 8.50% 92.00% 68.33%
2 Table III. Group model performance
Participant 67.62% 6.54% 80.33% 60.66%
3 Metric Value
Participant 70.60% 10.75% 99.00% 56.99%
4
Participant 96.22% 9.94% 100% 66.66% Mean 84.39%
5
Participant 83.25% 7.95% 95.50% 70.17%
6 Std. 2.30%
Participant 80.90% 7.77% 89.00% 67.50%
7
Participant 90.91% 10.57% 100% 66.67%
Max 87.18%
8
Participant 98.93% 1.40% 100% 95.66%
9
Min 81.22%VIII. INTERPRETATION OF THE CONFUSION MATRIX
From the confusion matrix in the previous section, it is
evident that the model could classify cognitive load with a
high degree of confidence, but it was not the case for the other
two classes. There can several possible explanations for this
observation:
1) In the affective state spectrum, meditaion and
amusement are much closer to each other than high cognitive
load, hence it was easier for the model to clearly draw a
decision boundary between cognitive load and the other two
states.
2) Meditation is an acquired skill, and it takes a lot of
regular practice to achieve an uninterrupted meditative state.
It is possible that the participants’ mind veered off during the
meditation period to other thoughts, some of which may have
been amusing, in which case it would have contaminated
some of the data.
3) Another possible explanation is that while the
meditation and amusement states were evoked using
computer based stimulus where no motor skills were
involved, the cognitive load task was pen and paper based and
involved the participant writing the numbers in addition to
Fig. 8 Group model confusion matrix
mental calculation. It is possible that voluntary motor control
From the confusion matrix of the group model, it can be contributed to easier identification of this task. An
clearly seen that the model could classify cognitive load with experiment was designed to verify that cognitive load could
a very high degree of certainty but there was some confusion be detected independent from voluntary motor control.
between meditation and amusement. This has been addressed
in the next section.
IX. EXPERIMENT TO VERIFY EFFECT OF MOTOR CONTROL
Case 3:
A second experiment was designed to study the effect of
The subject independent model was trained on 100% data voluntary motor control and verify if high cognitive load
of all but one participant and tested on 100% data of the could be identified independent of motor control. The
remaining participant, often called leave one subject out experiment was conducted with four participants and the
validation (LOSO). This was repeated 100 times for each protocol was as follows:
participant and the results were averaged. For the subject 2 minutes of baseline when the participant was sitting idle,
independent model, a neural network with 64 input nodes, 2 3 minutes of Fibonacci sequence addition and 3 minutes of
hidden layers with 256 nodes each and an output layer with 3 writing their own name.
nodes was used. The model used the same parameters as the Both of these tasks required the same degree of voluntary
previous models. The training parameters were batch size of motor control but in the case of Fibonacci sequence addition,
120 and 5 epochs. The table 4 shows the performance of the it required high level of cognition while during writing their
subject independent model. own name, minimal cognitive capabilities were employed.
The data was preprocessed using the same steps as outlined
in section V. A group model was trained to perform binary
Table IV. Subject independent model performance classification between these two activities, with 80% of all
Metric Group data from all four participants combined as the training set
and the remaining 20% data as the testing set. A neural
network was used for the classification and an accuracy of
81.58% was achieved with a standard deviation of 0.4%. This
Mean 60.57%
experiment clearly demonstrated that it was possible to
distinguish cognitive overload independently from voluntary
motor control.
Std. 12.82%
X. DISCUSSION
Max 83.99%
In this study, we created three models to address three
different real-life scenarios. The individual model can be
Min 39.17% trained for each individual who is going to use the system,
such a model is practical in an institutional setting where thesame individual will use the system multiple times over a Human-Computer Studies, Volume 66, Issue 9, 2008, Pages 662-677,
ISSN 1071-5819
period of time. The group model is more relevant where the
[2] Sano A, Taylor S, McHill A, Phillips A, Barger L, Klerman E, Picard
same equipment will be shared among a number of
R, Identifying Objective Physiological Markers and Modifiable
individuals multiple times over a period of time, but
Behaviors for Self-Reported Stress and Mental Health Status Using
individual profiles may not be feasible, e.g., shared Wearable Sensors and Mobile Phones: Observational Study, J Med
infrastructure in long term care facilities often have record of Internet Res 2018;20(6):e210.
all individuals who use are enrolled to use an equipment but [3] S. Wu and T. Lin, "Exploring the use of physiology in adaptive game
design," 2011 International Conference on Consumer Electronics,
do not always record who is using it at a given time. We are
Communications and Networks (CECNet), 2011, pp. 1280-1283, doi:
developing this system as a feedback controller to regulate 10.1109/CECNET.2011.5768186.
the level of difficulty of activities designed for older adults [4] N. Oliver and L. Kreger-Stickles, "Enhancing Exercise Performance
living in long term care facilities, and in such use cases, the through Real-time Physiological Monitoring and Music: A User
group model would be particularly useful. The subject Study," 2006 Pervasive Health Conference and Workshops, 2006, pp.
1-10, doi: 10.1109/PCTHEALTH.2006.361660.
independent model is designed for use by individuals whose
[5] Trejo, Leonard J., et al. "Experimental design and testing of a
historic data will not be accessible for training, it will be
multimodal cognitive overload classifier." Foundations of Augmented
useful in deployment as a product to the end user. In real life, Cognition 2007 (2007): 13-22.
individuals exhibit a spectrum of affective states, hence [6] Morton, Jessica, et al. "Identifying predictive EEG features for
binary classification is of little use. We attempted to create a cognitive overload detection in assembly workers in Industry 4.0." H-
Workload 2019: 3rd International Symposium on Human Mental
three-class classification and achieved an individual model
Workload: Models and Applications (Works in Progress). 2019.
accuracy of 83.04% which is almost at per with the state of
[7] Haines, Nathaniel & Southward, Matt & Cheavens, Jennifer &
the art. The group model accuracy was also above 80%. The Beauchaine, Theodore & Ahn, Woo-Young. (2019). Using computer-
subject independent model accuracy was just above 60% vision and machine learning to automate facial coding of positive and
which can be improved with hyper-parameter tuning. The negative affect intensity. PLOS ONE. 14. e0211735.
10.1371/journal.pone.0211735.
group model accuracy is less than some findings in other
[8] P. Schmidt, A. Reiss, R. Duerichen, and K. V. Laerhoven, “Introducing
literature, but that is because most have done a two-class
wesad, a multimodal dataset for wearable stress and affect
classification or three class classification where one class is detection,”ICMI 2018 - Proceedings of the 2018 International
baseline. Also, some authors have achieved very high Conference onMultimodal Interaction, pp. 400–408, 2018.
accuracies due to shuffling the data before dividing it into [9] S. J, B.-B. N. C. Youngjun, and Julier, “Instant stress: Detectionof
perceived mental stress through smartphone
training and testing sets which leads to a look-ahead bias. We
photoplethysmographyand thermal imaging,”JMIR Ment Health,
also verified that the greater confidence in classifying the
vol. 6, p. e10140, 4 2019.[Online]. Available:
cognitive overload was not due to voluntary motor control http://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pubmed/30964440
during that task. This numbers are a realistic expectation of [10] S. Taylor, N. Jaques, E. Nosakhare, A. Sano, and R. Picard,
what we might see in real life deployment. We will continue “Person-alized multitask learning for predicting tomorrow’s mood,
stress, andhealth,”IEEE Transactions on Affective Computing, vol.
this work to accommodate more affective states and try to
11, pp. 200–213, 2020.
improve the subject independent model accuracy. A robust
[11] R. Li and Z. Liu, “Stress detection using deep neural
model will enable a better feedback system to smart networks,”BMCMedical Informatics and Decision Making, vol. 20,
controllers and enable adaptive human computer/ human p. 285, 2020.[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-020-
machine interactions to take place. 01299-4
[12] D. Cardone, D. Perpetuini, C. Filippini, E. Spadolini, L.
Mancini,A. M. Chiarelli, and A. Merla, “Driver stress state evaluation
by meansof thermal imaging: A supervised machine learning
approach basedon ecg signal,”Applied Sciences, vol. 10, 2020.
REFERENCES
[Online]. Available:https://www.mdpi.com/2076-3417/10/16/5673
[13] R. Castaldo, L. Montesinos, P. Melillo, C. James, and L.
[1] Changchun Liu, Karla Conn, Nilanjan Sarkar, Wendy Stone, Pecchia,“Ultra-short term hrv features as surrogates of short term
Physiology-based affect recognition for computer-assisted intervention hrv: a casestudy on mental stress detection in real life,”BMC Medical
of children with Autism Spectrum Disorder, International Journal of Informaticsand Decision Making, vol. 19, p. 12, 2019. [Online].
Available:https://doi.org/10.1186/s12911-019-0742-y