Title of Manuscript
Direction of slip modulates the perception of slip distance and slip speed
List of Authors
1. Ayesha Tooba Khan1 (ORCID: 0000-0002-0690-8517)
2. Deepak Joshi1,2 (ORCID: 0000-0002-2438-3232)
3. Biswarup Mukherjee1,2 (ORCID: 0000-0001-5528-3763)
Corresponding Author: Biswarup Mukherjee, Email: bmukherjee@cbme.iitd.ac.in
Affiliation
1: Centre for Biomedical Engineering, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India.
2: Department of Biomedical Engineering, All India Institute of Medical Sciences, New Delhi, India.
Acknowledgements:
The authors warmly thank all the participants who participated in the study and willingly gave us several
hours of their time. We also thank the Central Research Facility, Indian Institute of Technology Delhi,
New Delhi for providing 3D printing and Laser cutting services to develop the device.
Funding: This work was supported in part by the Science & Engineering Research Board, Department
of Science and Technology, Government of India through a Core Research Grant (CRG/2021/004967,
PI: B. Mukherjee) and by IIT Delhi through a New Faculty Seed Grant (PLN12/03BM, PI: B.
Mukherjee).
1Direction of slip modulates the perception of slip
distance and slip speed
Abstract
Purpose: The purpose of this study was to investigate the psychophysical understanding of the slip stimulus. We
emphasized that the perception of slip and its characteristics, such as slip distance and slip speed depend on the
interaction between slip direction, slip distance as well as slip speed.
Methods: We developed a novel slip induction device to simulate the artificial sense of slip. We conducted a
psychophysical experiment on eight healthy subjects. The experiment was designed to evaluate the effect of slip
direction on slip perception as well as on the perception of slip distance and slip speed. A series of psychophysical
questions were asked at the end of the slip stimulation to record the subjective responses of the participants. The
average success rate (%) was used to quantify the subject responses.
Results: We demonstrated that the perception of slip is independent of slip direction however, perception of slip
distance and slip speed are significantly modulated by slip direction. We also observed that a significant
interaction exists between slip distance and slip speed in the upward slip direction. It was also observed that the
average success rate was significantly different for various combinations of slip distance and slip speed in the
upward slip direction.
Conclusions: Our study clearly establishes a significant interaction between the slip direction, slip distance, and
slip speed for psychophysical understanding of the perception of slip distance and slip speed.
Keywords: Object slippage, Psychophysics, Slip perception, Slip direction, Slip induction device, Prehensile
grasp
I. Introduction
The sense of touch and the ability to perceive object slippage involve complex interactions between sensory
receptors, neural pathways, and the central nervous system (CNS), forming a closed-loop control system. It relies
on both the forward kinematics of the musculoskeletal system as well as the sensing mechanisms of the
somatosensory system. Thus, able-bodied individuals modulate grip force during object manipulation according
to the somatosensory feedback from the fingertips and the proprioceptive feedback from muscle spindles adapting
based on the frictional condition between the fingertips and the object [1]. However, during object slippage, an
involuntary response initiated by the spinal cord comes into action. This response is faster than voluntary
corrective action as it bypasses the brain while initiating the corrective motor command. On the other hand,
individuals with neuromuscular deficits, such as those with upper limb amputation, paralysis following spinal
cord injury, or stroke, may not be able to initiate fast, involuntary reactions due to disruptions in efferent and
afferent CNS volleys, leading to object slippage due to improper modulation of the grip force [2]. This establishes
the importance of slip detection as well as slip perception while considering the slip characteristics such as slip
direction, slip speed, and slip distance to apply the appropriate corrective measures in the artificial closed loop
system of individuals with neuromuscular deficits to prevent object slippage.
Detection and perception of slip has been an integral research arena explored in various neurophysiological,
biomechanical, and psychophysical studies. Previous research has shown that Pacinian corpuscles are mainly
responsible for encoding the intensity of frictional forces for the detection of slip. In contrast, Meissner’s
corpuscles, Merkel’s cells, and Ruffini endings play a crucial role in determining the slip direction. A recent study
demonstrated a fast, automatic coupling arising between the slip sensation and the arm response when the arm
was moved in the slip direction [3]. In the same study, fast feedback responses arising from slip stimuli were
significantly different for slip stimuli with different slip speeds having the same slip distance but not for slip
stimuli with different slip distances having the same slip speed. In tandem with the neurophysiological basis of
slip detection, researchers have also investigated the biomechanical deformation at the fingertips during tangential
loading in different directions, which exhibited complex mechanics. An increased tangential force led to a reduced
contact area between the surface and the fingertip, thereby suggesting the nonlinear stiffening of the skin [4]. The
2temporal evolution of surface strain revealed strain wave patterns propagating from the peripherals towards the
centre of the contact area [5]. Various slip stages have also been explored quantitatively using stick ratio and how
the central nervous system perceives them to modulate the grip force [6]. Delhaye et al. also studied the activity
of single tactile afferents as a response to slip using microneurography and mapped their response with surface
deformations at the fingertips[7]. They found dominant contributions of Meissners’ corpuscles in perceiving
compressive strain rates and, hence, detecting the partial slips that can modulate grip force during object
manipulation [7]. André et al. investigated the effect of skin hydration on fingertip dynamics during various slip
stages. They found a linear relationship between the stick ratio and the load force, while the grip force was found
to be more unstable under dry skin conditions [8]. Additionally, a systematic psychophysical investigation of how
individuals perceive and respond to slip events is crucial for exploring the cognitive and subjective dimensions
involved in slip perception. Although a very limited number of psychophysical studies have been done to
understand slip perception, these studies have revealed that the perception of slip depends upon slip characteristics
such as surface texture [9], slip speed, slip distance, and slip direction [6, 9]. For example, horizontal slip direction
(lateral-medial or medial-lateral) viz., slip in the transverse plane has been found to be significantly impacting the
subjects’ responses to slip perception by Srinivasan et al. [9] whereas, a recent study by Barrea et al. shows no
significant effect of horizontal slip stimulation was observed by Barrea et al. [6].
Based on this study, we envisaged that it is not only the slip direction but rather the interaction between the slip
direction, slip distance and slip speed which determines the perception of the slip at the higher-order cognitive
levels. It further raises a pertinent question of whether a slip distance and a slip speed are perceived identically in
both the slip directions. Moreover, no studies were found to investigate either the neurophysiological or the
psychophysical behaviour of the slip perception in the vertical slip direction, which closely mimics the real-life
scenario of object slippage from our hands. Additionally, all the studies done in the past to either study slip
perception [6] or slip detection [4, 7, 9] have used either the pinch grasp or the single index finger. However, in
everyday life, we usually use prehension grip to perform activities of daily living. Therefore, it is crucial to
investigate the psychophysical, neuromuscular, or biomechanical manifestation of object slippage using a
prehension grasp. In this work, we developed a slip induction device capable of simulating the artificial sense of
object slippage in the vertical direction (upwards and downwards) while the participant holds on to the grasping
plates of the device using a prehension grip. We conducted a psychophysical experiment with able-bodied
individuals to develop a cognitive understanding of the interaction between the slip direction, slip distance and
slip speed. Participants were provided with either an upward or a downward slip stimulus. We have considered
five different slip distances and slip speeds in upward as well as downward directions, thereby giving fifty unique
combinations of slip stimuli. Thus, our research provides the first investigation of the psychophysical behaviour
of interaction between slip speeds, slip distances and slip direction during object manipulation.
II. Materials and Methods
Our study aims to investigate the influence of slip speed, distance, and direction on the perception of object slip.
We hypothesized that:
A: There is no significant effect of slip direction on slip perception.
B: There is a significant effect of slip direction on the perception of magnitudes of slip distance and slip speed.
C: The interaction between slip distance and slip speed significantly affects the perception of magnitudes of slip
distance and slip speed.
The following sections describe the experimental setup and analysis to test the hypotheses stated above.
A. Participants
Eight healthy human participants (aged 27.25±4.83, six males, two females) with no history of neuromuscular
disorder, surgical intervention in the upper extremity, or physical or cognitive impairment were recruited to
perform the psychophysics experiment to perceive the artificial sense of object slippage. All the participants
reported to be right hand dominant and had normal or corrected to normal vision. The Institute Ethics Committee
3at the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi approved all experimental procedures (Ref no: 2021/P052). All
participants provided informed consent to participate in the experiment.
B. Design and development of slip induction device
We have developed the slip induction device (SID) shown in Figure 1. (b), which was used to simulate the artificial
sense of object slippage. The device is a linear actuator driven by a stepper motor (NEMA17, 4.8 kg-cm)
controlled by a two-phase hybrid stepper motor driver (TB6600HG, Toshiba Corp., Japan) with a current of 2.0
A/phase and 32 micro-step mode. The device is equipped with the force measurement assembly comprising the
four load cells to measure the load and the grip forces exerted by the fingers and the thumb on either side of the
grasping plates. Grasping plates constructed from transparent acrylic sheets are attached to the load cells on one
side while the subject has to grasp the other side during the experiment. The grip aperture of the device is
approximately 60 mm. An optical quadrature rotary encoder (3806-OPTI-600-AB-OC, Orange, China) was
coupled to the stepper motor to measure the rotational speed of the SID. A microcontroller (Teensy 3.2, PJRC
INC., USA) development board is used to control the overall mechanism of the device and communicate with a
PC in real time. Custom-designed parts, including the base holding the stepper motor, the top holding the encoder,
the grasping plates carriage, the grasping plate mounts, and the limit switch holder of the SID, were rapid
prototyped using fused deposition modelling 3D printer (Motion System and Tool Changer, E3D, UK).
C. Development of software interface
We developed a MATLAB app-based user interface (MATLAB 2023b, The MathWorks, Inc., USA) to conduct
the experiment using the SID. The front end of the interface had the experimenter console and the user console.
The demographics of the participants were recorded at the experimenter console. Then a familiarization session
comprising 11 command sequences was given to the participant to allow the participant to be acquainted with the
interface. Before starting the session, the device was homed to its zero vertical position. Then, baseline data from
the four load cells during the idle state (when the participant has not grasped the grasping plates of the device)
was recorded for 20 s during the visualisation of grip force. The experimenter manually commenced the trials
after the completion of the familiarization session. The interface was programmed to randomize the sequence of
the stimuli presented to the user during each block. Each trial had three phases, viz., the calibration phase, the slip
simulation phase, and the perceptual judgement phase, as shown in Figure 1. (d). During the calibration phase,
the user console showed the instantaneous grip force values exerted by the participant while grasping the device
(Refer Figure 1. (c)). This was done to maintain a standardized grip force at the time of slip stimulation to avoid
any bias arising due to different grip forces exerted by the participant on the grasping plates. After each trial,
psychophysics questions would be posed to the participant.
D. Experimental Paradigm
To test the hypotheses, we designed the experiment protocol to assess the effect of slip direction on the slip
perception as well as the slip characteristics, viz., slip distance and slip speed. We considered five values of slip
distance from 2-10 mm in increments of 2 mm and five values for slip speed from 2-10 mm/s in increments of 2
mm/s. This resulted in twenty-five unique combinations of slip distance and slip speed forming the command
sequence to be given to the SID, as shown in Figure 1. (d). The SID was programmed to simulate the slip
alternatively in the upward direction and then in the downward direction with the same slip characteristics. It is
important to note that slip direction was not randomized to enable comparison of the same slip stimulus between
upward and downward directions. Then, the psychophysical questions were asked to compare the slip distance
and slip speed of the current and previous trials. Additionally, six catch trials, with a duration of 5 seconds each,
were added to ensure no learning effects. The catch trials were interleaved such that the first and the last trials
were always catch trials. Thus, effectively, there were 56 randomised trials (2 directions x 5 slip distance x 5 slip
speed and six catch trials) forming one command sequence for one block. Four uniquely randomised command
sequences were generated for four blocks to minimize ordering effects.
The participant was required to be seated comfortably in a chair with their dominant hand resting on the padded
armrest and the forearm of the participant as restrained using Velcro bands as shown in Figure 1. (a). The
participant was instructed to hold the grasping plates of the SID such that the angle subtended by the long axis of
4the humerus and the long axis of the radius in the sagittal plane was maintained at 135°. To avoid biased
Figure 1. (a) Experimental setup showing the participant performing the task on the slip inducing device (SID). (b) The enlarged view of the
SID showing the load cell, linear stage, and grasping apparatus. (c) The enlarged view of the user console during the calibration process
showing the target force and the user exerted force reading. (d) Generation of randomized command sequence for various combinations of
slip speeds and distances. (e) Psychophysical questions asked from the participant during the perceptual judgement phase.
psychophysical responses due to the visual or auditory cues arising from the movement or mechanical noise of
the stepper motor, the visual feedback of the device to the participant was occluded with a black curtain between
the monitor and the device.
Auditory feedback of the device to the participant was minimized by playing white noise in the headphones (Bose
QuietComfort 25, Bose Corp., USA) with active noise cancellation. The task was performed on a PC (Windows
10, 64-bit, core i7 CPU, 3.2 GHz processor with 16 GB RAM) running the interface described in the previous
section. In each trial, there were three phases: the calibration phase, the slip simulation phase, and the perceptual
judgement phase. During the calibration phase, the participant was asked to maintain the grip force exerted by the
fingers between 1.5±0.1 N for 125 ms. This was done to allow the user to prepare for the oncoming stimulus if
and to avoid any bias in slip perception arising because of the difference in the initial grip force of the participant.
If the participant succeeded in maintaining this force within 6 s, the trial proceeded to the slip simulation phase;
otherwise, the trial was marked as a failed trial. The visual feedback of the instantaneous grip force along with the
target force bounds was provided to the participant during the calibration phase. Following successful calibration,
the participants were presented with a slip stimulus by the SID. At the end of each successful trial during the
perceptual judgement phase, the participant was asked the following questions:
Q1: Did you feel the slip?
Q2: Was the current slip distance larger/same/smaller compared to the previous slip distance?
Q3: Was the current slip speed higher/same/lower compared to the previous slip speed?
Q2 and Q3 were asked only if an affirmative response was recorded for Q1. The entire flow of the questions
conditional to specific responses is shown in the flow chart shown in Figure 1. (e). After each block, the
participant was provided a rest of 10 min. The total duration of the study was approximately 3 hrs.
E. Performance evaluation:
In each block, a total of 56 unique stimuli were presented to each participant. Thus, for each unique stimulus,
there were four responses recorded during the four blocks. We analyzed the responses of the participants to the
perceptual judgment questions and compared them to the presented stimulus. The percentage of trials for which
5the participant responded correctly for each unique stimulus was considered as the success rate of the participant
corresponding to that stimulus.
𝑆𝑢𝑐𝑐𝑒𝑠𝑠 𝑟𝑎𝑡𝑒=
!"##$%& #$()"*($( +* ",# ($((+"*(
×100 %
-"&./ *,01$# "2 ($((+"*(
The success rate for eight participants was averaged across the participants, and color-coded plots were plotted
for visual understanding of the outcomes. The color intensity reflects the average success rate mapped
corresponding to a particular slip distance (mm) and slip speed (mm/s). The standard deviation resulting from
average participants’ responses is mentioned over the corresponding cell of the color-coded matrix plot. The
analysis was performed in a custom-developed script in MATLAB.
F. Statistical analysis
We performed a three-way repeated measures analysis of variance (ANOVA) to determine if a statistically
significant three-way interaction exists between the slip direction, slip distance, and slip speed on the perception
of slip, perception of slip distance, and perception of slip speed. The test was performed with the alternative that
there exists the effect of slip direction on the perception of slip distance and the slip speed but not on the perception
of slip. We further performed the follow-up tests (simple two-way interactions and simple-simple main effects) if
a significant three-way interaction was found between the independent variables, viz., slip direction, slip distance,
and slip speed. We considered the Greenhouse-Geisser correction if Mauchley’s Test of sphericity showed a
violation of the assumption of sphericity in any case. All statistical analyses were performed using IBM SPSS
Statistics (Version 28.0, IBM Corp, Armonk, USA).
III. Results
The participant was provided with a slip stimulus having specific slip characteristics (slip distance and slip speed)
first in the upward direction, then in the downward direction with the same slip characteristics for two consecutive
trials. If the participant succeeded in maintaining the grip force within the prescribed range of 1.5±0.2 N for a
duration of 125 ms within 6 s, slip simulation began, followed by the psychophysical questions posed to the
participant, thereby making it a successful trial. The average percentage of successful trials for eight participants
was 88.62±12.1 %. After each trial, the participant had to respond if they felt a slip during the slip stimulation
phase. The average success rate corresponding to various slip distances and slip speeds for the participants’
responses to this question is shown in Figure 2. (a and b) for upward and downward slips, respectively. If the
participant's response to the above question was ‘yes’, he/she was further asked to differentiate the magnitudes of
slip distance and slip speed of the current trial from the previous trial. The average success rate corresponding to
various slip distances and slip speeds for the perception of difference in slip distances is shown in Figure 2. (c and
d), while Figure 2. (e and f) show the average success rate for the perception of difference in slip speeds. The
average success rate mentioned corresponding to 0 mm slip distance and 0 mm/s slip speed is the average
participants’ response for the six catch trials. For ease of representation, we will report the intext results in the
following format: average success rate ± standard deviation (slip distance (mm), slip speed (mm/s)). For example,
for catch trials, the average success rate will be reported as 95.8±8.1% (0 mm, 0 mm/s).
I) Effect of slip direction on the perception of slip
To validate our first hypothesis, we analyzed the participants’ responses to the first psychophysics question, i.e.,
Q1. Slip stimuli in the upward direction resulted in higher average success rates except for slip stimuli with
smallest slip speed of 2mm/s (90.6±18.6% (4mm,2mm/s), 93.8±11.6% (2mm,2mm/s)) and with largest slip
distance (10mm) having moderate slip speed of 6mm/s (90.6±12.9% (10mm,6mm/s)). For the downward slip
direction, Figure 2. (b) shows that the perception slip was diminished for smaller slip distances and lower slip
speeds (2mm/s and 4mm/s) (90.6±18.6% (2mm,2mm/s), 87.5±18.9% (4mm,2mm/s), and 90.6±18.6%
(4mm,4mm/s)) as compared to slip stimuli with higher distances and speeds except for one slip stimulus where
the average success rate was found to be lowest (81.2±17.7% (10mm,6mm/s)).
Moreover, as evident from Figure 3., the overall average success rate, i.e., average success rate for all slip
distances and slip speeds taken together, for perception of slip in the upward direction was found to be 98.38±2.87
%, while for the downward direction, it was found to be 95.38±4.34 %. The three-way repeated measures ANOVA
6reveals that the three-way interaction between the slip direction, slip distance and slip speed was not statistically
significant for the perception of slip (F (16,112)= 0.597, p = 0.881).
Figure 2. Heatmaps showing the average success rate for the perception of slip (a and b), perception of slip distance (c and d), and perception
of slip speed (e and f). The top row corresponds to the stimulus in the upward direction, and the bottom row corresponds to the downward
direction. The average success rate for eight participants is depicted by the color-intensity, and the numerical values mentioned on each cell
are the average success rate ± standard deviation.
II) Effect of slip direction on the perception of slip distance and slip speed
Our second hypothesis was validated based on the participant’s responses to the second and third psychophysics
questions (Q2 and Q3). Firstly, considering the user responses to Q2, Figure 2. (c and d) show the ability of the
user to correctly identify differences in slip distance for various combinations of distance and speed stimuli in the
upward and downward directions. In the upward slip direction, as observed from Figure 2. (c), participants found
perceiving the differences in slip distance more challenging with the lowest slip speed (2mm/s) compared to higher
slip speeds (4-10 mm/s). This is evident from the average success rates for the lowest slip speeds which were
found to be 34.4±22.9 % (4mm,2mm/s), 40.6±18.6 % (6mm,2mm/s), and 50.0±13.4% (8mm, 2mm/s). Slip
distances of 2 mm, 6 mm and 8 mm demonstrate relatively higher discriminability of 93.8±11.6 % (2mm,10mm/s),
93.8±11.6 % (6mm,4mm/s), and 93.8±11.6% (8mm,6mm/s) respectively compared to other slip distances and slip
speeds combination in upward direction. The lowest average success rate found for perception of slip distance is
28.1±16% (8mm,8mm/s). On the other hand, considering responses to Q3, Figure 2. (e and f) illustrate the ability
to discriminate between differences in slip speed for various combinations of distance and speed stimuli in the
upward and downward directions. Results indicate a higher incidence of misidentified trials for smaller distances
irrespective of the speeds, with average success rates of 34.4±18.6% (2mm,4mm/s), 46.9±28.1% (4mm,8mm/s),
46.9±8.8% (4mm,10mm/s), and 50.0±18.9% (4mm,2mm/s) in the upward slip direction.
In general, Figure 2. reveals that the average success rates are higher in the upward slip direction as compared
to the downward slip direction, whereas the standard deviations are larger in the downward slip direction as
compared to the upward slip direction. Furthermore, as observed from Figure 3., the overall average success rate
for the perception of slip distance and slip speed in the upward slip direction was found to be 68.5±19.16 % and
65±14.12 %, respectively, while the overall average success rate corresponding to the perception of slip distance
(47.88±9.05 %), as well as slip speed (46.88±7.49 %), was drastically reduced in the downward slip direction.
Moreover, the three-way interaction between the slip direction, slip distance and slip speed was found to be
statistically significant for the perception of difference in slip distances (F (16,112) = 2.287, p = 0.006) and slip
speeds (F (16,112) = 2.739, p = 0.001) which suggest that the two-way interactions between slip distance and slip
speed are different in the upward and the downward direction.
7Figure 3. Comparison of average success rates in the perception of absolute slip, perceptual judgement of slip distance and slip speed. Results
from three-way repeated measures ANOVA show statistically significant interaction for the perception of slip distance and slip speed in the
upward and downward slip direction.
III) Perception of slip distance and slip speed in the upward slip direction
We further investigated if there are any statistically significant simple two-way interactions between slip distance
and slip speed for both the slip directions, viz., upward and downward. The simple two-way interaction between
slip distance and slip speed was found to be statistically significant for the perception of difference in slip distances
(F (16,112) = 8.679, p < 0.001) and slip speeds (F (16,112) = 3.764, p < 0.001) of the current and previous slip
stimuli in the upward slip direction but not in the downward slip direction (F (16,112) = 1.194, p = 0.284 for slip
distance difference and F (16,112) = 1.214, p = 0.268 for slip speed difference). This further opens the avenue to
investigate the effect of slip speed on the average success rate of perception of slip distance and slip speed for
each slip distance in the upward slip direction.
IV) Interaction between slip distances and slip speeds in the upward slip direction
Table I: Interaction between slip distances and slip speeds in the upward slip direction.
Slip distance (mm) Perception of slip distance (α = 0.05) Perception of slip speed (α = 0.05)
2 F (4,28) = 2.956, p = 0.037 F (1.868,13.078) = 11.162, p = 0.002
4 F (4,28) = 11.236, p < 0.001 F (4,28) = 6.487, p <0.001
6 F (4,28) = 7.702, p < 0.001 F (4,28) = 0.495, p = 0.739
8 F (4,28) = 29.870, p < 0.001 F (4,28) = 4.088, p = 0.010
10 F (4,28) = 5.957, p = 0.001 F (4,28) = 0.697, p = 0.601
We determined the simple simple main effects to see if slip speed led to different average success rates at different
slip distances in the upward slip direction. The average success rate for the perception of slip distance was found
to have a statistically significant simple simple main effect of slip speed for all slip distances (Refer Table I)
statistically significant simple simple main effect of slip speed for all slip distances except 6mm (F (1,7) = 0.322,
p = 0.588) and 10mm (F (1,7) = 0.876, p = 0.380).
8To further investigate which slip speeds differed from each other on their mean average success rate, simple
simple comparisons between different slip speeds were performed. All possible pairwise comparisons were run
between different slip speeds for all slip distances for the perception of slip distance as well as the perception of
slip speed. Statistically significant pairwise comparisons have been reported in supplementary information (SI
Table I and SI Table II). These results indicate a significant mean difference in average success rate at all slip
distances for the perception of slip distance; however, for the perception of slip speed, slip distances of 2 mm and
8mm exhibited a significant mean difference in average success rate (Refer supplementary information).
IV. Discussion
In this study, we investigated how humans perceive slip in the vertical direction while using the prehension grip.
We designed the experiment to determine the effect of slip direction on the perception of slip, slip distance, and
slip speed. In essence, we investigated if the same slip distance and slip speed are perceived differently in the
upward and downward slip direction. We also examined the interaction existing between slip directions, slip
distances, and slip speeds. We conducted a psychophysical experiment on eight healthy participants and recorded
their subjective responses, assessing their ability to perceive slips in upward and downward directions.
I) Perception of slip is independent of the slip direction.
We hypothesized based on existing literature [6], that the ability to perceive slip would not be affected by the slip
direction. Our experimental results confirmed our hypothesis that slip direction does not modulate the ability to
perceive slip. Although in our study, the slip was simulated in the vertical direction and the participant had grasped
the sliding plates of the device with a prehension grasp, the direction of the loading is similar to that of Delhaye
et al. [6], i.e., tangential to the finger ridges. This might have produced a similar sensation of the slip at the
fingertips and hence might have been perceived in a similar manner in both studies.
II) Slip direction modulates the perception of slip distance and slip speed
We also hypothesized that the same slip distance and slip speed will be perceived differently in the upward and
the downward slip direction. Our results have demonstrated that the perception of slip distance and slip speed are
significantly different in the upward and the downward direction. In essence, the downward slip seems to be more
unperceivable, irrespective of the magnitudes of the slip stimulus. Specifically, more unidentified downward slip
stimuli exist with lower slip speeds (2mm/s and 4mm/s) and smaller slip distances (2mm and 4mm) across
subjects. Moreover, there were more misidentified slip stimuli in the downward slip as compared to the upward
slip. Figure 2. also shows that the effect of direction is more prominent in the case of differentiating the magnitudes
of slip distance and slip speed of the current and the previous stimulus intensities. Irrespective of the slip direction,
the participants seem to find more difficulty differentiating the slip speeds than the slip distances of the current
and the previous stimuli. The uncertainty of correct responses in differentiating the slip characteristics among the
participants is much higher in the case of a downward slip, as the standard deviation across the participants during
a downward slip is much higher than in an upward slip. In essence, the higher values of standard deviation across
the participants in the downward slip while differentiating the slip characteristics suggest that it was more difficult
for the participants to compare the slip characteristics due to variation in the direction. We believe that the
difference in perception of slip parameters for the downward direction could be due to three factors:
(1) Effect of gravity: According to our results, the perception of the slip speed and slip distance were accurate in
the upward direction but not in the downward direction. We believe that the perception in the downward direction
might have some implications for the gravitational effect. Toma et al. demonstrated that the internal
representations of gravity in normal and altered gravitational contexts are modulated depending on the input from
the mechanoreceptors [10]. They investigated the effect of spatial features of congruent and incongruent visual
feedback movement with the actual object displacement in the horizontal and vertical direction was investigated
thoroughly. They reported that the grip force was found to be affected by incongruent visual feedback in the
vertical direction, which suggests that spatial features of visual feedback motion predict the load force changes
[10]. In our setup, visual feedback of the movement was removed, which could have affected the ability to
discriminate similar stimuli in upward and downward directions.
(2) Differences in direction-based perception of cutaneous vibrations: Object interactions and slip produce
cutaneous vibrations that emanate from the point of contact and travel along the hand [11]. Pra et al. have found
9that the vibrations induced in the tangential direction are perceived more easily than the vibrations induced in the
normal direction [12]. Hence, the direction of skin stretch-induced due to the movement of the slip device could
have been perceived differently depending on the direction of propagation of the cutaneous vibrations.
(3) Limitations of experimental design: We believe that certain limitations are associated with the design of the
slip induction device and the experiment protocol. Our results have shown that slip perception in itself is
independent of the direction. We believe that the vibrations induced in the device due to motor movement provided
tactile cues to the participant during slip simulation. This might have led to biased responses for Q1, especially
for the smallest slip distances and lowest slip speeds. Also, we speculate that the participants might have
considered the duration of the slip stimulus as the deciding factor while responding to Q2 and Q3. Hence, smaller
distances with lower speeds might have been confused with larger distances with higher speeds. The participants’
response to Q1 was absolute, whereas they had to memorize the previous stimulus to compare it with the current
stimulus to respond to Q2 and Q3. This might have increased the uncertainty of the subjective responses. It would
be interesting to see if any significance of the previous stimulus exists in the current stimulus's responses.
Another important aspect of the experiment paradigm is that the stimulus with specific slip characteristics was
first provided in the upward direction and then in the downward direction. The results obtained from the
experiment have raised an obvious question: Would providing the slip stimulus with specific slip characteristics
first in the downward and then in the upward direction alter the results?
III) Future scope
As part of this study in future, we wish to investigate the neuromuscular as well as neurological manifestation of
slip perception and slip detection to further investigate and correlate the psychophysical findings. These studies
may lead to effective closed-loop control strategies for assistive devices for individuals with neuromuscular
deficits such as stroke and cerebral palsy.
Conclusions
The present study exhibited evidence that slip direction modulates the interaction between slip distance and slip
speed. It was found that the perception of slip is independent of slip direction, but the perception of slip distance
and slip speed does depend on slip direction. The novel contribution of the research includes understanding the
psychophysics of slip perception while considering various slip characteristics, viz., direction, distance, and speed.
This is the first study which simulates the vertical slip and explores the manifestation of slip on prehension grasp,
which closely mimics the real-life scenario. Our research further opens the avenue to investigate the effect of slip
direction alongside the associated neuromuscular synergies of prehension grasp.
References
1. Francomano MT, Accoto D, Guglielmelli E (2013) Artificial sense of slip - A review. IEEE Sens J.
https://doi.org/10.1109/JSEN.2013.2252890
2. Johansson RS (1992) Sensory-motor coordination during grasping and manipulative actions. Curr Opin
Neurobiol. https://doi.org/10.1016/0959-4388(92)90139-C
3. Carlos X, Hernandez-Castillo R, Maeda RS, et al (2020) Sensory information from a slipping object elicits a rapid
and automatic shoulder response. J Neurophysiol. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.00672.2019.-Hu
4. Thonnard J-L, Delhaye B, Lefèvre P (2014) Dynamics of fingertip contact during the onset of tangential slip.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2014.0698
5. Thonnard J-L, Delhaye B, Barrea A, et al (2016) Surface strain measurements of fingertip skin under shearing.
https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2015.0874
6. Barrea A, Delhaye BP, Lefèvre P, Thonnard JL (2018) Perception of partial slips under tangential loading of the
fingertip. Sci Rep 8:1–8. https://doi.org/10.1038/s41598-018-25226-w
7. Delhaye BP, Jarocka E, Barrea A, et al (2021) High-resolution imaging of skin deformation shows that afferents
from human fingertips signal slip onset. Elife 10:1–21. https://doi.org/10.7554/ELIFE.64679
108. André T, Lévesque V, Hayward V, et al (2011) Effect of skin hydration on the dynamics of fingertip gripping
contact. J R Soc Interface 8:1574–1583. https://doi.org/10.1098/rsif.2011.0086
9. Srinivasan MA, Whitehouse JM, LaMotte RH (1990) Tactile detection of slip: Surface microgeometry and
peripheral neural codes. J Neurophysiol 63:1323–1332. https://doi.org/10.1152/jn.1990.63.6.1323
10. Toma S, Caputo V, Santello M (2020) Visual Feedback of Object Motion Direction Influences the Timing of Grip
Force Modulation During Object Manipulation. Front Hum Neurosci 14:198.
https://doi.org/10.3389/FNHUM.2020.00198/BIBTEX
11. Shao Y, Hayward V, Visell Y (2016) Spatial patterns of cutaneous vibration during whole-hand haptic
interactions. Proc Natl Acad Sci U S A 113:4188–4193. https://doi.org/10.1073/pnas.1520866113
12. Pra Y De, Papetti S, Jarvelainen H, et al (2023) Effects of Vibration Direction and Pressing Force on Finger
Vibrotactile Perception and Force Control. IEEE Trans Haptics 16:23–32.
https://doi.org/10.1109/TOH.2022.3225714
Statements and Declaration
Funding
This work was supported in part by the Science & Engineering Research Board, Department of Science and
Technology, Government of India through a Core Research Grant (CRG/2021/004967, PI: B. Mukherjee) and by
IIT Delhi through a New Faculty Seed Grant (PLN12/03BM, PI: B. Mukherjee).
Competing interests
The authors declare that they have no known competing financial or non-financial interests that could have
appeared to influence the work reported in this paper.
Author contributions
All authors contributed to the study conception and design. Data collection and preparation were performed by
Ayesha Tooba Khan. Data analysis was performed by Ayesha Tooba Khan, Deepak Joshi and Biswarup
Mukherjee. The first draft of the manuscript was written by Ayesha Tooba Khan and, all authors commented on
previous versions of the manuscript. All authors read and approved the final manuscript.
Ethics approval
This study was performed in line with the principles of the Declaration of Helsinki. Approval was granted by the
Ethics Committee of the Indian Institute of Technology Delhi, New Delhi, India (Date. August 10, 2022. /No.
2021/P052).
Consent to publish
Informed consent was obtained from all individual participants included in the study.
Consent to participate
The authors affirm that human research participants provided informed consent for publication of the image in
Figure 1.
11