JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 1
Analyzing State of Operators and the Impact of
AI-Enhanced Decision Support in Control Rooms:
A Human-in-the-Loop Specialized Reinforcement
Learning Framework
Ammar N. Abbas*, Chidera W. Amazu, Joseph Mietkiewicz, Houda Briwa, Andres Alonzo Perez, Gabriele
Baldissone, Micaela Demichela, Georgios G. Chasparis, John D. Kelleher, and Maria Chiara Leva
Collaborative Intelligence for Safety-Critical systems (CISC)
ciscproject.eu
Abstract—In complex industrial and chemical process control and potentially compromising their ability to respond effec-
rooms, effective decision-making is crucial for safety and effi- tively, thus increasing the likelihood of human errors. To
ciency. The experiments in this paper evaluate the impact and
address this challenge, there is a need for a decision support
applications of an AI-based decision support system integrated
framework to assist operators in detecting and responding
intoanimprovedhuman-machineinterface,usingdynamicinflu-
encediagrams,ahiddenMarkovmodel,anddeepreinforcement to potential safety incidents. In this context, we present the
learning. The enhanced support system aims to reduce operator results of an experimental study in this paper to assess the
workload, improve situational awareness, and provide different effectiveness of an improved AI-based recommendation sys-
intervention strategies to the operator adapted to the current
teminaddressinginformationoverloadandmitigatingprocess
stateofboththesystemandhumanperformance.Suchasystem
abnormalities.
canbeparticularlyusefulincasesofinformationoverloadwhen
many alarms and inputs are presented all within the same time One of the objectives of the experiment is to ascertain
window,orforjunioroperatorsduringtraining.Acomprehensive whether the integration of the enhanced HMI that incorpo-
cross-dataanalysiswasconducted,involving47participantsand rates screen-based procedures along with an AI-based rec-
adiverserangeofdatasourcessuchassmartwatchmetrics,eye-
ommendation system can reduce operators’ workload and
tracking data, process logs, and responses from questionnaires.
enhance their situational awareness. This recommendation
The results indicate interesting insights regarding the effec-
tiveness of the approach in aiding decision-making, decreasing system utilizes a dynamic influence diagram in combination
perceivedworkload,andincreasingsituationalawarenessforthe withreinforcementlearning.Thesystemisdesignedtoidentify
scenarios considered. Additionally, the results provide valuable anomalies and provide operators with not only information
insights to compare differences between styles of information
about the deviation but also specific procedures to follow,
gathering when using the system by individual participants.
which are dynamically updated to reflect the current state of
These findings are particularly relevant when predicting the
overall performance of the individual participant and their the system. To test this framework, we employ a simulation
capacity to successfully handle a plant upset and the alarms of formaldehyde production and present various deviation
connected to it using process and human-machine interaction scenarios to participants. These participants are tasked with
logs in real-time. These predictions enable the development of
responding to these scenarios, with or without the assistance
more effective intervention strategies.
of the recommendation system. The aim is to compare the
Index Terms—Process safety, human-in-the-loop AI, AI-based operator groups that have the aid of the AI-enhanced recom-
recommendation system, deep reinforcement learning, hidden
mendationsystemwiththeonesthatdonot.Theeffectiveness
Markov models, dynamic influence diagrams, situational aware-
of the recommendation system is then assessed based on
ness, workload, human-machine interaction, eye tracking
its ability to aid participants in handling different scenarios.
To assess the system we use various data sources involving
I. INTRODUCTION quantitative,qualitative,andphysiologicalmeasurementssuch
IN today’s complex industrial setting and chemical process as questionnaires, an eye tracker, a smartwatch, and simulator
logs as shown in fig. 1. Initial findings indicate the potential
control rooms, operators frequently encounter complex
of an enhanced AI-based recommendation system to support
situations demanding rapid and precise decision-making. The
operatorsindecision-makingduringchallengingsituationsand
Human-Machine Interface (HMI) can overwhelm operators
to improve safety in industrial processes.
with excessive information, leading to information overload
The presentation of procedures to operators is a critical
*Correspondingauthor:ammar.abbas@scch.at aspectofthisresearch.Providingoperatorswithappropriately
ThispublicationistheresultoftheresearchdonealongtheCollaborative tailored and simplified procedures that adapt to the current
Intelligence for Safety-Critical systems (CISC) project that has received
state of the system has shown promising results in assisting
funding from the European Union’s Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation
ProgrammeundertheMarieSkłodowska-Curiegrantagreementno.955901. their work. This system’s interpretability and basis in expert
4202
beF
02
]IA.sc[
1v91231.2042:viXraJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 2
II. RELATEDWORKANDCONTRIBUTIONS
The review article by [2] emphasizes AI’s potential to
assistoperatorsinmakingpreciseandswiftdecisions,thereby
enhancing the safety of nuclear energy production. They also
investigate various causes of human errors in nuclear power
plants and assess how AI has been integrated into various
operatorsupportsystemstoaddresstheseerrors.Eightspecific
types of support systems are examined, including decision
support, sensor fault detection, operation validation, operator
monitoring,autonomouscontrol,predictivemaintenance,auto-
matedtextanalysis,andsafetyassessmentsystems.Highlight-
ingthesignificanceofhuman-autonomoussysteminteractions
Fig.1. Casestudy:simulatedcontrolroomenvironmentofaprocessindustry
in ensuring plant system performance and reliability, the re-
foralivinglab.
view addresses various human factors-related issues identified
in the literature. The authors argue that a crucial gap exists in
integrating the Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) strategy with both
knowledge are enhanced through the collaboration between
black-boxmodels,suchasDeepNeuralNetworks(DNN),and
the influence diagram and reinforcement learning. Such a
the white-box approach involving probabilistic modeling.
system holds particular advantages for operators dealing with
The authors in [3] also discuss the importance of prevent-
information overload and junior operators. Furthermore, to
ing human errors in nuclear power plants. They propose an
gain insights into human behavior and their intervention ap-
enhanced control room interface design and decision support
proachtheanalysisisperformedwithintheparticipantsofthe
system to enhance operational performance. Their methodol-
group that is provided with the AI-enhanced decision support
ogyinvolvesanalyzingoperators’cognitiveactivities,resulting
system. The cross-analysis compares the perception level and
in the development of two decision support systems for fault
interventionabilityoftheparticipantbasedonthesourcethey
diagnosis and operation validation.
target to gain information about the system such as the screen
The authors in [4] propose a framework, designed to im-
procedures, AI-based decision support, or both.
prove initial emergency responses in nuclear power plants.
Furthermore, the outcomes from these experiments and a The framework aims for agile, dynamic, and intuitive oper-
survey[1],whichinvolvedexpertsandstakeholderswhomight ation, seeking to reduce response time and operator workload
engage with the developed support system led to the develop- through automation and real-time risk assessment. Scenario
ment of an extension of the dynamic influence diagram-based tests demonstrate a 95% reduction in tasks and improved
reinforcementlearningframework.Thefocusisonproposinga efficiency. Despite these positive results, the authors acknowl-
Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) hierarchical framework for inter- edge limitations such as the reliance on rule-based logic,
pretable, specialized, and safe Deep Reinforcement Learning the importance of rigorous effectiveness verification, and the
(DRL) that can be employed in real-world safety-critical system’s narrow focus on early-stage emergencies. As the
industries.Thisextendedframeworkaimstopredicttheplant’s systemisframedonrule-basedlogic,therefore,itdoesnottake
state during process abnormalities from human-machine in- intoaccounttheuncertaintiesinvolvedintheenvironmentand
teraction and process logs, enabling improved intervention needs to reiterate the rules over time to adapt to the changing
strategies. Therefore, it can be used as a decision support tool environment.
duringthetrainingofjunioroperators,butalsoasaco-pilotto The experiments presented in [5] focus on a decision
support even experienced operators in situations where there support system designed for identifying abnormal operating
aretoomanyalarmsallarrivinginthesametimewindow.The procedures in nuclear power plants. The study involved 32
tool can further also take up the role of taking over control graduate students with backgrounds similar to new nuclear
and requesting approval to automate the recovery process. power plant operators. After undergoing training and qualifi-
The paper is structured as follows: In section II, we delve cationtests,participantsutilizedthesupportsysteminaformal
intotherelatedwork,outliningthecontributionsofthispaper. experiment.Theresultsshowedthatthesupportsystemsignifi-
MovingontosectionIII,wedefinetheframeworkusedforthe cantlyreducederrorsby25%,decreaseddecision-makingtime
AI-enhanced decision support system in the experiments and by 25%, and increased decision accuracy by 18%. Operators
its extended version for future enhancements. In section IV, usingthesystemmadefewererroneousdecisions,experienced
wepresenttheformulatedcasestudy,whichservesasthebasis reduced mental workload, and demonstrated a preference for
for data collection and analysis. The data collection process thesupportsystem.Thestudyalsohighlightedtheimportance
and details of the collected data are discussed in section V. of avoiding information overload to maintain decision quality.
Subsequently, section VI conducts an in-depth analysis of As a recommendation, the developed decision support system
the data, making comparisons between groups and within is suggested as a valuable training tool, offering enhanced
participantsfortheAI-supportedgroup.Finally,insectionVII, performance and reducing mental burden for operators.
we validate the extended framework using results from the An experimental study was performed in [6], where the
experiments and elucidate its application capabilities. authors discussed the challenges faced by human operators inJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 3
processindustriesandexploredthepotentialofusingadigital recommendations, along with specific values tailored to the
twin to enhance their performance. The authors introduced current circumstances.
a cognitive architecture using eye tracker data that can be
1) Dynamic Influence Diagram (DID): A dynamic influ-
used to create a human digital twin and explained how it
ence diagram (DID) [7], [8] is a graphical decision analysis
could be applied to process industries. They evaluated its
tool that extends traditional influence diagrams by incorpo-
performance by comparing it to control room operators in
rating a time dimension. DIDs represent decision problems
a disturbance rejection task, involving 11 participants. The
through nodes such as decision, chance, and value nodes,
authors collected process data, operator actions, and eye-
connected by directed arcs that illustrate causal relationships
trackingdata.Theresultsshowedthatthehumandigitaltwin’s
and dependencies. The inclusion of a time element allows the
performance was generally in agreement with that of human
modelingofevolvingsystems.Keycomponentsincludeutility
operators. The digital twin successfully diagnosed the cause
functions, decision rules, and the application of probabilistic
of the abnormality and initiated necessary control actions.
links to account for uncertainty. DIDs enable scenario and
It focused on areas directly related to the disturbance and
sensitivity analysis, offering insights into decision-makers’
employed a proactive monitoring strategy using the trend of
strategies and the robustness of outcomes. The use of a
the process variables.
dynamic influence diagram within this framework and ex-
periment is described in detail by authors in [9], [10]. The
Contributions definition of an influence diagram is as follows:
This paper contributes by conducting an exploratory data
Definition 1. Discrete Limited Memory Influence Diagram
analysisonexperimentscarriedoutwithinasimulatedcontrol
[11] Given an influence diagram denoted as N =
room environment. The specific focus is on comparing two
(X,G,P,U), it comprises the following components:
groups: one utilizing an AI-enhanced decision support system
(i) A Directed Acyclic Graph (DAG) G = (V,E), where V
based on dynamic influence diagrams and deep reinforcement
represents the set of nodes and E is the set of directed
learning, and the other not using such a system. Addition-
edges, indicating dependency relations and information
ally, we delve into the analysis of human decision-making
flow.
preferences for the group using the AI-enhanced decision
(ii) A collection of discrete random variables X and deci-
support system and their associated consequences. Moreover, C
sion variables X , such that the total set of variables X
Our paper addresses a significant gap in the existing literature D
is the union of these two sets, i.e., X =X ∪X . These
by investigating the synergies among various models and the D C
variables are represented by the nodes in G.
impactofaHuman-in-the-Loop(HITL)AI-enhanceddecision
support framework, specifically integrating dynamic influence (iii) A set of conditional probability distributions P, where
diagrams, a hidden Markov model, and Deep Reinforcement each distribution P(X v|X pa(v)) is associated with a
Learning (DRL). We leverage DRL for its adept handling of discrete random variable X v given its parent variables
uncertainties and adaptability to dynamic environments. The X pa(v) in the graph.
objectiveistoincorporatehumanstatesandactionstoenhance (iv) A set of utility functions U, with each utility function
decision-making interventions. In contrast to prior research, u(X pa(v))associatedwithanodevinthesubsetofutility
ourproposedframeworkuniquelyemphasizesautomatedinter- nodes V U ⊆V.
ventionstrategiesanddecision-supportcontrolsduringprocess
To determine the decision option with the highest expected
abnormalities. This automation is triggered when the system
utility,wecalculatetheexpectedutilityforeachdecisionalter-
identifies increased task loads for humans or predicts a high
native. Let A be a decision variable with options a ,...,a ,
1 m
probabilityofhumanfailureduringabnormalsituations.While
H ahypothesiswithstatesh ,...,h ,andϵasetofobserva-
1 n
our current research paper does not explicitly delve into the
tionsasevidence.Theprobabilityofeachhypothesisoutcome
creation of a human digital twin, it lays the groundwork for
h andtheexpectedutilityofeachactiona canbecomputed.
j i
such advancements. The results presented here serve as a
The utility for an outcome (a ,h ) is denoted as U(a ,h ),
i j i j
foundation for further enhancements in the framework.
where U(·) is the utility function. The expected utility for
action a is given by:
i
III. FRAMEWORK
n
A. Preliminaries (cid:88)
EU(a )= U(a ,h )×P(h |ϵ) (1)
i i j j
TheAI-basedrecommendationsystemleveragesDeepRein- j=1
forcement Learning (DRL) and a dynamic influence diagram.
Here, P(·) represents the belief in hypothesis H given
DRLisemployedinanonlinesetting,whereitlearnsthrough
evidence ϵ. The utility function U(·) quantifies the decision
interaction with the environment and observation of process
maker’s preferences numerically.
behavior based on its actions. The dynamic influence diagram
The optimal decision is made using the principle of maxi-
is constructed using expert knowledge, which includes the
mum expected utility, selecting an option a∗ such that:
physical equations governing the behavior of the system
components. These two models are combined to detect de-
viations in the process and provide the operator with precise a∗ =argmax EU(a ) (2)
ai∈A iJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 4
Dynamic influence diagrams extend traditional influence d) State: WithintheframeworkofaPartiallyObservable
diagrams by incorporating discrete time elements, effectively Markov Decision Process, relying solely on the observed
creating a time-sliced model. This approach involves repli- state may be insufficient due to inherent partial observability
cating a static network structure across multiple time slices, constraints.Toovercomethischallenge,ourresearchemploys
where each slice represents the system at a specific point in atupleconsistingofthehistoryofexpertactionsconcatenated
time. The progression of the system over time is captured with the history of process variables. This history extends up
through connections between variables across these different toalengthdenotedas”l,”asillustratedineq.(7).Theselected
time slices. Essentially, a dynamic model can be visualized as historicalinformationincludesthecurrentstateattime”t”and
a series of static models placed sequentially, each depicting the preceding trajectory at time ”t - 1”.
the system at a distinct time step. The links between these
time steps illustrate the impact of the system’s past state s :=(cid:10)(cid:0) y ,aE (cid:1) ,...,(cid:0) y ,aE (cid:1)(cid:11) (7)
t t−l t−l−1 t t−1
on its present state. In our experiment, we utilized a finite
e) Action: In the context of the TD3 architecture, the
horizon dynamic influence diagram, which means our model
actor-network outputs a continuous action parameterized by a
was designed to consider a specific, limited number of time
neural network. The actor’s output is denoted as:
steps into the future.
2) Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL): Deep Reinforce- π θ(s)=µ(s) (8)
ment Learning (DRL) [12] combines deep neural networks
Here,µ(s)isthedeterministicpolicyfunction,representing
with reinforcement learning, offering an approach for training
the mean of the distribution over the continuous action space.
tomakesequentialdecisionsincomplexanddynamicsettings.
f) Reward: In a disturbance rejection scenario, the agent
In Process control and its optimization, where traditional
seeks to determine an optimal policy that minimizes tracking
control techniques may struggle to address the complexities
errorandstabilizestheprocesswhiledeviatingminimallyfrom
and uncertainties inherent in real-world processes, DRL has
the optimal set point. This objective is incorporated into the
proven to be beneficial [13]. Mathematically, reinforcement
DRL agent through a reward function (r) or a cost function
learning involves Markov Decision Processes (MDPs), where
(-r), such as the negative l1-norm of the set-point error, as
anagentinteractswithanenvironmentbytakingactionsbased
expressed in eq. (9).
on its current state, receiving rewards, and updating its policy
tomaximizecumulativefuturerewards.TheQ-valuefunction, my
denoted as Q(s, a), represents the expected cumulative reward r(cid:0) s t,aA t ,s t+1(cid:1) =−(cid:88) |y i,t−y i,sp| (9)
oftakingaction’a’instate’s’andfollowingtheoptimalpolicy i=1
thereafter. The Bellman equation, a fundamental concept in
3) Specialized Reinforcement Learning Agent: A Special-
reinforcement learning, expresses the recursive relationship
ized Reinforcement Learning Agent (SRLA) integrates the
between Q-values. Authors in [14] have delved into the
strengths of probabilistic modeling and Deep Reinforcement
application of DRL in the process control environment.
Learning (DRL) as shown in fig. 2, proposed in [16]. SRLA
enables the DRL agent to specialize in specific scenarios
Q(s,a)=E[r+γmaxQ(s′,a′)|s,a] (3) withintheenvironment,particularlyincasesinvolvingprocess
a′
abnormalities. This specialization enhances training efficiency
a) Twin Delayed Deep Deterministic Policy Gradient and reduces the need for excessive data. In the associated
(TD3) Architecture: Twin Delayed DDPG (TD3) architecture figure, P(s t) denotes the probability of a particular state,
[15], proposed to tackle challenges like overestimation bias. x∗(s t) signifies the specialized state where the DRL agent
TD3 serves as the foundational DRL architecture in our is activated, and the system state S is filtered to extract
framework, incorporating twin Q-value estimators to alleviate information about that specific state. The recommended op-
overestimation errors and a delayed policy update mechanism timal control strategy π is then presented to the operator. An
forstabilizingthelearningprocess.TheTD3algorithmfollows instantiation of the framework was adapted for a case study
theactor-criticapproach,wheretheactordecidesandthecritic in process control and optimization, as presented in [17]. The
evaluates the policy. actor and critic updates are modified as shown in eq. (10)
where s∗ = desired state identified through the probabilistic
b) Critic Update:
model.
(cid:20) (cid:21)
1
L(θ Q)=E (s,a,r,s′)∼D 2(Q 1-target(s,a)−y)2 (4) L∗ (θ )=−Q(cid:0) s∗,(cid:0) aE +aA(s∗ |θ )(cid:1) |θ (cid:1)
A π π Q
L∗ (θ )= 1(cid:0) R−Q(cid:0) s∗,(cid:0) aE +aA(s∗ |θ )(cid:1) |θ (cid:1)(cid:1)2 (10)
Q Q 2 π Q
y =r+γ(1−d)minQ (s′,π (s′)) (5)
i=1,2
i-target target Furthermore, the framework was extended as an AI-
enhancedrecommendationsystemforprocesscontrol,wherea
c) Actor Update: Multi-Specialized Reinforcement Learning Agent (M-SRLA)
configuration was employed. In this setting, multiple agents
L(θ )=−E [Q (s,π(s))] (6) operate independently, with only a specific agent activated to
π s∼D 1JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 5
Fig.2. SpecializedReinforcementLearningAgent(SRLA).
Source:[16]
offer the optimal control strategy when a process abnormality
is detected through the influence diagram as presented by [9].
4) HiddenMarkovModel(HMM): HiddenMarkovModels
(HMMs) [18] are probabilistic models widely used for mod-
Fig. 3. Human-Centered Specialized Reinforcement Learning Agent for
eling sequential data in diverse fields. They consist of a set of Safety-CriticalSystems.Thedashedarearepresentstheframeworkdeveloped
hidden states, each associated with a probability distribution in[9],[10].
over observable outcomes. The transitions between hidden
states are governed by probabilities, and at each state, an ob-
servation is emitted based on another probability distribution. the information of the process variables as well as the human
HMMs are characterized by their ability to capture temporal interaction with the process. This framework further increases
dependencies. A similar hybrid approach of combining HMM the capabilities in terms of the intervention strategies such
with DRL was used by authors in [19] and [17], where as using it during the operator’s training, decision support
the sole purpose of HMM was to provide separate the state for the operator or supervisor, operator action validation, and
space into normal and abnormal states as well as to provide requesting automating of the intervention through DRL.
interpretations for the root cause of failure. In our proposed The methodology involves utilizing an influence diagram
frameworkHMMs[20]areusedinasimilarcontexttopredict to locate specific failures within the system globally. Once
the human failure in process abnormality states. the failure-associated procedure is identified, the relevant step
a) State Transitions: of the procedure is presented to the operator based on the
current situation. In cases where the procedure requires the
P(q |q ) (11)
t t−1 manual adjustment of a controller with continuous values,
where P(q |q ) represents the transition probability from locally specialized deep reinforcement learning is activated
t t−1
state q to q . to determine the appropriate value, considering the current
t−1 t
b) Emission Probabilities: state of the system. One additional safety barrier that we
introduce for using such a black-box system in safety-critical
P(x |q ) (12)
t t industries is that the exact continuous value is only suggested
where P(x |q ) represents the emission probability of obser- to the operator if it is found within the confidence interval
t t
vation x given state q . of the DID. The influence diagram, due to data discretization,
t t
c) HiddenStatePrediction: Giventhecurrentstateq , providesavalueintheformofaninterval.Ifthevaluederived
t−1
the observation sequence x ,x ,...,x up to time t−1, from deep reinforcement learning falls outside this interval,
1 2 t−1
and the model parameters θ (initial, transition, and emission onlytheprocedure,alongwiththeinterval,ispresentedtothe
probabilities)thepredictedprobabilitydistributionforthenext operator.Thisprecautionistakentoensuretheinterpretability
state q is given by: andsafetyoftheoverallsystem.Insummary,theinfluencedia-
t
gramservestomodelthesystemglobally,whilereinforcement
P(q |x ,x ,...,x ,θ) (13)
t 1 2 t−1 learning precisely addresses local issues.
Furthermore, the HMM is introduced at the final layer
B. Human-Centered Specialized Reinforcement Learning De-
between the human and the recommended control value that
cision Support Framework for Safety-Critical Systems
determines different intervention strategies based on the state
In this paper we build upon the previous framework [9] of both the system and the human as derived from the real-
and introduce an extended version as shown in fig. 3 that in- time process logs, which includes the data of current process
corporates a Human-in-the-Loop (HITL) setup. The proposed variables, alarm information, and human-system interactions.
framework additionally captures the human state prediction in The HMM predicts if the human state will be able to handle
real-time by the use of the Hidden Markov Model (HMM) on the situation given the time and circumstances and based
the data from process, alarms, and HMI-logs, which provide on this it suggests the operator to either adjust the controlJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 6
manually or allow the system to automate certain processes. air ingress into the methanol tank leading to the formation
HMM can also be used to validate the actions of the operator of a flammable atmosphere, and reactor overheating. These
according to the expert standards and prompt to avoid human scenarios are categorized based on complexities (normal and
errors. Moreover, the proposed framework is versatile enough abnormal situations) within different plant sections. The goal
to be used in real situations as well as during the training of istovarythetaskloadasavariableandobserveitsimpacton
the operator to enhance the guidance. performance,analyzingitalongsideothervariablestoenhance
Algorithm: The algorithm is defined in algorithm 1 and is the understanding of the system’s behavior.
available in the project repository. The experiment aims to investigate the impact of various
interactionsbetweenvariablesinhuman-machineandautoma-
Algorithm 1 Human-Centered Specialized Reinforcement
tion interactions on operator performance and its implications
Learning Agent (HC-SRLA)
for process safety. The goal is to facilitate comprehensive
STEP I: Dynamic Influence Diagram Monitoring risk-based decision-making for real-time support adaptation,
Input: processcontroloptimization,andmanagementofchange.The
y: process variables key objectives include developing a real-time model to assess
DID: trained model human performance in human-machine interaction environ-
Output: ments,modelingsafetydataforHuman-inloopconfigurations
s∗: specific event of interest (such as abnormality) in process control, exploring optimal decision-making pro-
recommendation: pruned procedure cessesinsafety-criticalsystemsusingReinforcementLearning
with human-in-the-loop, and creating Bayesian networks to
STEP II: Deep Reinforcement Learning Inference assist human operators in recommending adaptive automation
Input: strategies.
s∗: specific event of interest (such as abnormality)
y: process variables
A. Process Control Room Simulation Environment
π (s): trained specialized actor
θ
Our experiment is based on a simulator created for
Safety control confidence interval check
formaldehydeproduction[21],whichsimulatesacontrolroom
Output:
environment. A significant enhancement to this simulator is
µ(s): recommended control value (eq. (8) or interval
the ”support panel” converting it into a comprehensive con-
trol room simulation with features like graphical production
STEP III: Hidden Markov Model Monitoring
monitoring, an alarm list, a procedure list, and a suggestion
Input:
box as shown in fig. 4.
logs: process, alarms, and HMI-logs
HMM: trained model parameters
Output: B. Groups
q t: hidden state predition from eq. (13) For the comparative evaluation, the participants were di-
vided into two groups, the one with the AI support system
STEP IV: Decision Support and Human Intervention and the one without it.
Input: 1) GroupN (Without AISystem): The group withoutthe AI
q t: hidden state interpretation (such as human failure) system has a screen-based procedure panel to manually go
Output: through the intervention procedure and had the difference in
intervention: intervention strategy suggestion the last section of the support panel that does not include any
control: human intervention suggestion box as shown in fig. 5.
a) Screen-Based Procedure Panel: The screen-based
procedures provided the participants with the intervention
IV. CASESTUDY proceduresforallthealarmspereverysub-sectionoftheplant.
The case study, conducted in collaboration with Politecnico The participant has to click on the specific alarm which has
Di Torino and Technological University Dublin, involves a to be recovered and follow the procedure accordingly.
simulated chemical plant dedicated to formaldehyde produc- 2) GroupAI(WithAISystem): Theonlydifferencebetween
tion. The plant, which produces a 30% formaldehyde solution GroupAI from GroupN is an additional panel of suggestion
at a rate of 10,000 kg/h through partial oxidation of methanol boxes as shown in fig. 6.
withair,consistsofthreemainsections:thefeedsection(com- a) AI-Enhanced Decision Support Panel: The AI-
prising various systems such as nitrogen flow, methanol tank, enhanced decision support panel introduces a concise rep-
pumps,boiler,compressors,heaters,piping,controllers,safety resentation of the intervention procedure to be followed and
valves,andindicators),theheatandrecoverysection(housing gives the root cause of the predicted failure even before the
threeheatexchangers),andthereactionandseparationsection alarm. The probabilistic model predicts the failure and deep
(featuring a reactor, controllers, alarms, sensors, rupture disk, reinforcement learning provides the exact analog value for
absorber, and piping). the controller to be manually configured. If the participant
The study focuses on hazardous events or process safety agrees to follow the suggestions by the AI system they have
occurrences, including depressurization of the methanol tank, to acknowledge and then follow the guidelines. Furthermore,JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 7
Fig.4. Simulatorscreens,(left)mimicsubprocess,(middle)overviewoftheplant,and(right)supportpanel.
theendoftheexperiment.Thethreescenariosincludedwithin
this TOI are as follows:
a) Pressure indicator control failure: The automatic
pressuremanagementsysteminthetankmalfunctions,requir-
ingtheoperatortomanuallyadjustnitrogeninflowtomaintain
pressure. The interruption of nitrogen flow leads to a pressure
dropasthepumpcontinueschannelingnitrogenintotheplant.
b) Nitrogen valve primary source failure: Similar to the
first scenario, the primary nitrogen source fails, prompting
the operator to switch to a backup system. While the backup
system starts slowly, the operator regulates pump power to
slow down the pressure drop in the tank.
Fig.5. GroupNsupportpanelincludingscreen-basedprocedures.
c) Temperature indicator control failure in the Heat
Recovery section: The operator attempts to resolve the issue
by adjusting the cooling water flow in the absorber manually.
3) Scenario3:AlarmOverflow: ThisTOIreferstothestart
of the beginning of the alarm overflow (second critical alarm)
to the end of the experiment. Scenario 3 included within this
TOI is as follows:
a) Temperature indicator control failure in the Heat
Recovery section: The operator attempts to resolve the issue
by adjusting the cooling water flow in the absorber manually.
However,thisprovesineffective,andtheoperatorcontactsthe
supervisor. The supervisor advises that the problem exceeds
control room resolution and requires a field operator’s inter-
vention. While the field operator addresses the issue on-site,
the control room operator manages the reactor’s temperature,
Fig. 6. GroupAI with support panel including screen-based procedures and
AI-basedsuggestionbox. with a focus on preventing potential reactor issues.
As the focus of this analysis is not the comparison across
the scenarios, therefore, the results from different scenarios
to gain the attention of the participant the acknowledge box
were normalized across the scenarios and aggregated as an
starts blinking if there is any change in the suggestion so that
average for each participant, creating a single data point for
theoperator(participant)canmonitorthatchangeandperform
each participant per group to reduce comparison complexity.
the suggested action.
Furthermore, to normalize metric within its corresponding
baseline TOI (where applicable) [22], the following eq. (14)
C. Scenarios was applied:
To evaluate the effectiveness of our decision support, we
Metric in TOI
devised three scenarios, and further analysis of the scenarios Metric= (14)
Metric in Baseline TOI
was divided according to the Time of Interest (TOI):
1) Baseline Overview: This TOI refers to the condition
V. DATACOLLECTION
where the operator just observes the overall process the time
before the occurrence of the first critical alarm. This created The dataset encompasses measurements obtained from di-
a baseline performance analysis of the participant in terms of verse data sources. They incorporate both objective and sub-
physiological measures such as an eye tracker. jective metrics commonly employed in assessing cognitive
2) Critical Alarm: This TOI refers to the start of the first states related to workload, situational awareness, stress, and
critical alarm to the time when it is either fully recovered or fatigue.VariousdatacollectiontoolssuchashealthmonitoringJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 8
watch,eyetracking,processandHMIlogs,operationalmetrics
(response time, reaction time, performance, etc), NASA Task
Load Index (NASA-TLX), Situation Awareness Rating Tech-
nique (SART), a think-aloud Situation Presence Assessment
Method (SPAM), AI support questions, and AI vs human
error were utilized. A detailed explanation of the dataset is
provided in this data article [23] and the dataset is available
in this repository [24].
Furthermore, the datasets encompass information derived
from a simulated formaldehyde production plant, involving
participantinteractionwithinacontrolledexperimentalsetting
resembling a control room. The human-in-the-loop scenario
included tasks like Monitoring, Alarm Handling, Recovery
planning, and intervention (Troubleshooting, Control, and
Evaluation). Data collection involved 47 participants divided
into two groups, each undergoing the specified task flow.
Fig.7. Datasetfilehierarchy
Participantstestedthreescenarioslasting15–18minutes,with
breaks and survey completion periods in between, utilizing
different combinations of decision support tools. The decision
wasobtainedfromtheTechnologicalUniversityDublinEthical
support tools varied across groups, encompassing factors of
ReviewCommittee(RECApprovalNumber:REC-20-52A).All
digitized screen-based procedures and the inclusion of an AI
participantsprovidedinformedconsentbeforeparticipatingin
recommendation system.
the study, and their confidentiality and privacy were strictly
Thesignificanceofthisresearchliesinitsrelevancetocom-
maintained throughout the research process. Any potential
paringcurrentindustrypracticesandtheirimpactonoperators’
risks to participants were minimized, and steps were taken to
performance and safety. It is also applicable for validating
ensure the well-being of all individuals involved in the study.
proposed solutions within the industry. The dataset is utilized
for statistical analysis to compare outcomes among different
groups.Thesedatasetshavepotentialapplicationsfordecision- B. Value of the Data
makers involved in control room design and optimization,
process safety engineers, system engineers, human factors 1) Optimizing Human-AI Interaction: The dataset provides
engineers in process industries, and researchers in related an opportunity to study the integration of human-in-the-loop
domains. The hierarchy of the dataset is shown in fig. 7 and configurations with AI systems in safety-critical industries.
the processed dataset can be found in this repository [25]. By examining the data, researchers can identify the factors
necessary for successful collaboration between humans and
The collected raw data was processed particularly for the
AI. This knowledge can lead to the development of optimized
analyses in this paper. The data from individual participants
interaction mechanisms, ensuring that the strengths of both
was concatenated and merged in a single xls file for further
humans and AI are leveraged effectively to enhance decision-
evaluation.ThedatausedforcomparisonbetweentheGroupN
making in critical scenarios.
and GroupAI is presented in the merged normalized data
folder.Thexlsfilecontainsthedatapointsforeachparticipant 2) Evaluation of AI-Enhanced Decision Support System:
per row and each column represents the data and sub-data The dataset allows for qualifying and quantifying the perfor-
collected from various sources. As the focus of this analysis mance and effectiveness of the AI-enhanced decision support
is not between the scenarios, therefore, the data is normalized system incorporating Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL).
across scenarios to avoid the effect of the scenarios in the By analyzing the data, researchers can assess how well the
analysis and is averaged for every participant to acquire a system performs in safety-critical process industries with
single vector of data for each participant. human-in-the-loop configurations, which is rarely observed.
In the folder of ”hmm modeling” the concatenated data Thisevaluationcanprovideinsightsintothepotentialbenefits,
representthetime-seriesdataoftheprocess,alarms,andHMI scope, and limitations of utilizing DRL in such contexts.
logsforeveryparticipantintoasinglefileasisrequiredbythe
HMM python library [20]. Further, a separate file is included
C. Data Explanation
that provides the labels for participants who failed during the
taskbasedonvariousfactorssuchastheconsequenceofplant In this section, a brief description of each variable in the
shutdown or reactor overheating and overall performance. dataset has been provided.
1) Biometric Measures: The biometric data for this study
A. Ethics Statement
is described in [26]. This includes data on the pulse rate,
This research study was conducted following the ethical electrodermal activity, and temperature of participants during
guidelines set forth by the Technological University Dublin the test. A brief description of each measure is also given
Ethical Review Committee. Ethical approval for this study below.JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 9
a) Electrodermal Activity (EDA) or Galvanic Skin Re- 3) Process, Alarms, and HMI Logs (online): The perfor-
sponse(GSR): Itmeasurestheskin’selectricalconductanceof mance and behavioral measures derived from the online logs
the skin. It is influenced by sweat gland activity, for example, and how they were derived are detailed in [29]. A brief
the skin’s moisture level. description of what they mean is shown below.
b) Pulse Rate or Heart Rate: It defines the number of a) Alarms:
heartbeats per unit time (bpm).
• Number of alarms annunciated.
c) Temperature: Thebodytemperatureherereferstothe
• Number of alarms silenced.
degree of coldness or hotness of the body.
• Number of alarms acknowledged.
2) Eye Tracker: Tobii Pro Glasses 3 [27] and Tobii Pro b) No.ofProcedures: Thenumberofproceduresopened
Lab [28] analysis software were used in this experiment for during the duration of each scenario.
eye tracking and extracting useful metrics within the defined c) No. of Mimics Opened: The number of mimics1
TimeofInterest(TOI),allowingforbetterevaluationofvisual opened during the duration of each scenario.
attention dynamics: d) AI Acknowledgement: The number of times the AI
• BaselineOverview(pre-alarmoccurrence):Fromthestart acknowledgment button was pressed during the duration of
of the experiment to the start of the first critical alarm each scenario.
(scenarios 1, 2, and 3). e) AI vs Human Response: Deviations and preliminary
• Critical Alarm: From the start of the first critical alarm analysis of decisions taken by the human participant and
to the end of it (scenarios 1, 2, and 3). suggestions by AI/DRL agent were analyzed and the mean
• Alarm Overflow: From the start of the second critical error was calculated. Figure 8 illustrates the aggregated mean
alarm to the end of the experiment (scenario 3). and standard deviation of the human vs AI (DID + SRLA)
All the eye tracker metrics were categorized based on these control for all the participants in GroupAI. It includes the
TOIs for evaluating visual attention across distinct phases of scenariosof(a)criticalalarmand(b)alarmoverflow.TheDRL
theexperiment.Tonormalizeeacheyetrackermetricwithinits control suggestion is based on the current state of the process
corresponding TOI, eq. (14) was applied. This normalization and is considered to be ideally optimal in the case of this
process ensured that the metrics were evaluated relative to the experiment.TheoptimalityoftheDRLsuggestionsisverified
baseline, facilitating meaningful comparisons and insights. throughacarefullycontrolledexperimentaldesign,barringany
a) Fixation: Fixationisthestablegazeorsustainedfocus unforeseen deviations by the human participant. This can be
onaspecificpointinthevisualfield.Duringfixation,theeyes further validated in the correlation analysis conducted later
remain relatively stationary, allowing detailed processing of in section VI-B3, revealing a positive correlation between
visual information at that location. higher errors and more adverse consequences. Therefore, the
• Duration: Fixation duration is the amount of time in- AI vs human measure was used to evaluate the performance
dividuals concentrate on a particular point of interest. ofparticipantsintermsofoptimallyfollowingthesuggestions.
This measurement helps identify elements that capture
4) Operational Measures (offline): These metrics are de-
extended attention, enhancing our understanding of in-
rived from the online process logs and can only be measured
formation processing and cognitive involvement.
oncetheexperimenthasbeencompleted,hencethesearecom-
• Pupil Diameter: Pupil diameter during fixation serves
putedoffline.Itgivestheoverallindicationoftheperformance
as a vital metric indicating shifts in cognitive load and
of the participant.
emotionalarousal.Analyzingchangesinpupilsizeallows
a) Performance Measures:
us to comprehend the cognitive effort and emotional
reactions linked to particular visual stimuli. • Recovery Status: Classified into optimal, good, and poor
based on the participant’s ability to manage the situation
b) Saccade: It refers to rapid eye movements that occur
withoutanalarmannunciation(optimal,abilitytorecover
betweenperiodsoffixation.Itallowsustoevaluatevisualper-
the alarm even if annunciated (good), and failure to
ception,informationprocessing,andthedynamicsofdecision-
recover the alarm (poor).
making. Further characteristics during saccades include:
• Accuracy: This metric quantifies the mean square error
• Amplitude: The distance covered during a saccade.
between the executed action and the prescribed control
• Velocity: The speed of the eye movement.
action (expert response, as specified in the operating
• Peak Velocity: The maximum speed reached during a
procedure manual). Notably, the expert response over
saccade.
which the “Accuracy” is measured is a constant average
• Duration:Thetimetakenforthecompletionofasaccade.
baseline and is not adapted to the current state of the
c) Heat Map: The heat map visually displays regions
system, unlike the AI vs Human response. Furthermore,
that attracted participants’ visual attention. Brighter areas
accuracy is a common factor between both groups for
on the heat map signal a higher concentration of fixations,
easy comparison, however, the AI vs Human response
providinginformationaboutkeyfocalpointswithinthevisual
is just for GroupAI.
stimuli. This understanding is especially valuable when com-
paringtheheatmapwithTOIs,revealinghowvisualattention
1Mimics:Graphicalinterfacesthatrepresentthelayoutandcomponentsof
changes during different phases of the experiment. thesub-processes.Thesemimicsallowtheusertoanalyzevariablesassociated
withthesub-processandtobeabletomanuallycontrolifnecessaryJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 10
(a)
Fig.9. Questionsrelatedtodeepreinforcementlearningsuggestions
SART Understanding=SART Demand−SART Supply
(15)
TABLEI
(b)
QUESTIONSTHATWEREASKEDTOEVALUATEEACHOFTHESETHEMES.
Fig.8. AverageDRLvshumanresponsefor23participantsduring(a)critical
NASA-TLXIndex SARTIndex SPAMIndex
scenario:tankflowerrorand(b)overflowscenario:reactortemperatureerror.
Mentaldemand Instability Monitoring
Physicaldemand Variability Planning
Temporaldemand Complexity Intervention
• Consequence: Broken down into different levels depend- Performance Arousal
ingontheevent.Thepossibleconsequencesareimpurity Effort Sparecapacity
Frustration Concentration
of air in the tank atmosphere, plant shutdown, reactor
AttentionDivision
overheating, and safe state. Quantity
• Overall Performance: Classified into optimal, good, and Quality
Familiarity
poor performance based on percentiles of the recovery
time.
c) Alarm Prioritization Support: : this entails the per-
b) Behavioral Measures:
ceived support of the participants on how well the alarm
• Recovery Time: The time to recover the critical alarm. prioritization supported them during the scenario.
• Reaction Time: The time of the first control action. d) Procedures Support: : this refers to the perception of
• Response Time: The time it takes to Perform the last the participants on how well the procedures supported them
control action on the expected area of interest. during the task.
e) AI Support Questions: These questions were asked
5) Questionnaires: Somequestionnaire-basedmeasuresbe-
after the end of the entire experiment (all 3 scenarios).
low have been detailed in a previous study by [30]. A brief
description is provided for each. • Level of explainability of the AI suggestion.
a) Task Load: Questions on how the participants per- • Level of trust for the AI suggestion.
• Helpfulness of the AI suggestion.
ceived the complexity of the task were asked at the end of
• Additional workload imposed by the AI suggestion.
each scenario.
• ThetradeoffbetweenthebenefitsoftheAIsystemvsthe
b) NASA-TLX, SART, and SPAM Indexes: The Task
additional workload.
LoadIndex(TLX)andSituationPresenceAssessmentMethod
• Importance of validating the AI suggestion by manually
(SPAM) indexes are calculated as the average of their six
going through the screen-based procedures.
andthreedimensions,respectively.SituationAwarenessRating
Technique(SART)isbasedoneq.(15),aspreviouslydetailed f) Questions Related to DRL: Some specific question-
in [30] 2. The thematic breakdown of the questions asked is naires were asked for the DRL analog value suggestions
shown in table I. provided to the human participant as shown in fig. 9
• Importance of the DRL (analog) value in the AI sugges-
2SART Demand: Sum of the first three dimensions, SART Supply: Sum tion.
of dimensions 4, 5, 6, and 7, SART Understanding: Sum of the last three
dimensions.DimensionsareorderlypresentedintableI • Increase in trust due to the DRL (analog) value (if any).JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 11
The data analysis is divided into two main sections. In
Section VI, we compare GroupN and GroupAI, and within
GroupAI, we focus on participants. The objective is to assess
the impact of the AI-enhanced decision support framework,
specifically, the dynamic influence diagram-based deep rein-
forcement learning outlined in [9], [10]. This analysis lays
the groundwork for understanding the dataset, recognizing
patterns, and informing the development of an extended
framework for real-world implementation. Moving on to Sec-
tion VII, this section validates the extended framework. It
offersadetailedanalysisofobservationsandexplorespotential
future applications in industries. Specifically, it delves into
Fig.10. Frequencyplotofconsequences
thehuman-in-the-loopspecializeddeepreinforcementlearning
framework that utilizes a hidden Markov model for real-time
system failure prediction based on human and process states.
VI. ANALYSISI:EXPLORATORYDATAANALYSIS
An experimental study was conducted to evaluate the per-
formance of the recommendation system and the importance
of the Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) agent. GroupN is (a)
the group without the AI system and GroupAI refers to the
group with the aid of the AI recommendation system. There
are a total of 47 participants with 23 participants in GroupN
and 25 participants in GroupAI. The data was normalized
using a MinMax scalar with values ranging from 0.0 to 1.0.
Thenormalizationwasappliedacrossgroupingbyscenarioto
minimizetheeffectofthescenariosonalltheparticipantsfrom
(b)
bothgroups.Asthefocusofthispaperwasnottoanalyzethe
differences between the scenarios, therefore, the normalized Fig.11. Heatmapsforparticipantsin(a)GroupN(withoutAIsupport)and
(b)GroupAI(withAIsupport).
values were then averaged for the scenarios per participant
so that each participant had now a single data point for each
variable.
In this section, we cross-correlate different performance
measures to evaluate the overall performance between groups
as well as within participants in GroupAI for their different
choices of preferences. Furthermore, this cross-analysis will
help in identifying the relationship of the process, alarm, and (a)
HMI logs as well as the DRL vs AI response with other
important factors such as situational awareness, task load,
trust in the system, and overall performance, etc to be able
to validate the real-time prediction of operator state.
A. Human Performance vs System Performance
The metrics for analysis were divided in such a way that
(b)
it can capture the performance of the human as the operator
and decision-making agent as well as the performance of the Fig.12. Heatmapsforparticipantsin(a)GroupN(withoutAIsupport)and
(b) GroupAI (with AI support) within the Time of Interest (TOI) of critical
system that would be in the case of GroupAI the AI and
alarms.
DRL recommendation system. From the frequency plot of
the overall consequences incurred during the simulation as
shown in fig. 10, it can be observed that with the AI system
a) TimeofInterest:CriticalAlarm: Figure12showsthe
in alarm overflow situations (a problem in the reactor), it
heat map for the specific Time of Interest (TOI) of critical
becomes difficult to recover the plant and to focus on the
alarm. As can be seen for GroupAI (with AI support), people
recommendation of the DRL precisely.
focusmoreontheAIsuggestionratherthantheprocedure,and
the Deep Reinforcement Learning (DRL) analog suggestion
B. GroupN and GroupAI
value and the control task to retrieve the plant to normal
1) Heat Map: Figure 11 shows the heat map of the par- conditionassoonaspossibleascomparedtoGroupN(without
ticipants’ data (17 participants) for scenario 1 and the group AI support).
with and without AI support for the entire recording.JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 12
(lower saccade amplitude and velocity), and reduced pupil
diameter compared to GroupN. These findings suggest that
GroupAI employs a more focused and deliberate cognitive
processing strategy, potentially perceiving the task as less
demanding or engaging than GroupN.
3) Correlation Graph: Correlation analysis was conducted
on participant data from both groups, followed by filtering
for visualizations that exceeded a specified threshold (0.4) as
shown in fig. 14. The subsequent analysis revealed several
noteworthy characteristics:
a) Recovery Time: Reaction time, response time, and
number of alarms are directly correlated with the recovery
time and inversely correlated with the accuracy.
b) Number of Alarms: It is directly correlated with the
TLX index, task load, SPAM index, average pupil diameter,
and consequence.
c) Procedures Support: It is directly correlated with the
SART index and inversely correlated with the consequence.
Fig.13. RadarplotbetweenGroupN(blue)andGroupAI(red) d) Veloctity: Velocityisdirectlycorrelatedwithrecovery
time, mimics opened, overall performance, SART, and SPAM
index.
2) RadarPlot: Asseenfromfig.13,wecancross-evaluate
e) Fixation Duration: It shows an inverse correlation
several different factors.
betweenrecoverytimeandthenumberofalarms.Itisdirectly
a) Recovery Status and Consequence: These factors are
correlated with the number of procedures opened.
nearly the same for both groups, indicating the performance
f) AI (DRL) vs Human Response: This metric shows a
based on the overall recovery of the plant does not vary.
directcorrelationwithrecoveryandreactiontime.Ontheother
b) Recovery, Reaction, and Response Time: All of these
hand, it is inversely correlated with recovery status, accuracy,
factors are lower in GroupAI as compared to GroupN in-
SPAM index, pupil diameter, velocity, saccade amplitude, AI
dicating the performance in terms of reduced information
acknowledgment, AI support, and AI help. As the deviation
processing time.
from the suggested value increases, there is a corresponding
c) Accuracy: It is higher for GroupAI which shows the
rise in the time needed to attain process stabilization, leading
ability to follow the operational guidelines accurately.
to a decline in recovery performance. The escalation of errors
d) MimicsOpenedandNumberofAlarms: Bothofthese
also signifies a reduction in situational awareness (SPAM).
factors were observed to be lower in the case of GroupAI,
Additionally, it is noteworthy that a lower error in adhering to
indicatingthepreventiveandproactiveabilityprovidedbythe
the DRL recommendations correlates with higher participant
AI system to the participants and minimizing the task-solving
ratings for the help and support offered by the overall AI
complexities.
e) Overall Performance: It was measured greater for system, along with an increased frequency of acknowledging
GroupN as compared to GroupAI which was evaluated based and accepting the AI suggestions. Furthermore, higher error
on how correctly the overall system was stabilized. also results in lower pupil diameter, saccade velocity, and
f) Task Load, SART, TLX, and SPAM Index: All the amplitude which may suggest reduced arousal, slower eye
questionnaires indicated lower values for GroupAI compared movements, and more restricted visual processing.
toGroupN.DespiteGroupAIhavingareducedtaskload,their g) AI Acknowledgement: The degree to which a par-
situational awareness is effectively lower. ticipant concentrates on adhering to the AI’s recommenda-
g) EDA, Temperature, and Pulse Rate: In examining tion directly correlates with heightened situational awareness
thesemeasures,itwasobservedthatGroupAIexhibitedhigher (SPAM), enhanced perception of AI assistance, and support.
levels of EDA and temperature, while their pulse rate was h) AI Explanability: A heightened understanding of the
lower. The autonomic nervous system (ANS) is responsible AI system, particularly in terms of explainability for the
for regulating various physiological responses [31], including participant, yields increased situational awareness (SPAM).
heart rate and electrodermal activity. While EDA and tem- i) AI Trust: The participant’s response to the trust in
perature may indicate increased sympathetic nervous system the AI system is inversely proportional to the reaction time,
activity, heart rate is also influenced by both sympathetic saccade amplitude, EDA, and pulse rate. It suggests that as
and parasympathetic branches. The group with higher EDA individuals develop a higher level of trust in the AI system,
and temperature may be experiencing a specific pattern of they exhibit faster reaction times, reduced eye movements,
autonomic response that involves decreased parasympathetic decreasedelectrodermalactivity,andalowerpulserate.These
activity, leading to lower heart rates. observed physiological and behavioral changes likely signify
h) EyeTrackingMetrics: GroupAIexhibitedlongerfixa- a more relaxed and less stressed response in participants who
tionandsaccadedurations,smallerandslowereyemovements trust the AI system.JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 13
Fig.14. RadarplotbetweenGroupN(blue)andGroupAI(red)
j) AI as Additional Work Load: Participants tend to rate m) DRL Importance: We observed a positive correlation
higher scores for perceiving the AI system as an additional between the importance of DRL as a response by participants
workload. Surprisingly, this perception is associated with a to SART, AI trust, and AI as an additional workload. Further,
decrease in reaction time, number of alarms, velocity, and it was negatively correlated with reaction time, EDA, and
electrodermal activity (EDA), which are typically indicative pulse rate. This implies that as the perceived importance of
of lower workload. However, there is a positive correlation DRL increases, participants tend to respond more to the task,
with saccade duration, suggesting that participants may spend trust AI more, and perceive AI as a greater workload, but
more time making eye movements when perceiving the AI also exhibit faster reaction times and reduced physiological
systemasahigherworkload.Thecontradictorynatureofthese responses.
findingssuggestsaneedforfurtherinvestigationtounderstand
n) Trust Increase due to DRL: It is directly correlated
ifthereareanyunexpectedfactorsinfluencingtheseoutcomes
with SART, AI support, AI trust, and DRL importance, and
or if there might be nuances in how participants perceive and
inversely correlated with the reaction time. It indicates the
respond to the AI system’s workload.
increaseinoverallAIsupportandtrustwiththeDRL’sanalog
k) AI Benefits vs Additional Workload: It shows a pos- value and faster reaction responses.
itive correlation with alarms silenced, alarms acknowledg-
ments, number of alarms, TLX index, procedures support, 4) Factor Analysis: Factor analysis is a statistical method
AI acknowledgment, and AI trust. With AI vs human er- usedtoexplorerelationshipsamongobservedvariablesbypos-
ror, a negative correlation can be observed. The favorable tulatingunderlyinglatentfactors.Inthefactormodelequation,
view that participants hold toward the benefits of AI vs the observed variables (X) are expressed as linear combinations
additional workload is linked to heightened trust, following of latent factors (F) and unique factors (U), represented by
AI suggestions by acknowledging it. The inverse relationship the factor loading matrix (Λ). The covariance matrix (Σ) can
with human error implies pervasive confidence in AI as a be decomposed into the product of Λ and its transpose, plus
dependable and error-reducing solution. a diagonal matrix (Ψ) of unique variances. To determine the
l) AI Validity: The participants who were more likely to optimalnumberoffactors,ascreeplotisgeneratedbyplotting
consider the importance of validating the AI system opened the eigenvalues of the covariance matrix, and the elbow joint,
more mimics and had a higher fixation and saccade duration. indicative of the optimal number of factors, is identified by
Longer saccades may indicate increased cognitive load or analyzing the second difference in the cumulative variance
visual search difficulty, while prolonged fixations suggest in- explainedwithathresholdof0.05asshowninfigs.15and16.
depth processing, interest, or confusion [32]–[35]. The following statistical modeling can be decomposed asJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 14
(a)
Fig.15. Screeplotandthebestpossiblevalueofthefactors.
(b)
(c)
Fig.16. Cumulativeexplainedvariancepereachfactor.
follows:
(d)
X =ΛF +U
Fig. 17. Heat maps for (a) P21, (b) P24, (c) P30, and (d) P37 within the
Σ=ΛΛT +Ψ
TimeofInterest(TOI)ofcriticalalarms.
(cid:80)n
Eigenvalue
Cumulative Variance= i=1 i (16)
(cid:80)n
Eigenvalues
i=1 the dataset as shown in table II. A factor loading importance
Second Differences=diff(diff(Cumulative Variance))
threshold of 0.4 was chosen which was identified iteratively
Elbow Point=argmax(Second Differences) to capsulate the valuable factors involved in the experiment.
a) InterpretationoftheFactors: Thefactoranalysiscon-
ducted on the dataset identified a crucial factor, chosen at the
C. Within Participants (GroupAI)
point where the cumulative variance explained reached 50%
(benchmark). This factor, along with the preceding factors, 1) Heat Map: As depicted in the diverse heatmaps rep-
collectively explains approximately half of the total variance resenting different participants in fig. 17, distinct patterns
in the data. The analysis successfully achieved dimensional- emerge. Certain participants (a) exclusively adhere to the
ity reduction, simplifying the interpretation of the complex AI procedure, others (b) concurrently emphasize both AI
dataset. While the 50% cumulative variance is a meaningful and DRL, and (c) a subset concentrates solely on screen
balancebetweenmodelsimplicityandexplanatorypower,fur- procedures. Meanwhile, (d) some validate their approaches
ther exploration of additional factors or alternative models is through a combination of AI and screen procedures.
advisable for a more detailed understanding of the underlying 2) Selection of Participants: A subset of participants from
structure. The interpretation of factors is context-dependent, GroupAI was chosen based on how they preferred to un-
emphasizing the significance of findings concerning the spe- derstand and adhere to the intervention strategy as shown in
cific goals and nature of the variables in the analysis. The table III. This interpretation of the preference was extracted
factor analysis performed here was the combination of all the from the heatmap and other variables such as AI vs human
variables and the data points of all the participants involved response. Two participants were compared with each other on
in both groups and also included some missing variables. various factors to better understand the behavior patterns and
Therefore, further analysis is required to break down the data performance.Foreachcomparison,aparticipantwasincluded
points in terms of specific context as well as scenario-wise who preferred to use both the AI + DRL support to be able
for detailed exploration. Overall, the factor analysis provided to understand its characteristics with the other participant’s
valuable insights into the relationships among observed vari- behavioral pattern.
ables, facilitating a concise and interpretable representation ofJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 15
TABLEII
FACTORANALYSIS
Factor1 Factor2 Factor3 Factor4 Factor5
(SituationalAwareness&Performance) (SystemStatus&TaskImpact) (Human-AIInteraction&Trust) (OculomotorBehavior:CognitiveLoad&Attention (AIandDRLPerception)
Recoverytime Recoverystatus Accuracy Velocityoverflow EDA
Reactiontime Noofalarms AIvshumanerror Fixationdurationoverflow AItrust
Responsetime Consequence AIack Saccadedurationoverflow AIadditionalload
Accuracy Overallperformance AIsupport Saccadeamplitudeoverflow DRLimportance
Noofalarms TLXindex TrustincreaseduetoDRL TrustincreaseduetoDRL
SPAMindex
Pupildiameteroverflow
Velocitycritical
Pulserate
TABLEIII
SELECTIONOFPARTICIPANTSBASEDONTHEIRPREFERENCEOF
SUGGESTIONTOOLUSEDDURINGTHEEXPERIMENT
Participants Preference
P21 AI
P24 AI+DRL
P30 Procedure
P32 AI+DRL
P37 AI+Procedure
P96 AI+DRL
(a)
Fig.19. Radarplotbetweenparticipant21and24
(b)
Fig.18. SRLAvshumanresponseofparticipant(a)P21and(b)P24within
theTimeofInterest(TOI)ofcriticalalarms(scenario1)andalarmoverflow
(scenario3). (a)
3) P21 vs P24: This section comprises the comparative
evaluation of P21 (preference: AI) and P24 (preference: AI
and SRLA).
a) AI (SRLA) vs Human Response: The comparison be-
tweentheSpecializedReinforcementLearningAgent(SRLA)
suggestion and the human response can be seen in fig. 18, (b)
which shows P24 follows the SRLA suggestions better than Fig.20. SRLAvshumanresponseofparticipant(a)P30and(b)P32within
P21, however, for the scenario of alarm overflow both have theTimeofInterest(TOI)ofcriticalalarms(scenario1)andalarmoverflow
(scenario3).
similar performance.
b) Radar Plot: Participant P21 demonstrates superior
physiological responses, better AI interaction, higher overall
4) P30 vs P32: This section comprises the comparative
performance, quicker recovery from errors, and greater task
evaluation of P30 (preference: screen procedures) and P32
accuracy compared to P24. P24, on the other hand, exhibits a
(preference: AI and SRLA).
higher cognitive workload, better situational awareness, and
a) AI (SRLA) vs Human Response: The comparison
more significant consequences for actions. The comparison
between the SRLA suggestion and the human response can
suggeststhatP21excelsinperformance-relatedmetrics,while
be seen in fig. 20, which shows that P32 follows the SRLA
P24 may have strengths in cognitive aspects and situational
suggestions better than P30 for both the scenario of critical
awareness.
alarm and alarm overflow.JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 16
(a)
(b)
Fig.22. SRLAvshumanresponseofparticipant(a)P37and(b)P96within
theTimeofInterest(TOI)ofcriticalalarms(scenario1)andalarmoverflow
(scenario3).
Fig.21. Radarplotbetweenparticipant30and32
b) Radar Plot: Participant P30 generally experiences
higher consequences, workload, and positive interaction with
AI, however, has higher errors following the AI suggestion.
P30alsoranksproceduressupportandtheneedforAIvalida-
tionhigherasevidencedbythepreferredchoiceofintervention
support. P30 also encounters higher recovery, reaction, and
responsetimeleadingtomorealarmsandtheopeningofmore
mimics, indicating higher evaluation time for following the
screen procedures support. In contrast, P32 excels in situa-
tionalawareness,quickertransitionsbetweenpointsofinterest
sustained attention at specific locations, and more deliberate
or careful exploration of the visual environment (based on
eye movement dynamics). P32 relies more on AI support
and rates highly its help demonstrating quicker recovery and
higher importance of deep reinforcement learning, however,
experiencesahigherloadindoingsoasalsoevidentfromthe
Fig.23. Radarplotbetweenparticipant37and96
rating of AI as an additional load.
5) P37 vs P96: This section comprises the comparative VII. ANALYSISII:HUMANFAILUREPREDICTIONIN
evaluation of P37 (preference: AI and Screen Procedures) and REAL-TIMEUSINGPROCESSVARIABLESAND
P96 (preference: AI and SRLA). HUMAN-MACHINEINTERACTION
a) SRLA vs Human Response: The comparison between
The data used for the Hidden Markov Model (HMM)
the SRLA suggestion and the human response can be seen in
includedthevariablesthatcanbeaccessedinreal-time,suchas
fig. 22, which shows a comparable performance of both the
processvariables,alarmlogs,andhuman-machineinteractions
participants, however, P96 tends to respond more accurately
suchasthenumberofproceduresopened,thenumberoftimes
to the dynamic changes of the SRLA suggestions.
the manual switch was controlled, etc. Optuna [36] was used
b) Radar Plot: Participant P37 encounters more chal- for hyperparameter tuning for the HMM modeling and the
lenges with higher AI vs human error, longer recovery time, bestchosenhyperparametersaresummarizedintableIV.With
increased alarms, opened procedures, severe consequences, 95.8% accuracy for the situation of alarm overflow (scenario
higher task load, EDA, and temperature. In contrast, Partic- 3), the HMM was able to predict the hidden state (state 2) for
ipant P96 experiences a more positive interaction with AI, which the human would fail the situation using the raw data
including higher AI acknowledgment, support, explainability, fromtheprocesslogsasshowninfig.24.Theplotsrevealthat
better recovery status, response time, accuracy, and overall incaseswhereparticipantsencounteredfailureinthescenario,
performance,butalsohigherperceptionsofAIasanadditional the HMM demonstrated the capability to forecast the failure
load. P96 also reports a balanced perceived task load and wellinadvance.TheHMMcaneffectivelyinterveneinhuman
higher situational awareness. actionsbyissuingtimelyalarmsaboutpotentialconsequencesJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 17
A. Factor Loadings on the Principal Component Analysis
(PCA)
Thereasonforthisanalysisistounderstandtheimportance
of feature sets or data sources used for the prediction of
the system state based on the state of the process as well
as the state of the human and human-machine interaction.
The Principal Component Analysis (PCA) is a method for
reducing dimensionality in multivariate data. It encompasses
the computation of factor loadings (f ), representing the
ij
coefficients in the linear combination of the original variables
(X )toconstructeachprincipalcomponent(PC ).Thefactor
i j
loadingsfortheinitialprincipalcomponentaredeterminedby
the elements of the eigenvector (a ), acquired through the
kj
eigenvalue problem for the covariance or correlation matrix
of the original variables.
Theprincipalcomponents(PC )arenovelvariablesformed
j
as linear combinations of the original variables (X ), with the
i
factor loadings (a ) serving as coefficients in these combina-
ij
tions.
Factor loadings:
(cid:118)
(cid:117) p
(cid:117)1(cid:88)
f
ij
=(cid:116)
p
a2
kj
k=1
Principal components:
p
(cid:88)
PC = a X
j ij i
i=1
In these equations, p denotes the number of variables in
the original dataset, These formulae aid in the analysis and
encapsulationofessentialinformationwithinadatasetthrough
acondensedsetofvariables.Thetop10factorloadingsinboth
directions on the chosen 4 Principal Components are shown
in fig. 25.
It can be seen from the description of these features as
provided in Appendix, that the most important factor loadings
for the principal components are the combination of process,
Fig. 24. Sample of participant’s failure prediction based on the real-time
simulatorlogtime-seriesdata. alarms, and HMI variables.
B. Intervention Strategies and Applications: Towards a Gen-
and highlighting alternative courses of action. eral SRLA-Based Support System
In the proposed framework, a Dynamic Influence Diagram
(DID) is used for process-level abnormality detection and the
TABLEIV HiddenMarkovModel(HMM)isforhuman-levelabnormality
HYPERPARAMETERSFORHMMMODELING
detection. The Specialized Reinforcement Learning Agent
Hyperparameter Value (SRLA) is used in this loop to identify the best possible
n_states 3 interventionstrategiesandsuggestthemtothehumanoperator
model_type ’gmmhmm’
who is responsible for the final decision. Based on these
n_mix 3
covariance_type ’tied’ intervention strategies we propose several applications for
is_lr True which such a system can be implemented in the real world
is_scalar True
safety-critical process industries. The following proposed ap-
is_pca True
n_decomp 4 plications in the real world are based on the interviews with
thesafety-criticalindustryexperts,controlroomoperators,and
decision-makers:JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 18
and what is needed to be followed in such a situation which
can later be generalized by their intuition. Furthermore, it
can also be used for tuning the system’s parameters [5] by
observing the predicted hidden states and control suggestions.
2) Decision Support to Operator: Such a system has al-
ready been tested and provided in this research, where the
framework is used to provide suggestions to the operator in a
simulated environment, however, in real-world the conditions
can be more complex, and therefore, it may be challenging to
directlyimplementsuchasystemintosafety-criticalindustries
(a) [3].Nevertheless,eveninscenarioswheretherecommendation
seeks the operator’s confirmation for automating the process,
the ultimate decision remains in the hands of the human.
This approach ensures the implementation of a higher level
of safety. Therefore, a tradeoff between increased task load
and aid in decision support is to be made as also evidenced
bythefindingsintheexperimentalresults.Furthermore,itcan
also help the operator to self asses their operating state and
control decisions.
3) Decision Support to Supervisor: An alternative appli-
cation could involve offering decision support directly to
supervisors instead of burdening operators with the additional
workload. However, ethical considerations regarding the dis-
(b) closure of information about the operator’s state must be
carefully taken into account. In such a configuration, the
supervisor can assess the overall system performance, deter-
mine necessary corrective measures, and disseminate relevant
information among the operators.
4) SRLA-Based Validation: Specialized Reinforcement
Learning Agent (SRLA) can also be trained and used to
validate the control actions taken by the operator in abnormal
as well as normal operating conditions and prompt for any
predicted consequences as also a similar setup developed in
[3].
5) SRLA Control: On the opposite end of the spectrum,
an approach involving solely providing suggestions to the
(c) operator is full process automation, particularly in instances
where the HMM predicts elevated workload, reduced sit-
uational awareness, or an imminent failure. However, the
automation would only be performed after receiving confir-
mation from the operator. This form of automation proves
beneficial in situations where the agent’s speed in performing
control actions surpasses that of a human, as illustrated in
our experiment’s scenario 3. It’s crucial to acknowledge that
incorporating human latency as an input to SRLA is essential
for delivering more robust control suggestions. Furthermore,
SRLA can also determine which processes to automate and
which to recommend for manual intervention.
(d)
VIII. DISCUSSION
Fig.25. Top10factorloadingsinbothdirectionsonthePrincipalComponent
Analysis(PCA). While comparing GroupN with GroupAI the general obser-
vation that was made was that GroupAI had a better overall
performance and reduced task load, however, the participants
1) Training and Tuning: Such a framework can be imple- in GroupAI also had lower situational awareness as compared
mentedduringthetrainingofnewoperatorsaswellastraining to GroupN. The comparison among participants in GroupAI
theexperiencedoperatorswhenthereisamajorchangeinthe revealed that the participants who followed the suggestions
system.Itcanhelptheoperatorfocusontheprunedprocedures provided by the Specialized Reinforcement Learning AgentJOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 19
(SRLA) more closely resulted in better situational awareness Theintegrationofreal-timefeedbackmechanismstocontin-
and performance, however, a higher workload was observed. uously adapt and improve the AI system’s performance based
The differences in these experiences highlight the importance on operator interactions and feedback is aimed for further
of evaluating various factors in human-AI interactions for a exploration. Conducting comparative studies to evaluate the
comprehensive understanding. AI system’s performance against traditional decision support
Insituationswhereahighlevelofwell-informedsituational systems or other AI-based approaches in similar industrial
awareness is crucial, artificial intelligence may not be the contexts will further validate the proposed framework.
optimal solution regardless of the workload. However, in Moreover, current research does not investigate the ethical
emergencyscenariosandsimilarcases,thecombinationofAI, and social implications of integrating AI systems into safety-
alongwithpriorknowledgeandtraining,canprovebeneficial. critical industries, including considerations of trust, account-
From the correlation analysis in section VI-B3, it was ability, and transparency that would be the request for future
generally observed that: research.
Rating of support∝
1
∝Situational awareness
X. CONCLUSION
Task load
This study introduces an AI-based recommendation sys-
Expressingthatasparticipantsperceivegreatersupportfrom
tem using dynamic influence diagrams and reinforcement
various components, their task load decreases, and situational
learning to tackle information overload in complex indus-
awareness improves. Hence, for optimal results, the decision
trial environments, with a focus on chemical process control
support system should be universally applicable, benefiting
rooms. Preliminary results indicate the system’s potential to
each individual. Additionally, providing operators with thor-
reduce operator workload and enhance situational awareness,
ough training on such an interface is likely to enhance overall
especially in situations of information overload and for less
performance and situational awareness while reducing task
experienced operators.
load. Furthermore, it can be observed that the process, alarm,
FeedbackfromNASATaskLoadIndex(TLX)andSituation
and HMI logs are correlated with situational awareness, task
Awareness Rating Technique (SART) questionnaires, along
load, cognitive load, attention dynamics, and physiological
witheye-trackingdata,suggestsadecreaseinperceivedwork-
responses. Therefore, these correlations can help base future
loadandincreasedsituationalawarenesswhentherecommen-
research on identifying such states using the Hidden Markov
dationsystemisactive.Additionally,areductioninoperators’
Model (HMM) on the real-time data and its implementation
heartrateswhileusingthesystemimpliesapotentialreduction
in the real world. Further in-depthstudy is needed to interpret
in the stress associated with managing process deviations.
the hidden states predicted by the HMM and its relation to
While these results are promising, further research with
the physiological state of the operator using ground truth
larger participant samples is needed to confirm these findings
data from various sources such as an eye tracker, smartwatch,
and optimize the system for broader application in real-world
questionnaires, and an electroencephalogram (EEG).
industrial settings. This research contributes to the advance-
ment of AI decision-support tools in safety-critical industries,
IX. LIMITATIONSANDFUTUREWORK pavingthewayforimprovedprocesssafetyandmoreefficient
This study focuses on a specific simulated chemical plant. decision-making.
Futurestudieswillaimtoreplicatetheexperimentindifferent
industrial settings to assess the broader applicability of the ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
AI-based decision support system.
This publication is the result of the research done along the
Moreover, the study’s participant pool was relatively small
Collaborative Intelligence for Safety-Critical systems (CISC)
as they were non-expert students with limited knowledge
project that has received funding from the European Union’s
of chemical engineering and the process control room. To
Horizon 2020 Research and Innovation Programme under the
enhance the robustness of the findings, including a larger and
Marie Skłodowska-Curie grant agreement no. 955901.
morediversegroupofparticipantsandreal-worldoperatorsin
future research is imperative.
In future research, the proposed framework will be em- REFERENCES
ployed with extended experimental study including human
[1] C. W. Amazu, A. Abbas, M. Demichela, and D. Fissore, “Decision
participants. Through which the effectiveness of human-state making for process control management in control rooms: a survey
prediction can be evaluated. Furthermore, the possibility of methodologyandinitialfindings.,”CETJournal-ChemicalEngineering
Transactions,vol.99,2023.
creating a human digital twin will be explored to be able to
[2] M. Sethu, B. Kotla, D. Russell, M. Madadi, N. A. Titu, J. B. Coble,
run the entire experiment in simulation without the need of R.L.Boring,K.Blache,V.Agarwal,V.Yadav,etal.,“Applicationof
real human participants and the digital twin will be used as artificialintelligenceindetectionandmitigationofhumanfactorerrors
innuclearpowerplants:Areview,”NuclearTechnology,vol.209,no.3,
their replacement to be able to have more flexibility in terms
pp.276–294,2023.
of experimental validations. Furthermore, in current research [3] S.J.Lee,K.Mo,andP.H.Seong,“Developmentofanintegrateddeci-
only human failure was predicted, however, the correlation sionsupportsystemtoaidthecognitiveactivitiesofoperatorsinmain
control rooms of nuclear power plants,” in 2007 IEEE Symposium on
between that failure and its association with task load and
ComputationalIntelligenceinMulti-CriteriaDecision-Making,pp.146–
situational awareness is yet to be explored. 152,IEEE,2007.JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 20
[4] J. S. Kang and S. J. Lee, “Concept of an intelligent operator support [28] “Tobii pro lab.” https://www.tobii.com/products/software/
systemforinitialemergencyresponsesinnuclearpowerplants,”Nuclear behavior-research-software/tobii-pro-lab. Accessed: February 21,
EngineeringandTechnology,vol.54,no.7,pp.2453–2466,2022. 2024.
[5] M. H. Hsieh, S. L. Hwang, K. H. Liu, S. F. M. Liang, and C. F. [29] C. W. Amazu, A. N. Abbas, J. Mietkiewicz, H. Briwa, A. A. Perez,
Chuang,“Adecisionsupportsystemforidentifyingabnormaloperating G.Baldissone,D.Fissore,M.Demichela,andM.C.Leva,“Operational
proceduresinanuclearpowerplant,”vol.249,pp.413–418,82012. logs:Human-in-the-loopanddecisionsupportinprocesscontrolrooms.”
[6] B. Balaji, M. A. Shahab, B. Srinivasan, and R. Srinivasan, “Act-r Manuscriptunderpreparation,2024.
basedhumandigitaltwintoenhanceoperators’performanceinprocess [30] C. W. Amazu, J. Mietkiewicz, H. Briwa, A. N. Abbas, A. A. Perez,
industries,”FrontiersinHumanNeuroscience,vol.17,p.18,2023. G. Baldissone, D. Fissore, M. Demichela, and M. C. Leva, “Impact
[7] R. A. Howard and J. E. Matheson, “Influence diagrams,” Decision of human system interfaces on process control room operators: An
Analysis,vol.2,no.3,pp.127–143,2005. introduction of support tools and a design of experiment.” Manuscript
underpreparation,2024.
[8] J.A.TatmanandR.D.Shachter,“Dynamicprogrammingandinfluence
diagrams,”IEEEtransactionsonsystems,man,andcybernetics,vol.20, [31] S. Ghiasi, A. Greco, R. Barbieri, E. P. Scilingo, and G. Valenza,
“Assessingautonomicfunctionfromelectrodermalactivityandheartrate
no.2,pp.365–379,1990.
variabilityduringcold-pressortestandemotionalchallenge,”Scientific
[9] J. Mietkiewicz, A. N. Abbas, C. W. Amazu, A. L. Madsen, and
reports,vol.10,no.1,p.5406,2020.
G. Baldissone, “Dynamic influence diagram-based deep reinforcement
[32] P. J. Unema, S. Pannasch, M. Joos, and B. M. Velichkovsky, “Time
learning framework and application for decision support for operators
courseofinformationprocessingduringsceneperception:Therelation-
incontrolrooms,”2023.
shipbetweensaccadeamplitudeandfixationduration,”Visualcognition,
[10] J. Mietkiewicz, A. N. Abbas, C. W. Amazu, G. Baldissone, A. L.
vol.12,no.3,pp.473–494,2005.
Madsen, M. Demichela, and M. C. Leva, “Enhancing control room
[33] M.S.Fadardi,J.S.Fadardi,M.Mahjoob,andH.Doosti,“Post-saccadic
operatordecisionmaking,”Processes,vol.12,no.2,p.328,2024.
eyemovementindicesundercognitiveload:Apathanalysistodetermine
[11] U. B. Kjærulff and A. L. Madsen, “Bayesian networks and influence
visualperformance,”JournalofOphthalmic&VisionResearch,vol.17,
diagrams:Aguidetoconstructionandanalysis,”2013.
no.3,p.397,2022.
[12] V.Franc¸ois-Lavet,P.Henderson,R.Islam,M.G.Bellemare,J.Pineau, [34] B. Mahanama, Y. Jayawardana, S. Rengarajan, G. Jayawardena,
et al., “An introduction to deep reinforcement learning,” Foundations L. Chukoskie, J. Snider, and S. Jayarathna, “Eye movement and pupil
andTrends®inMachineLearning,vol.11,no.3-4,pp.219–354,2018. measures:Areview,”frontiersinComputerScience,vol.3,p.733531,
[13] S. Spielberg, A. Tulsyan, N. P. Lawrence, P. D. Loewen, and R. B. 2022.
Gopaluni, “Deep reinforcement learning for process control: A primer [35] E. Stuyven, K. Van der Goten, A. Vandierendonck, K. Claeys, and
forbeginners,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2004.05490,2020. L. Crevits, “The effect of cognitive load on saccadic eye movements,”
[14] A. N. Abbas, G. C. Chasparis, and J. Kelleher, “Deep residual policy Actapsychologica,vol.104,no.1,pp.69–85,2000.
reinforcementlearningasacorrectiveterminprocesscontrolforalarm [36] T.Akiba,S.Sano,T.Yanase,T.Ohta,andM.Koyama,“Optuna:Anext-
reduction:Apreliminaryreport,”2022. generation hyperparameter optimization framework,” in Proceedings
[15] S. Fujimoto, H. Hoof, and D. Meger, “Addressing function approxi- of the 25th ACM SIGKDD International Conference on Knowledge
mation error in actor-critic methods,” in International conference on DiscoveryandDataMining,2019.
machinelearning,pp.1587–1596,PMLR,2018.
[16] A.N.Abbas,G.C.Chasparis,andJ.D.Kelleher,“Hierarchicalframe-
workforinterpretableandspecializeddeepreinforcementlearning-based
APPENDIX
predictive maintenance,” Data & Knowledge Engineering, vol. 149, PROCESS,ALARM,ANDHMILOGSDESCRIPTION
p.102240,2024.
[17] A. N. Abbas, G. C. Chasparis, and J. D. Kelleher, “Specialized deep
residualpolicysafereinforcementlearning-basedcontrollerforcomplex TABLEI:
and continuous state-action spaces,” arXiv preprint arXiv:2310.14788,
2023. Var Name Description
[18] L. R. Rabiner, “A tutorial on hidden markov models and selected
applications in speech recognition,” Proceedings of the IEEE, vol. 77, LSERB 1 Level
no.2,pp.257–286,1989.
All2 XX Alarm activation
[19] A.N.Abbas,G.C.Chasparis,andJ.D.Kelleher,“Interpretableinput-
outputhiddenmarkovmodel-baseddeepreinforcementlearningforthe sAll XX Alarm sound silence
predictivemaintenanceofturbofanengines,”inInternationalConference
onBigDataAnalyticsandKnowledgeDiscovery,pp.133–148,Springer, PSERB 1 Pressure
2022.
[20] A.Lee,“hmmlearn:Hiddenmarkovmodelsinpythonwithscikit-learn Human Control adjusted by human
likeapi,”2023. PythonPackageIndex.
Nitsel 1 Nitrogen system selector
[21] M.Demichela,G.Baldissone,andG.Camuncoli,“Risk-baseddecision
making for the management of change in process plants: benefits of AckAll Alarm action
integrating probabilistic and phenomenological analysis,” Industrial &
Engineering Chemistry Research, vol. 56, no. 50, pp. 14873–14887, SRLA vs Human Error between the suggestion
2017. and chosen control
[22] S. Mathoˆt, J. Fabius, E. Van Heusden, and S. Van der Stigchel, “Safe
and sensible preprocessing and baseline correction of pupil-size data,” SRLA Control suggested by SRLA
Behaviorresearchmethods,vol.50,pp.94–106,2018.
[23] C. W. Amazu, J. Mietkiewicz, A. N. Abbas, H. Briwa, A. A. Perez, MCReatTempOld 1 Manual Reactor cooling value
G. Baldissone, M. Demichela, D. Fissore, A. L. Madsen, and M. C.
MmanNit 1 Manual primary flow value
Leva,“Experimentdata:Human-in-the-loopdecisionsupportinprocess
controlrooms,”DatainBrief,p.110170,2024. LinasO 1 Water IN flow
[24] A. N. Abbas and Winniewelsh, “Cisc-live-lab-3/dataset: v1.0.2,” Jan.
2024. MVAPrec3 1 Flow Steam REC3
[25] A.N.Abbas,“ammar-n-abbas/drl-based-decision-support:v1.0.0,”Feb.
MAssWatO 1 ManualAbsorberwaterselector
2024.
[26] C. W. Amazu, A. N. Abbas, J. Mietkiewicz, H. Briwa, A. A. Perez,
intop 1 Open interface
G.Baldissone,D.Fissore,M.Demichela,andM.C.Leva,“Experiment
data:Human-in-the-loopanddecisionsupportinprocesscontrolrooms.” MAssWatFlowO 1 Manual Absorber water value
Manuscriptunderpreparation,2024.
[27] “Tobii pro glasses 3.” https://www.tobii.com/products/eye-trackers/ Continued on next page
wearables/tobii-pro-glasses-3. Accessed:February21,2024.JOURNALOFLATEXCLASSFILES,VOL.XX,NO.X,DECEMBER2023 21
TABLEI: (Continued)
Var Name Description
REC3WMO 1 Manual REC3 selector
MWpopOld 1 Manual Pump power value
MpumpOld 1 Manual Pump selector
intop 5 Open interface
FN2serb1O 1 Primary Nitrogen Flow
MCoolreatOld 1 Manual Reactor Cooling selec-
tor
intop 2 Open interface
MliqbolO 1 Methanol Mass in the Boiler
MNitsel 1 ManualPrimarynitrogenselec-
tor
MAssWatFlowO 1 Manual Absorber water value