JournalTitle
Learning to connect in action: XX(X):1–20
©TheAuthor(s)2016
Measuring and understanding the Reprintsandpermission:
sagepub.co.uk/journalsPermissions.nav
DOI:10.1177/ToBeAssigned
emergence of boundary spanners in www.sagepub.com/
SAGE
volatile times
Vittorio Nespeca1 and Tina Comes 1 and Frances Brazier1
Abstract
Collectiveintelligenceofdiversegroupsiskeyfortacklingmanyoftoday’sgrandchallengessuchasfosteringresilience
and climate change adaptation. Given increasing societal fragmentation, information exchange across such diverse
groups is crucial for collective intelligence, especially in volatile environments. To facilitate inter-group information
exchange, Informational Boundary Spanners (IBSs) as pivotal information exchange ’hubs’ are promising. However,
themechanismsthatdrivetheemergenceofIBSsremainpoorlyunderstood.Toaddressthisgapthereisfirstaneed
for a method to identify and measure the emergence of IBSs. Second, an Agent-Based Modelling (ABM) framework
is not available to systematically study mechanisms for the emergence of IBSs in volatile environments through the
method.Third,eventhoughtheabilitytolearnwhoprovideshigh-qualityinformationisthoughttobeessentialtoexplain
theemergenceofIBSs,arigoroustestofthismechanismismissing.Thelearningmechanismisformalizedusingan
ABM framework, with the model’s outputs analyzed through the proposed method for measuring the emergence of
IBSs. To illustrate both the measurement method and the learning mechanism, we present a case study focused on
information sharing in the volatile environment of a disaster. The study shows that learning constitutes a mechanism
fortheemergenceofeffectiveIBSsin(a)low-volatilityenvironmentscharacterisedbylowuncertaintyand(b)inhigh-
volatility environments characterised by rapid change if the number of inter-group connections is sufficient. With the
method and model, this paper aims to lay the foundations for exploring mechanisms for the emergence of IBSs that
facilitateinter-groupinformationexchange.Thisarticlecontributestothefieldofcollectiveintelligencebyprovidingthe
essentialelementsformeasuringandunderstandingtheemergenceofIBSsandbyexploringtheeffectoflearningon
theiremergenceinvolatileenvironments.
Keywords
Information management, crisis management, information diffusion, boundary spanning, inter-organizational
coordination.
Significance statement Results show that learning can facilitate more actors
into growing into the role of IBSs that effectively convey
In today’s rapidly changing and uncertain world, effective information across groups. This process is most effective
communication and collaboration are crucial between dif- when information is consistently provided by information
ferentgroupsincludinggovernmentalorganizations,NGOs, sourcesthatarestableanddonotchangeovertime.Further,
andcommunities.Thispaperfocusesoneffectiveexchange in environments characterized by rapid change, a high
of information within and between these groups. Individual number of inter-group contacts (20 or more) is vital for
actors known as Informational Boundary Spanners (IBSs) the development of IBSs, to distribute the informational
play a key role in this process. Yet, there is so far no exchangeburdenandimprovecommunicationefficiency.
methodtoquantitativelymeasuretheemergenceofindivid- These findings have two main practical implications.
ual IBSs, and as such no analytical way to systematically First, to foster effective inter-group information exchange
test the mechanisms that drive the emergence of IBSs. in volatile environments it is key to broadly crowd-
Measuringandunderstandingtheconditionsandunderlying sourceinformationandwidelydisseminateitthroughstable
mechanismsthatinfluencetheemergenceofIBSs,andtheir channels. Second, the availability of trusted connections
success,isthefocusofthispaper. across groups is crucial to support effective inter-group
information exchange even in conditions of high volatility.
This paper (a) proposes a method to quantitatively
measure the number of actors that take on the role of IBSs
and(b)showshowthismethodcanbeusedincombination
with computer simulations to study mechanisms for the 1DelftUniversityofTechnology,NL
emergence of IBSs. In particular, the ability of all actors
Correspondingauthor:
to learn which actors provide information of high quality is
Vittorio Nespeca, Delft University of Technology, Delft, South Holland,
explored as a mechanism for the emergence of IBSs under 2628BX,TheNetherlands.
differentconditions. Email:v.nespeca@tudelft.nl
Preparedusingsagej.cls[Version:2017/01/17v1.20]
4202
yaM
02
]AM.sc[
1v89911.5042:viXra2 JournalTitleXX(X)
This, in turn, mandates that trusted connections between that there are three major gaps in the literature: (i) a
groups are established and maintained over time: a true formalised method to quantitatively analyse how IBSs
societalchallenge. effectivelyconveyinginformationacrossgroupsemerge;(ii)
ananalyticalmodelingframeworktoanalyseandunderstand
the mechanisms behind the emergence of effective IBSs
Introduction
under different conditions of environmental volatility; and
Policies and practices for ensuring a sustainable, resilient, (iii)adeeperunderstandingoftheeffectsoflearningonthe
and climate-adaptive future rely on collective intelligence emergenceofIBSsinvolatileenvironments.
across diverse groups (Norris et al. 2008; Malone 2018;
Casestudyresearchhasbeeninvaluabletostudyboundary
Rockstro¨m et al. 2023; Perrone et al. 2023). Collective
spanning (Ancona and Caldwell 1992; Levina and Vaast
intelligenceisdefinedasthesharedproblem-solvingability
2005; Marrone 2010; Lifshitz-Assaf 2018). Yet, Agent-
that arises from the interaction and combined efforts of a
BasedModeling(ABM)cancomplementandenhancecase
groupofindividuals,leadingtotheeffectiveaccomplishment
study research by facilitating the systematic analysis and
of one or more goals (Malone 2018; Flack et al. 2022).
comparisonofresultsfromseveralcasestudiesbycapturing
Fostering collective intelligence strongly relies on the
interactions from micro to macro levels within a unified
exchange of information among the individuals belonging
modeling framework. This is particularly relevant when
to the different groups (Leonard and Levin 2022; Ballou
investigating emergent mechanisms resulting from complex
2007; Malone and Crowston 1994; Fiala 2005). The need
interactionsacrossmultiplelevels(AdamandGaudou2017;
for information sharing is even more prominent in volatile
Antosz et al. 2022), as seen with IBSs (Marrone 2010).
(i.e., rapidly changing and uncertain) environments, where
For instance, by incorporating insights from case studies
the groups (e.g., governmental organizations, NGOs, and
on individual behavior at the micro level into an ABM,
communities) must continually adapt while maintaining
researchers can simulate a system’s macro-level behavior,
coordinationoftheiractivities.Disasterresponseexemplifies
assessingwhetherthesimulatedemergentpatternsreplicate
a situation in which multiple groups operate in a volatile
andexplainempiricalobservationsfromotherstudies(Adam
environmentandneedtoexchangeinformationtocoordinate
and Gaudou 2017). This approach enables the replication,
andrespondeffectively(Kapucu2005;Bharosaetal.2010;
testing of consistency, and extension of case study research
Comesetal.2020;Nespecaetal.2020).
findings and provides directions for further case studies
Actors within these groups exchange information with
(Tubaro and Casilli 2010; Castellani et al. 2019; Nespeca
each other and with actors in other groups. Some actors do
etal.2023).
so more successfully than others: over time they become
hubsforinter-groupinformationexchangeorInformational A fundamental step in enabling a combination of case
Boundary Spanners (IBSs) (Tushman 1977; Ancona and study research and ABM when studying the emergence
Caldwell1992;Kapucu2006;Ballou2007;Zagoreckietal. of IBSs is to design a quantitative method for measuring
2009;Marrone2010;AltayandPal2013;AltayandLabonte boundary spanning on an individual or micro level. This
2014; Van Meerkerk and Edelenbos 2014; Bharosa and involves identifying individuals who emerge as IBSs by
Janssen2015).LevinaandVaast(2005)findthattheformal effectively providing the information needed to the groups
appointmentofthisroleasIBS,suchasthroughamandate, who need it. Identifying emergent IBSs is vital for
does not suffice to ensure effective information exchange. examining the interplay between the micro, meso, and
Instead, the role of IBSs in facilitating information sharing macrolevelconditionsthatpromotesuchemergence(Levina
amonggroupsemergesthroughdynamicinteractionswithin and Vaast 2005). While several quantitative methods for
and between these groups. More specifically, fostering the IBSs have been provided for measuring informational
emergence of IBSs requires consideration of the interplay boundary spanning (Ancona and Caldwell 1992; Hansen
between individual group members (micro level), their 1999; Cummings 2004; Marrone 2010; Van Osch et al.
groups (meso level), and networked interactions among 2016),thesemethodstypicallyfocusonboundaryspanning
groups (macro level) (Marrone et al. 2007; Marrone 2010). atthelevelofoneormultiplegroupsratherthanatthelevel
This emergent process is contingent on specific conditions oftheindividualactor.Specifically,somemethodsfocuson
at the different levels. For example, it is key that at the assessing the volume of boundary spanning (e.g., through
micro level an IBS develops an interest in carrying out the frequency of communication) vis a vis operational
boundary spanning. Further, the formal nomination of an performance (e.g., time required for project completion) at
actorasanIBSsatthegroup(meso)levelcansupporthis/her the group level (Hansen 1999; Cummings 2004; Zagorecki
emergenceassuchbutisnotmandatory.And,finally,formal etal.2009).Othermethods,directlymeasurethesuccessof
or informal recognition of boundary spanners’ authority to IBSs in retrieving information for their group in a timely
negotiate on behalf of their group also plays as key role manner (Ancona and Caldwell 1992; Marrone et al. 2007;
in the emergence of boundary spanners when considering Van Osch et al. 2016). Finally, Zagorecki et al. (2009)
networkedinteractionsamonggroups(macrolevel). monitors network characteristics (e.g., the average distance
While there are some initial empirical insights into the between nodes) and the volume of inter-group information
emergenceofinformationalboundaryspanningatthemicro, exchanged to study the level of informational boundary
meso, and macro levels and mechanisms that drive their spanning occurring among groups. However, none of these
emergence,thereisthusfarnoquantitativeformalisationand approachesmeasureshowmanyandwhichindividualagents
analytical modeling framework that studies the emergence emerge as effective IBSs. As such, a method to measure
of IBSs via computational experiments. This paper argues the emergence of effective IBSs at micro-level is missing,
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 3
leadingtoalackofunderstandinginthemechanismsbehind the emergence of IBSs in volatile conditions through the
theemergenceofIBSs. method. Then, the method and ABM framework are used
Such a method provides a basis to build an ABM to analyse and understand learning as a mechanism that
framework enabling to simulate inter-group information potentiallyresultsintheemergenceofIBSs.Tothisend,two
exchange and capture the simulation outputs required mechanisms are introduced and compared in the ABM: in
to systematically analyse, test, and understand at micro- thefirstmechanism,agentsexchangeinformationrandomly.
level mechanisms for the emergence of IBSs under In the second mechanism, agents continually learn which
varying circumstances. The characteristics of the external sources provide the most relevant information and adjust
environment,inwhichthegroupsoperate,arelikelytoplay their information collection preferences accordingly. Both
a crucial role in shaping the emergence of IBSs (Aldrich mechanisms are studied for different levels of volatility
and Herker 1977; Hazy et al. 2003). The environment andnumbersofconnectionsenablinginformationexchange
consistsoffactorsexternaltoagroup’sboundarythataffect among the considered groups during the response to a
the decisions of individuals within the group and thereby disaster.
affects the group’s ability to achieve its goals (Lawrence The remainder of this paper is structured as follows.
and Lorsch 1967; Duncan 1972). Especially in volatile Section 2 introduces our case study of disaster response
environments information sharing has been shown to be in Jakarta as an example of a situation that requires
essential to achieve collective intelligence and coordination collective intelligence. Section 3 introduces the method
(Comes et al. 2020). Volatility is defined as the level of proposed for measuring the emergence of IBSs based on
turbulence and uncertainty that characterize changes in the existing literature. Section 4 formulates three propositions
environment, where turbulence indicates the frequency of concerninglearningmechanismsfortheemergenceofIBSs
change (Hazy et al. 2003), and uncertainty denotes the and their impact on inter-group information exchange in
unpredictabilityintheoccurrenceofchange(Duncan1972). volatile environments. Section 5 describes the development
The emergence of boundary spanning (or lack thereof) of an ABM that captures inter-group information exchange
has been primarily studied for non-volatile environments and provides the output required to study the emergence
(Ancona and Caldwell 1992; Levina and Vaast 2005, 2006; of IBSs through the proposed method. Section 6 illustrates
Lifshitz-Assaf2018).Eventhoughvolatilesituationssuchas the model parametrization and experimental design aimed
social unrest, crises, or conflicts are increasingly common, at testing the method for capturing the emergence of IBSs
little research is available on the conditions that foster the and study the propositions through the ABM. Section
emergence of IBSs in volatile environments. Hazy et al. 7 presents the results of the experiments. Section 8
(2003) propose an ABM framework and use it to study discusses the implications of these results, leading to
the effectiveness of different numbers of IBSs for varying considerations regarding the correctness of the method
levels of environmental volatility. However, their modeling proposedformeasuringemergentIBSs,theextenttowhich
framework and study assume a predefined number of IBSs theresultssupporttheformulatedpropositions,andwhatthe
anddoesnotaccountforhowandwhytheyemerge.Further, findings imply for information management and collective
Zagorecki et al. (2009) propose an ABM to study the intelligence in volatile environments. This section also
emergence of inter-group information exchange in volatile presents directions for future research. Section 8 concludes
environments. Yet, their model does not focus on capturing thepaper.
theemergenceofIBSsatthemicrolevel.Assuch,anABM
frameworktostudytheemergenceofIBSsatthemicrolevel
Case study: Disaster response in Jakarta
involatileenvironmentsinmissing.
Further,severalempiricalstudieshaveshownthatactorsin In disaster response, typically multiple and loosely
volatile conditions actively learn who among their contacts connected organizations (e.g. governmental organizations
provides high-quality information, subsequently adjusting and NGOs) and groups (e.g. communities) collectively
their information collection preferences to align with these operateinahighlyvolatileenvironment.Thesegroupsneed
sources(Suttonetal.2008;Nespecaetal.2020).Preliminary to exchange information to respond effectively (Kapucu
evidence shows that this learning behavior can lead to the 2005; Altay and Green III 2006; Bharosa et al. 2010;
emergence of IBSs in volatile conditions (Nespeca et al. Comes et al. 2020; Nespeca et al. 2020). Information
2020).However,theconcretemechanismsbetweenlearning exchange in these conditions is particularly challenging as,
andtheemergenceofIBSsremainpoorlyunderstood. given the sheer volume and frequency of new information
In sum, there are several gaps in the understanding of produced during a disaster, the actors are likely to become
IBSs.First,amethodisneededformeasuringtheemergence overloaded with information, which impairs their ability
of IBSs at the micro level as key to analyse the underlying to share and retrieve relevant information (Van de Walle
mechanisms that drive their emergence. Second, an ABM et al. 2016; Comes 2016). Further, disaster response is
framework is missing to systematically study mechanisms typically characterized by high uncertainty, meaning it is
for the emergence of IBSs at the micro level in volatile often difficult to predict when and from which sources
environments. Third, a better understanding is required of relevantinformationwillbecomeavailable.Assuch,disaster
the effects of learning and the volatility of the situation on response presents an ideal case study to understand the
theemergenceofIBSs. emergenceofIBSsinvolatileenvironments.
To address these gaps, this paper develops a method This research focuses on the case study of Jakarta,
to measure the emergence of IBSs at the micro-level Indonesia. Situated on the northwest coast of Java, the
and introduces an ABM framework enabling to study world’s most populous island, Jakarta is subject to frequent
Preparedusingsagej.cls4 JournalTitleXX(X)
flooding, primarily attributed to its rapid subsidence and formulate propositions and design the ABM for testing the
ongoing urbanization processes (Abidin et al. 2011, 2015). propositions.
Jakarta also hosts diverse stakeholders including govern-
mentalorganizations,NGOs,andcommunityinitiativesthat Mechanisms for the emergence of informational
need to coordinate, collaborate, and exchange information boundary spanners
effectively.Additionally,Jakartawaschosenbecause,during
Insights regarding potential mechanisms for the emergence
the data collection period in 2018, numerous international
of IBSs were gained in the case study of Jakarta. In the
organizations were present in response to the humanitarian
wordsofaninformationmanagementofficerinterviewedby
responsetotheSulawesiEarthquake.Thedetailsonthecase
(Nespecaetal.2020):
studyincludingdatacollection,analysis,anddiscussionare
availablein(Nespecaetal.2020). ”Iwasbecomingareferenceforeveryoneasking
aboutmailinglists,whoisworkinginacertain
area, or what sort of maps are available. So
Measuring the emergence of informational
that’s the role that I have played”. UN-OCHA
boundary spanners
Information Management Officer. Collected in
October2018.
While several functions can be attributed to boundary
spanning including information processing, external repre-
Thisquoteshowsthatanactor canemergeasanIBSnot
sentation, negotiation, and brokering (Aldrich and Herker
because of direct choice, but through an emergent process
1977; Ancona and Caldwell 1992; Fleming and Wagues-
resulting from the collective choices and adjustments in
pack 2007), this paper focuses on information processing.
the information collection preferences of a multitude of
Informationprocessingorinformationalboundary-spanning
actors. This finding hints at the ability of actors to learn
is defined as the activity of searching for information that
the contacts that consistently provide relevant information
lies outside the boundary of a group (i.e. that originates
andadjusttheirinformationcollectionpreferencestomatch
in the group’s external environment) to find, process, and
such contacts over time. This learning process constitutes
share new and relevant information that can enhance the
a mechanism that occurs at the micro (agent) level, and
knowledgeofthegroup(Bharosa2011;Lindgrenetal.2008;
can lead to the emergence of ’information hub roles’ (here
Ancona and Caldwell 1992; Van Osch et al. 2016). Bound-
termedIBSs)atthemacrolevel(Nespecaetal.2020,pp9-
aries are the delimitation of a group or organization from
10).Suchamechanismisreferredtoas’LearNing’orLNin
its environment (Scott 1992). Often external information
thefollowing.Inthisstudy,learningiscomparedtoanother
needed by a group is available from other groups. As such,
mechanism in which actors collect information randomly
performing the informational boundary spanning function
among their contacts without developing information
entailsfosteringtheexchangeofinformationamonggroups.
collectionpreferences(called’RandomCollection’orRC).
IBS candidates (actors that can become IBSs), are AgentsrelyingonLNdevelopapreferenceforcollecting
those who have connections across group boundaries, or from contacts that share relevant information frequently.
’inter-group ties’. As such, they can potentially search, Thissignificantlyincreasestheirchancesoffindingrelevant
find, process, and share information across groups, thus information. For IBS candidates with inter-group contacts,
performingtheinformationalboundaryspanningfunction. these preferences tend to favor external contacts, who
One approach to measuring the emergence of IBSs may provide access to external information not readily available
be to simply count the number of IBS candidates that carry within the their own groups. Consequently, IBS candidates
outtheinformationalboundary-spanningfunction.However, relying on LN are more likely to engage with sources
whilethisfunctionmaybeperformedoccasionallybymany outside their group boundaries, accessing new and relevant
orallpotentialIBSs,onlyafewoftheseactorsconsistently information more effectively than those using RC, who
perform this function and thus contribute significantly to lack such targeted preferences. Therefore, IBS candidates
fostering the exchange of new and relevant information influencedbyLNaremorelikelytofulfilltheinformational
across groups (Levina and Vaast 2005). As such, simply boundary spanning function (Cf. Section measuring the
counting the number of IBS candidates that perform the emergenceofIBSs)andemergeaseffectiveIBSscompared
informationalboundary-spanningfunctionoccasionally(e.g. to those that rely on RC. This has two consequences. First,
onceorafewtimes)isexpectedtooverestimatethenumber a larger portion of IBSs candidates become emergent IBSs,
of IBSs that emerge. Then, measuring the emergence of resulting in a higher number of emergent IBSs with LN
IBSs requires identifying those actors that not only carry compared to RC. Second, as a whole, the IBSs that emerge
out the informational boundary spanning function but also are more effective in finding external information that is
dosowithsufficientconsistencytosignificantlyenhancethe relevantandnewfortheirgroupswithLNcomparedtoRC.
exchange of new and relevant external information among Thefollowingpropositionisformulated.
groups.
Proposition 1 (Learning VS Random Collection):When
actorslearnbyadjustingtheirpreferredinformationsources
Understanding the emergence of based on the past quality of information provided by
such sources, a higher number of informational boundary
informational boundary spanners
spanners emerge that are more effective in retrieving
This section presents insights from the literature and the externalinformationthaninthecaseinwhichactorscollect
Jakarta case study (Nespeca et al. 2020) that were used to informationrandomlyamongtheircontacts.
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 5
The effect of environmental uncertainty
In disaster response, there are typically two types of events
in a group’s external environment that need to be detected
by individuals belonging to the group to inform decision
making, namely shocks and announcements (Nespeca et al.
2020, 2023). Shocks are unexpected disruptive events such
as cascading effects generated by infrastructural failures
(e.g., blackouts), riots, or natural disasters. Announcements
represent the release of information that is produced and
consistently shared by particular groups or agencies such
as flood early warnings (Watts et al. 2019; Nespeca et al.
2018),evacuationorders(AdamandGaudou2017),orneeds
assessments.
In this study, uncertainty can be associated with the
event itself (e.g., concerning the nature and timing of the
Figure1. Informationflowpathsillustratingthespreadof
event) and the source from which information regarding
informationfromitsorigin(i.e.nodeinthenetworkinwhichnew
the event is released or made available (i.e. the information informationisintroduced)throughaseriesofinformation
origin). Shocks and announcements differ in terms of sharingactivitiescarriedoutbythenetworknodesrepresenting
their uncertainty in the source of information associated theactors.
with them. In the case of shocks, it is not known when
and where a shock will occur, and who will be affected
toberelevant(asassumedforthisstudy),theactorsdirectly
and communicating about it. Consequently, the origin (or
connected to the origin will learn and develop a preference
source) of information becomes uncertain. As such, shock-
towardschoosingitastheirsource.Otheractorswhoareonly
related information has an unstable origin. In contrast,
indirectly connected to the origin (i.e. via other contacts)
announcements are consistently generated from the same
arelikelytodevelopapreferencefortheactorsamongtheir
source within an information exchange network (e.g.,
contactsthatarethemostdirectlyconnectedtotheorigin(i.e.
weatherforecastingagencyinthecaseofearlywarnings,or
throughthelowestnumberofties),giventheyaremorelikely
thevillageleaderinthecaseofevacuationorders).Assuch,
to consistently receive and share such information earlier
whilethetimeandtypeofannouncementisstilluncertain(it
than other contacts. Then, at each information exchange
isnotknownwhenanearlywarningwillbenecessary),the
alongthepath,actorsarelikelytocollectfromthecontacts
source of announcement information is known. Therefore,
that are the most directly connected with the information
announcementinformationisreferredtoasinformationwith
origin. As such, learning is expected to generate shorter
astableorigin.
information flow paths from the origin of information to
Thecombinedeffectofthestabilityininformationorigin
thegroupthatneedssuchinformationcomparedtothecase
andlearningontheemergenceofIBSscanbeconceptualized
in which actors collect information randomly and do not
fromtheperspectiveofinformationflowpaths.Information
developpreferences.
flow paths (or simply information flows) represent the
Conversely, if information has an unstable origin
contact-to-contact information exchanges through which
(shocks) the source of information changes, and, thus,
information spreads within and across groups. These paths
agents cannot learn which sources continually provide
originateonceinformationiscreatedfromunstructureddata,
relevant information. The actors therefore will benefit less
andthenroutedtooneormoreoftheactorsbelongingtothe
from developing information collection preferences. These
groupsconsidered(asshowninFigure1).
considerationsleadtothefollowingproposition:
The configuration of information flows and whether they
reachgroupsdependonseveralfactors.Thisstudyaccounts
Proposition 2 (Stability of information origin and
for the following three: (1) information flows depend on
learning): Learning leads to more effective inter-group
the structure of the network through which information can
information exchange if and only if relevant information
be exchanged within and across the boundaries of different
is consistently generated by the same actors. If relevant
groups (as introduced by (Zagorecki et al. 2009; Altay
information becomes available from continually changing
and Pal 2013)). In this case, the network is considered
and uncertain sources (unstable origin) learning has
to be constant. (2) information flows are affected by the
no effect in terms of improving inter-group information
locationsofthenetwork,inwhichnewexternalinformation
exchange.
is introduced i.e. the origin of the information. The origin
of information can be stable (announcements), or unstable
The effect of environmental turbulence
(shocks).(3)Thepathsdependontheinformationexchange
behaviorandpreferencesoftheactorsconstitutingthenodes Environmentalturbulenceisthefrequencyofenvironmental
inthenetwork. change(Duncan1972).Specifically,turbulenceinthisstudy
WhetherlearningimpactstheemergenceofIBSsandthe is defined as the frequency of occurrence of events (i.e.,
ability of groups to retrieve external information is related shocks, and announcements) representing changes in the
tothestabilityofinformationorigin.Whentheinformation environment. In order to detect and adapt to such changes,
originisstable(announcements),theinformationflowpaths actors need to find information regarding these events. As
originate in the same node. If that information is perceived such,thehigherthelevelofturbulencethehigherthevolume
Preparedusingsagej.cls6 JournalTitleXX(X)
of external information that agents need to manage and consequences of individual behavior (Epstein and Axtell
find. However, actors have a limited capacity to process 1996).
information (Simon 1955). In the case of disasters, the An ABM was developed based on the methodology and
volume and speed of information can be so prominent that ABM proposed in (Nespeca et al. 2023) and modified to
actors reach the limit of their cognitive capabilities and include the learning mechanism found for the Jakarta case
become overloaded with information, which impairs their study in (Nespeca et al. 2020). The goal of the model
ability to retrieve and exchange the information needed is to assess the validity of the method for measuring
(VandeWalleetal.2016;Comes2016).Assuch,theauthors the emergence of IBSs and to study the mechanisms that
of this study posit that, for higher levels of turbulence, influence the emergence of IBSs. A graphical overview of
the performance of the system decreases. Performance the results of this ABM is shown in Figure 2. Further, a
is measured as the amount of information concerning conceptualdiagramoftheentities,states,andtasksincluded
environment-altering events that is collected or received by inthemodelisshowninFigure3.Entitiesrepresentessential
thegroupsthatneedsuchinformation. featuresofthemodelwiththeirproperties,states,andtasks
The number of actors that can explore the external aspresentedinthelegendofFigure3.
environment was shown to play a crucial role in helping Two main groups of agents are considered in the ABM,
groups to detect environmental change (Hazy et al. 2003). namely communities and professional response organiza-
In their study, the actors able to explore the external tions or simply professionals (including governmental and
environment are those with inter-group ties. An increased non-governmentalorganizations).Thesystem’sperformance
number of inter-group ties entails a greater number of is measured in terms of the percentage of external informa-
IBSs candidates who can emerge as IBSs and contribute to tionneededbyeachofthesetwogroupsthatisfoundbyat
detectinformationconcerningeventsmarkingenvironmental leastoneoftheactorsbelongingtothegroup.Eachgrouphas
change. This is particularly relevant for high levels of direct access to the information that the other group needs.
turbulence, in which the high volume of information needs Therefore,sharinginformationacrossgroupbordersisvital.
to be distributed among a higher number of IBSs to reduce Specifically, communities have direct access to information
the risk of information overload and enhance system’s about shocks, which represent the information needed by
performance. professionals.Conversely,professionalscansendannounce-
Additionally, LN is expected to increase the number of ments, which represent the external information needed by
IBSs and improve their performance compared to random communities. The exchange of information among the two
collection for high levels of turbulence. Considering that groupsisenabledthroughtheemergenceofIBSs.
IBSs tend to process and exchange a high volume of Information exchange within and across the two groups
information across different groups, they are likely to takes place via networks of informal and formal ties or
become overloaded with information. When the available contacts (Cf. Figure 2). Informal ties are obtained through
IBSs are no longer able to provide relevant information preferential attachment algorithms based on (Baraba´si
becauseofinformationload,theactorsrequiringinformation and Albert 1999). Formal ties representing hierarchical
from them will adapt their information sources through LN structures are introduced within the professional response
tofindotheractorsabletoprovidetheinformationtheyneed. organizations according to three levels, namely strategic,
This may lead the actors to develop preferences towards tactical, and operational. Within such networks, IBS
IBSs candidates that are not yet as overloaded and that candidates (i.e., those that can potentially emerge as IBSs)
thus can support the exchange of information. As such, the are those that have at least one connection with an actor
adaptability introduced by learning is anticipated to enable belonging to a group different from their own (cf. the ties
actors to collectively distribute the volume of information connecting Professional Responders and Communities in
acrossahighernumberofIBSs,andthusimprovingoverall Figure2).
system’s performance compared to the case of RC. This The following paragraphs discuss the key features
performance increase is dependent on the agents’ capacity introduced in the model to measure the emergence of IBSs
to select from various IBS candidates resulting from a andexploreeachofthepropositions.
high number of inter-group ties, leading to the following Measuring the emergence of IBSs: emergent IBSs are
proposition. thosethatconsistentlyprovidenewandexternalinformation
to a group thus playing a key role in fostering information
Proposition 3 (Interplay of turbulence, inter-group ties
exchange across the groups (cf. Section ”Measuring the
redundancy, and learning): A higher number of ties
emergence of informational boundary spanners”). To apply
amonggroupsresultsinahighernumberofemergentIBSs,
such a definition, it is crucial to measure each agent’s
enhancingagroup’sabilitytoretrieveexternalinformation
contribution to information sharing across groups. This
eveninhighlyturbulentenvironments.Thisenhancedability
measurementisfacilitatedbytheintroductionofthe’number
to retrieve external information is particularly pronounced
of informational boundary-spanning Function Executions’
when actors rely on learning to adjust their information
orFEs,whereanactoragentincreasesitsFEcounteachtime
collectionpreferences.
it provides new and external information to any group that
requires it. The number of FEs accumulated by agents are
then used to study which of the IBS candidates emerge as
Model Design
IBSs.
Agent-basedmodeling(ABM)isthemodelingparadigmof Understanding emergence: the first proposition focuses
choice as it enables researchers to explore the collective on studying the emergence and effectiveness of IBSs
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 7
Figure2. GraphicaloverviewoftheAgent-BasedModel(ABM)developedforthisstudy.Themodelinvolvestwodistinctgroups,
namelyprofessionalresponders(ontheleft,inblack)andcommunities(ontheright,inblue)thatexchangeinformation.Thegrey
linesrepresenttheformalandinformaltiesusedforinformationexchange.Thetiesthatcrosstheborderbetweenprofessional
respondersandcommunitiesaretheinter-groupties.
Figure3. Graphicaldescriptionofentities,theirproperties,states,andtasksinthedevelopedABM.Theactorsandenvironment
areagentsintheABMgiventheycarryouttasks.
by comparing random information collection (RC) with to adjust preferences over time for each agent based on
learning (LN). RC and LN are characterized by different the relevance of the information provided by each of the
information collection preferences. Such preferences are agent’s contacts from the beginning of the simulation up to
modeled as non-uniform distributions in the probability the current time step. The adopted reinforcement learning
that agents have to collect from each of their contacts, algorithmisQ-learning(seeAppendixA).
denoting that some of the agents’ contacts are preferred Thesecondpropositionconsiderstheinterplayoflearning
compared to others. For RC, the information collection anduncertainty.Totesttheimpactofstabilityininformation
probabilitiesassignedbyanagenttoitscontactsareequally origin,announcements(withastableinformationorigin)and
divided among all contacts, indicating that the agent has shocks(withanunstableinformationorigin)areintroduced
no preferences (uniform distribution). For LN, each agent inthemodel.Thedegreeofuncertaintyisdeterminedbythe
develops and adjusts its information collection preferences parametersshocksperdayandannouncementsperday.For
over time (possibly leading to a non-uniform distribution). instance,ifshocksperdayissetto0andannouncementsper
Specifically, a reinforcement learning algorithm is used dayissettoavaluegreaterthan0,environmentaluncertainty
Preparedusingsagej.cls8 JournalTitleXX(X)
isconsideredtobelow,asonlystable-originannouncements varyinglevelsofenvironmentalturbulence(establishedwith
areconsidered. the parameters shocks per day and announcements per
The third proposition focuses on studying the combined day), learning (LN VS RC), and the number of inter-
effect of learning, turbulence, and number of inter-group groupties(establishedwiththehomonymparameter).These
ties on the emergence and performance of IBSs. Varying experimentsarerunthroughtheserviceprovidedbytheDelft
levelsofturbulencearecapturedbythedifferentfrequencies HighPerformanceComputingCentre (DHPC).
in the number of shocks and announcements (parameters
shocks per day and announcements per day) considered.
Results
The number of ties across communities and professional
responders are specified by the parameter number of inter- Thissectionillustratestheresultsoftheexperimentsshown
group ties. The inter-group ties are introduced in the inTable1.
model with a preferential attachment algorithm modified to
choose pairs of agents belonging to different groups with a Experiment 0: Measuring the emergence of
likelihoodthatdependsontheircurrentdegree(i.e.number informational boundary spanners
of ties). Bounded rationality is captured by limiting the
Figure 4 illustrates the distribution of the number of
amount of information that actors can process, share, and
instanceswhereagentswithinter-groupties(IBScandidates)
collectto3piecesofinformationwithineachsimulationstep
effectivelycontributenewandrelevantexternalinformation
(setthe’info.processinglimit’parameterinthemodel).
to the groups that need it, earning them informational
Regarding the temporal and spatial scales considered in
boundaryspanningFunctionExecutions(FEs).
thismodel,thetimestepofsimulationis10minutes,while
the duration of the simulation is 4 days. Spatial scale is
considered at an abstract level in this model as the actors
exchangeinformationthroughnetworks.Assuch,aspecific
spatialscaleisnotassignedinthiscase.
Methods
Thissectiondescribesthewaythemodelparameterswereset
andtheexperimentsthatwereruntotestthepropositions.
Model Parametrization Three parameters were constant
for all experiments namely: duration of a simulation, the
learning rate, and the information processing limit. The
duration of each simulation was set to 4 days to simulate
informationexchangeintheearlystagesofdisasterresponse, Figure4. Frequencyofoccurrenceof#FEs(numberof
a phase in which volatility is especially pronounced and informationalboundary-spanningFunctionExecutions)obtained
bytheIBScandidates,andthethresholdusedtocapturethe
rapidinter-groupinformationexchangeandcoordinationare
emergentIBSs.
particularlycrucial(Kreissetal.2010;BodeandMacdonald
2017). The learning rate was set to a relatively low value
ThedistributionrevealsthatseveralIBScandidatesattain
(assumed to be 0.1) as the time step in the simulation is
relatively few FEs, while only a few candidates achieve
small (10 minutes) compared to the chosen duration of the
a high number of FEs. This finding illustrates that a
simulation, requiring a smaller learning rate to compensate
few IBS candidates contribute to a great extent to inter-
for the high frequency with which information exchange
group information exchange by providing new and relevant
preferences are updated (up to every 10 minutes). Finally,
information to the groups who need it, while many other
the information processing limit was set to a value of 3,
candidates do not contribute significantly. The candidates
representing humans’ limited ability to process information
that contribute significantly to inter-group information
perunitoftime(inthiscaseevery10minutes)(Simon1955).
exchangequalifyasemergentIBSs.Oneapproachtoidentify
Experimental design In total, four batches of experiments these candidates is to assume that those that achieve a
were designed to study (a) the method for measuring the numberofFEsaboveagiventhresholdcontributeeffectively
emergence of IBSs and (b) each of the 3 propositions as also at the inter-group level and thus qualify as emergent
shown in Table 1. Experiment 0 focuses on testing the IBSs (cf. the red vertical line in Figure 4). Such threshold
approach for capturing and measuring the emergence of or thresholds should be high enough to avoid capturing
IBSs.Thesimulationsarerunforvaryingnumbersofinter- those IBS candidates that obtain only a few FEs (and as
group ties. Experiment 1 focuses on simulating the impact such do not considerably improve inter-group information
of the two different information collection mechanisms to exchange), but also not too high to avoid not capturing
studyProposition1.Next,Experiment2studiesProposition agentsthatmaynothavethehighestFEsbutstillcontribute
2 and thus investigates the interplay between learning significantlytointer-groupinformationexchange.However,
and varying levels of uncertainty (stability in information it is unclear how to select a threshold that satisfies these
origin) by combining different levels of shocks per day conditions.
andannouncementsperday.Finally,Experiment3explores To investigate the effects of the choice of this threshold,
Proposition 3 and thus focuses on the interplay between Experiment 0 focuses on studying the implications of
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 9
Parameters Experiment0 Experiment1 Experiment2 Experiment3
(method): (Proposition1): (Proposition2): (Proposition3):
Measuring emergent Comparing LN and Effect of Environ. Effect of Environ.
IBSs RC Uncertainty Turbulence
Info. Collection RC LN,RC LN,RC LN,RC
Mechanism
shocksperday 10 10 0,10,20 1∗,5∗,10∗,15∗,20∗
announcements 10 10 0,10,20 1∗,5∗,10∗,15∗,20∗
perday
number of inter- 1,2,5,10,20,30 20 20 1,2,5,10,20,30
groupties
duration of the 4 4 4 4
simulation(days)
learningrate N.A. 0.1 0.1 0.1
info. processing 3 3 3 3
limit
number of repeti- 80 40 40 20
tions
totalsimulations 120 80 720 1200
Table1. Parameterssettingforthesimulationexperimentsaimedattestingeachofthepropositions.Theexperimentswerefull
factorialwiththeexceptionofthevaluesmarkedwithanasterix’∗’.Theuseof∗forexperiment3indicatesthatforeachsimulation
intheexperimentanequalvalueofshocksperdayandannouncementsperdayisconsidered(e.g.10shocksperdayand10
announcementsperday)ratherthentheirfullfactorialcombination.LN=LearNing,RC=RandomCollection.
adopting different thresholds, namely the 1st, 10th, 20th,
30th, 40th, 50th, 60th, 70th, 80th, and 90th percentiles in
the frequency distribution shown in Figure 4. For each of
these thresholds, the number of IBSs emerged is plotted
againsttheireffectivenessattheinter-grouplevel,measured
asthe%ofexternalinformationneededfoundbythegroups.
Figure 5 illustrates the results for selected thresholds (i.e.
the 1st, 30th, 60th, 90th percentiles) to enhance clarity of
representation. These results show that for all considered
thresholds a higher number of emergent IBSs corresponds
to a higher performance. Further, the number of emergent
IBSs grows considerably when increasing the threshold.
This figure, however, does not consider the number of IBS
candidatesavailable,whichrepresentsthemaximumnumber Figure5. RelationshipbetweenthenumberofIBSsthat
emergedandthe%ofexternalinformationfoundbythegroups
ofIBSthatcanemerge.Assuch,amoreindepthanalysisis
whoneeditfordifferentvaluesofthethresholdsetasa
required that considers not only the threshold adopted, but
percentileinthedistributionofFEsfromFigure4.
alsothenumberofIBScandidatesavailable.
ToanalyzeemergingIBSsacrossvaryingnumbersofIBS transition into emergent IBSs. For instance, with 10 inter-
candidates and threshold settings, it is key to consider that group ties (meaning 20 IBS candidates), the emerging
the number of IBSs candidates depends on the number of number of IBSs tend to be around 20, underscoring the
Inter-GroupTies(#IGTs)availableamonggroups.Precisely, high conversion rate of IBS candidates into actual IBSs
the number of IBS candidates is twice # IGTs given that (cf. Figure 6.A, B, and C). Furthermore, the simulation
each connection ties two agents who can both emerge as results cluster in specific areas of the plot when holding
IBSs.Assuch,theanalysisdepictedinFigure5isexpanded the number of inter-group ties constant. This clustering
to consider not only different thresholds (in this case all suggestsminimalvariabilityinboththenumberofemerging
of those between the 1st and 90th percentiles), but also IBSs and the overall system performance. Such lacking
different # IGTs. Figures 6.A to 6.J depict the results. A variability shows the little sensitivity in capturing emergent
comparison of these figures reveals that, at low thresholds, IBSs provided by low thresholds. Conversely, for high
as depicted in Figures 6.A to C, nearly all IBS candidates thresholds such as the 90th percentile (Figure 6.D), there
Preparedusingsagej.cls10 JournalTitleXX(X)
Figure6. NumberofIBSsthatemergedforeachofthethresholdsconsideredinFigureBandfordifferentnumbersofInter-group
Ties(#IGTs).
is significant variability in the number of emergent IBSs, the consistency of the findings obtained. The remaining
yetthepercentageofexternalinformationremainsrelatively experiments(1to3)areanalyzedwithsixthresholds,namely
constant, as shown by the horizontal lines. This shows that the 30th, 40th, 50th, 60th, 70th, and 80th percentiles. For
the emergent IBSs captured with high thresholds do not brevity, the following sections show the results for the 60th
contribute significantly to effective inter-group information percentile. However, a comparison of the IBSs emergence
exchange. Thresholds between these extremes, like those resultsobtainedwiththesixpercentileschosenarepresented
between the 30th and 80th percentiles (Figures 6.D to 6.I), inAppendixB.
show variability in the number of IBSs emerged. Further,
for an increase in the #IBSs, the % of external information Experiment 1: Learning VS Random Collection
found also increases, showing how the additional emergent
Proposition 1 is composed of two parts. The first part
IBSs captured positively contribute to fostering inter-group
indicates that when actors learn and adjust the information
information exchange. One exception to such an increase
collection preferences based on the quality of information
is observed for the 80th percentile and 20 IGTs when the
provided by their contacts (LeaRning mechanism or LN)
numberofemergentIBSsfoundis3.Thisismostlikelyan
this leads to the emergence of more IBSs compared to
outliergiventhattheplotdoesnotshowaconfidenceinterval
the case in which actors collect information randomly
aroundthevalue.
(RandomCollectionmechanismorRC).Thesecondelement
These findings illustrate that the method proposed in
of the proposition states that when actors learn (LN), this
this paper captures the number of emergent IBSs that
leads to the emergence of IBSs that are more effective
significantly contribute to providing new and external
in fostering inter-group information exchange compared to
information to groups, thereby supporting effective inter-
randomcollection(RC).Inthefollowingthesetwopartsare
groupinformationexchange.
assessedagainsttheresultsofexperiment1.
However, for this method to be effective, thresholds Figure 7 shows the results of experiment 1 including
need to be carefully chosen according to two criteria. the emergence of IBSs (left) and their performance (right)
First, adequate thresholds are not too low, thus presenting respectively for the information collection mechanisms LN
sensitivity to the emergence of varying numbers of IBSs andRC.
acrossdifferentsimulations.Second,suchthresholdsarenot First,Figure7(left)illustrateshow,comparedtoRC,LN
too high, meaning that when the number of IBSs captured resultsinanaverageincreaseofaboutthreeemergentIBSs.
through the threshold increases, also their effectiveness in The 5th, 25th, 75th, and 95th percentiles and the median
fosteringinter-groupinformationexchangeincreases. are also shifted towards higher values in the case of LN
Thesetwocriteriaaresufficienttofindmultipleadequate compared to RC. The interquartile range of the number of
thresholdsratherthanasingleone(inthiscasethosebetween IBSs emerged is larger for LN than in the case of RC,
the30thand80thpercentiles),leavinganopenquestionasto showing that learning also increases the variability of the
whetheradoptingdifferentadequatethresholdswillprovide results.However,the5thpercentileisclosertothemedianin
different results when studying the emergence of IBSs. thecaseofLNcomparedtoRC,illustratinghow,despiteits
As such, rather than simply choosing one of the adequate higher variability, the distribution is skewed towards higher
thresholds, it is key to use multiple thresholds and assess values of # IBSs emerging in the case of LN compared to
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 11
Next,inthecaseofshocks(Cf.rightcolumnofFigure8),
thenumberofIBSsthatemergeandtheirperformancedoes
notchangesignificantlywithLNorRC.
ThesefindingssupportProposition2byshowingthatthe
effect of learning depends on stability of the information
origin. If the information origin is stable (announcements),
thenlearningleadstoanincreaseinthenumberofIBSsand
in their effectiveness in improving inter-group information
Figure7. ResultsofExperiment1:Effectoftheinformation exchange. Conversely, if the source of information is
collectionmechanismsRandomCollection(RC)andLearNing unstable(shocks),learninghaslittleeffect.
(LN)onthe#IBSsemerged(left)andthe%ofexternal
informationfoundbythegroupsthatneedit(right).Thewhite
Experiment 3: The effect of environmental
dotsrepresenttheaverages.
turbulence
This experiment focused on the emergence of IBSs and
RC.TheseresultssupportsthefirstpartofProposition1by their effectiveness under different levels of turbulence
showingthatthenumberofIBSsemergedtendstoincrease and numbers of Inter-group Ties (# IGTs). The level
withLNcomparedtoRC. of turbulence consists of the frequency of disruptive
Second,accordingtoFigure7(right)theeffectivenessof events (shocks and announcements) occurring every day of
IBSs measured as the percentage of external information simulationandgeneratingexternalinformationneedsforthe
retrieved by each group increases roughly by 7.5% on groups(measuredasexternalinformationneededperday).In
average with LN compared to RC. The 5th, 25th, 75th, otherwords,theturbulencelevelissetasthesumofshocks
and 95th percentiles, and the median shift towards higher per day and announcements per day. An equal number of
valuesinthecaseofLNcomparedtoRC.Additionally,the shocks and announcements per day is considered in all
interquartilerangeforLNisconsiderablyreducedcompared experiments.Assuch,aTurbulenceleveloftencorresponds
to RC, illustrating how, in combination with the higher tofiveannouncementsperdayplusfiveshocksperday.The
median, the retrieval of external information is more likely resultsareshowninFigure9.
tobehigherinthecaseofLNcomparedtothecaseofRC. Figure 9 on the left shows that for higher turbulence a
These results support the second part of proposition 1 by higher number of IBSs emerges. The number of IBSs that
showing that when agents learn (LN) the IBSs that emerge emerge grows with the # IGTs, and it does not change
areabletofindandprovidehigherpercentagesoftheexternal significantly with the information collection mechanism
informationneededbygroupscomparedtothecaseinwhich considered(LNorRC).
information is collected randomly (RC). In sum, both parts Figure 9 on the right shows that for higher levels
ofProposition1aresupportedbytheresults. of turbulence (and corresponding increasing information
needs),theshareoftheexternalinformationthatisretrieved
decreases. However, a higher number of inter-group ties
Experiment 2: The effect of environmental increases the performance of the system at all levels of
turbulence. Further, such performance increases with LN
uncertainty (stability of information origin)
comparedtoRCforhighlevelsofenvironmentalturbulence
Figure 8 shows the results of Experiment 2 regarding the (10ormoreeventsperday)ifthenumberofinter-groupties
emergenceofIBSs(upperrow)andtheirperformance(lower isalsohigh(20ormoreIGTs).
row) for both LN and RC. These results include different In sum, these findings support proposition 3 for two
combinations of frequencies in shocks and announcements, reasons.First,independentlyfromtheinformationcollection
namely20announcementsperday(leftcolumn),10shocks mechanism, more inter-group ties are associated with the
per day and 10 announcements per day (middle column), emergence of more IBSs that more effectively convey
and20shocksperday(rightcolumn).Inallthreecasesthe information across groups. Second, for high numbers
number of events (shock, announcements, or combinations of IGTs and levels of environmental turbulence, the
of them) amount to a total of 20 for each day of simulation performance of the IBSs emerged increases with LN
toensurecomparabilityamongthem. comparedtoRC.
The results show that, in the case of announcements (Cf.
left column of Figure 8), LN increases the # IBSs emerged Discussion
(byroughly7IBSs)andtheirperformance(byaround15%)
This section discusses the implications of the findings, and
comparedtoRC.
suggestsdirectionsforfutureresearch.
When announcements and shocks are combined, as
illustrated in the middle column of Figure 8, LN leads
Measuring emergent IBSs
to an average emergence of 2 additional IBSs and a
performanceincreaseof7%overRC.However,thesegains Thisstudyintroducedamethodformeasuringtheemergence
are modest when compared to scenarios solely involving of IBSs. Compared to previous work that measures the
announcements. For announcements only (see left column emergence of informational boundary spanning at the level
ofFigure8),therewasanotableriseof7emergentIBSsand of a group or groups (Ancona and Caldwell 1992; Hansen
a15%performanceimprovement. 1999; Cummings 2004; Zagorecki et al. 2009; Marrone
Preparedusingsagej.cls12 JournalTitleXX(X)
Figure8. ResultsofExperiment2:InterplaybetweentheinformationcollectionmechanismsRandomCollection(RC)and
LearNing(LN),andvaryingenvironmentaluncertainty.Theeffectofsuchaninterplayisassessedfor(a)theemergenceof
InformationalBoundarySpanners(IBSs)(upperrow)andon(b)theeffectivenessofsuchIBSsinenablinggroupstoretrieve
externalandrelevantinformation(lowerrow).Thevaryingenvironmentaluncertaintyischaracterizedbystable(20announcements
perday-leftcolumn),mixedstableandunstable(10announcementsperdayand10shocksperday-middlecolumn),and
unstable(20shocksperday-rightcolumn)originsofexternalinformation.Thewhitedotsrepresenttheaverages.
strategies that foster the emergence of IBSs, enhance inter-
group information exchange, and support coordination and
collectiveintelligence(LevinaandVaast2005).
To qualify as IBSs, the IBSs candidates need to fulfill
a minimum ”number of informational boundary spanning
FunctionExecutions”orFEs(i.e.aminimumthreshold)that
enablesthemtosignificantlyimproveinformationexchange
among groups. To ensure the correctness of this method,
thresholds must be carefully selected based on two criteria:
they should not be too low to maintain sensitivity to
varying occurrences of IBSs in different simulations, and
not too high to ensure that as more IBSs are detected,
their collective ability to enhance inter-group information
exchange also increases. Here, inter-group information
exchangeismeasuredasthepercentageofthetotalexternal
informationneededfoundbythegroups.
Experiment0showedthatthismethodenablestomeasure
emergentIBSsbyindividuatingthoseactorsthateffectively
contribute to inter-group information exchange. Further,
Figure9. Resultsofexperiment3:Effectofincreasing multiple adequate thresholds were found to satisfy the
environmentalturbulenceonthenumberofInformational two criteria mentioned above. To clarify whether adopting
BoundarySpanners(IBSs)emerged(left)andtheircollective
different adequate thresholds lead to different results when
performanceinexchangingexternalrelevantinformationacross
studying the emergence of IBSs, the results of Experiments
groups(right)fordifferentnumbersofInter-groupTies(#IGTs)
1 to 3 were analyzed and compared with six adequate
betweencommunitiesandprofessionals,andforthetwo
informationcollectionmechanismsLN(LearNing)andRC thresholds: the 30th, 40th, 50th, 60th, 70th, and 80th
(RandomCollection). percentiles of the FE distribution for IBS candidates.
The results of this comparison in Appendix B show that
adopting different adequate thresholds does not change
the conclusions of the experiments as Propositions 1 to
3 remain supported by the findings independently of the
2010; Van Osch et al. 2016), the method introduced here thresholds considered. However, Appendix B also shows
directlymeasurestheindividualagentsthatemergeasIBSs. that it is still essential to consider a wide range of
Emergence of IBSs can thus be tracked in greater detail, adequate thresholds when studying the emergence of IBSs.
and the heterogeneous characteristics of those that emerge Specifically,adiscrepancywasfoundinExperiment2inthe
as IBSs can be observed at the micro level. Further, the resultsobservedwiththeminimumandmaximumthresholds
interplay between the individual, group, and inter-group (respectively, the 30th and 80th percentiles). These results
levelsanditsimpactontheemergenceofeffectiveIBSscan were considered as outliers and thus discarded given their
be studied through this method. These aspects are crucial extremevalue,inconsistencyintheeffectsfound,andthefact
to inform the design of effective information management thatthemajorityoftheotherthresholdsindicatedconsistent
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 13
results (cf. Appendix B). This process illustrates the of the environment, for studying the emergence of IBSs.
importanceofconsideringmultiplethresholdsandcarefully As posited in Proposition 2 and corroborated by the
analyzinganydiscrepanciesthatmayarise.Suchananalysis findings from Experiment 2, the effect of learning on
allows one to determine whether discrepancies indicate the emergence and efficiency of IBSs is contingent on
inconsistenciesinthefindingsthatrequirereconsiderationor environmental uncertainty and specifically on the stability
modification of the conclusions, or if they simply represent of the information source or origin. If the information
outliers resulting from the adoption of extreme thresholds origin is stable, as in the case of announcements, the
(i.e.,toolowortoohigh). number of IBSs and their performance in enhancing inter-
In sum, this method enables the study of the emergence groupinformationexchangeincreaseswhentheagentsadopt
of IBSs. To ensure the method’s correctness, it is first learning. In contrast, an unstable information source, as
crucial to select thresholds that are neither too low nor in the case of shocks, renders learning ineffective. This
too high, thereby effectively capturing emergent IBSs that differencecanbeexplainedbythedifferencesofinformation
contribute to inter-group information exchange. Second, a origin and network structures: while announcements are
wide range of adequate thresholds should be considered to constantlyoriginatingfromthesamelocationofthenetwork,
testconsistencyacrossresultsontheemergenceofIBSsand shocks originate from random locations in the disaster-
to assess whether any discrepancies are outliers or if the affected area of the model. Under learning, announcements
conclusions need to be reconsidered and modified in light propagatethroughthenetworkfollowingincreasinglystrong
ofsuchdiscrepancies. preferentialchannels.Incontrast,thewayshockspropagate
continuallychangesdependingonwheretheshockoccurred
Understanding emergent IBSs andwhichnodes/actorsinthenetworkfindthisinformation
andshareitwithothers.Theseresultsexplainwhylearning
First, this paper introduces a novel agent-based modeling
has little effect on shocks or more generally information
(ABM) framework that enables to study the emergence of
of unstable origin: when information can come from ever-
IBSs in volatile environments. This ABM simulates inter-
changing locations of the network, developing information
group information exchange and outputs the number of
collection preferences for the contacts that provided the
times IBS candidates fulfill the informational boundary
most relevant information in the past has the same effect
spanning function at the micro level, as well as their
as collecting information randomly given that none of the
overall effectiveness. This provides the basis to identify
agentstendstoconsistentlyproviderelevantinformationdue
thosethatemergeasIBSsthroughtheproposedmethodand
totheinstabilityoftheinformationorigin.
to systematically test mechanisms for their emergence in
Proposition3issupportedbythefindingsofExperiment3
volatileconditions.ComparedtopreviousABMframeworks
and suggests that an increased presence of inter-group ties
introduced to study inter-group information exchange and
leads to the emergence of a higher number of IBSs that,
boundary spanning in volatile conditions (Hazy et al.
as a collective, can more effectively facilitate the exchange
2003; Zagorecki et al. 2009), this framework measures
of information between groups. This effect occurs even for
the emergence of IBSs rather than imposing a predefined
high turbulence and when considering the actors’ limited
numberofIBSsapriori(Hazyetal.2003),andcapturesthis
information processing and sharing capability. Further, for
emergenceatthemicroorindividuallevelratherthansolely
highlevelsofinter-grouptiesandenvironmentalturbulence,
atthemacrolevel(Zagoreckietal.2009).
learning leads to higher performance than in the case of
Second, this study furthers the understanding of learning
random information collection. Such an improvement is
fortheemergenceofIBSs.Learningentailsthateachagent
negligible for low numbers of ties and becomes evident for
developsinformationcollectionpreferencesovertimebased
20 and 30 inter-group ties. This pattern can be attributed to
on the past quality of information provided by the agent’s
the agents’ collective capacity to discern through learning
contacts. This mechanism was compared to the case in
the most effective IBS candidates for relaying external
which actors collect information randomly. As posited in
information(e.g.,thosethatareexposedtolessinformation
Proposition1andsupportedbytheresultsofExperiment1,
load)astheychangeovertime.Further,thefactthatlearning
learningleadstotheemergenceofmoreIBSsascomparedto
has an effect only for 20 or more inter-group connections
randominformationcollection,andtheseIBSscontributeto
illustratesthatasufficientlyextensivenetworkofinter-group
more effective inter-group information exchange. Learning
tiesiscrucialforenablingagentstochoosefromvariousIBS
therefore is a micro-macro mechanism as learning at the
candidatesthroughlearning.
micro level leads to the emergence of IBSs and effective
inter-group information exchange at the macro level. This
Implications for Collective Intelligence
findingconfirmstheresultsofthestudybyLevinaandVaast
(2005) and extends it to volatile environments by showing Thisstudycontributestothecollectiveintelligenceliterature
that effective boundary spanners emerge through a process by illustrating how a cognitive process at the individual
resulting from the decentralized interactions among actors level (i.e., learning (Sternberg et al. 1982)) can support
belonging to different groups. It also adds to the work by the collective selection of actors (the IBSs) that effectively
Marrone (2010) by showing how micro level antecedents convey information across multiple groups to support their
such as learning and the availability of connections with coordination (Argote 1982; Wittenbaum et al. 2002). This
other groups can lead to macro level outcomes through an canbeconsideredtobecollectiveintelligentbehaviourgiven
emergentprocess. thatthegroupsareabletoselectactorsthataremoreeffective
Third, this study highlights the necessity to consider than others at carrying out particular tasks or activities -
environmental volatility, i.e. the uncertainty and turbulence in this case fostering inter-group information exchange -
Preparedusingsagej.cls14 JournalTitleXX(X)
thus possibly improving the system’s performance (groups’ Maurer 2010; Aldrich and Meyer 2015; Tasic and Amir
retrieval of the external information needed for decision 2016) and supply chain operations (Pettit et al. 2010; Jia
makingandcoordination)(MaloneandBernstein2022). et al. 2020; Go¨lgeci and Kuivalainen 2020). Additionally,
Further,thisstudyillustratesthatthiscollectiveintelligent this study shows the importance of the degree of bridging
behaviour is contingent upon the characteristics of the social capital (measured by the number of trusted inter-
environments in which groups operate (Lawrence and group ties available) in facilitating effective information
Lorsch 1967; Duncan 1979) and specifically its volatility exchange via emergent IBSs, even amidst high volatility
(characterized by uncertainty and turbulence). When anduncertainty.Thus,policyinterventionsshouldprioritize
environmental uncertainty is very high and, as such, establishing bridging social capital through initiatives that
information presents unstable information origins, learning build trusted connections among different groups, such as
does not lead to a collectively intelligent behaviour. This between communities and professional responders (Norris
effectisreversedwhenatleastsomeoftheinformationhas etal.2008;AggerandJensen2015).
as stable origin. Additionally, when the turbulence of the
environment is very high learning produces a collectively Future research
intelligent behaviour only for high levels of inter-group
This study focused on theory building by advancing
connectivity.
propositions concerning the emergence of IBSs that
effectively convey information across groups in volatile
Implications for Information Management
environments. These propositions are designed based on
Understandingthelearningmechanismanditsinterplaywith the literature, empirically grounded in the case study of
environmental uncertainty, environmental turbulence, and disaster response in Jakarta, and systematically explored
the number of inter-group ties available can provide useful through an empirical ABM (Nespeca et al. 2023). Despite
insightsforthedesignofinformationmanagementstrategies thisgrounding,thepropositionsstillresultfromexploratory
that foster inter-group information exchange and collective research on one case study. As such, generalising the
intelligence in volatile environments. Two main indications propositionswillrequirefurtherinvestigationandtestinge.g.
forpolicycanbedrawnfromthisstudyrespectivelyrelated via additional case studies and experiments. Future studies
environmentaluncertaintyandturbulence. should extend beyond disasters (as in this research), to
Concerningenvironmentaluncertaintyandtheassociated include other volatile environments such as supply chains
stability of information origin, this research shows that duringrapidmarketshifts.
learning increases the number of IBSs that emerge and Further,thisstudyfocusedontheemergenceofboundary
the external information they retrieve only in the case of spanners, and was agnostic to the specific information
stable origin. However, in this chaotic and unpredictable technology that was used. At the same time, evidence
world marked by increasing volatility, the environments suggests that information technology can play a key role
in which groups operate are often characterized by high in information sharing and the emergence of inter-group
levels of environmental uncertainty and thus information information exchange in volatile environments (Tim et al.
withanunstableorigin(shocks).Assuch,effectivestrategies 2017)andalsointerplaywiththeemergenceofIBSs(Levina
for managing this type of information are required to and Vaast 2005; Van Osch and Steinfield 2016). Such an
support effective information exchange across groups that interplay,isstillpoorlyunderstoodinvolatileenvironments
fosters collective intelligence in volatile environments. If andrequiresfurtherresearch.
information with an unstable origin can be re-directed Additionally, agents in this study exhibit non-strategic
to stable origins which consistently provide it to other behavior in information exchange, lacking consideration
actors, this will enable the actors develop an information for long-term goals or personal agendas (i.e., they are
collection preference for this source through learning and myopic, cf. Appendix A). However, previous research
more effectively retrieve the external information needed. indicates that strategic information exchange occurs, for
Such a change in stability could be achieved by gathering example, to persuade others to reciprocate with valuable
shocks through crowdsourcing and sharing them widely information, to obfuscate or withhold information, or to
through a fixed node in the information exchange network spreadmisinformationtoadvancepersonalororganizational
suchasanonlineplatform,website,orsocialmediaaccount interests (Heavey et al. 2020; Comes et al. 2020; Nespeca
(thus establishing a stable information origin) (Holderness et al. 2020). This strategic sharing can alter recipients’
andTurpin2015). information collection preferences and impact the flow of
With regards to environmental turbulence, a higher information, thereby influencing the emergence of IBSs.
number of inter-group ties was consistently found to be a Future research should investigate how strategic sharing,
key element in fostering the emergence of IBSs, especially combined with learning and adaptation in information
athighlevelsofenvironmentalturbulenceandatanylevelof exchange preferences, affects the emergence of effective
environmentaluncertainty.Toenabletheavailabilityofsuch IBSs.
inter-grouptiesitiskeytobuildtrustedrelationshipsacross Next,thisstudyassumesaconstantinformationexchange
groups that can be leveraged when external information network, however, establishing new connections to retrieve
needstoberetrievedbythegroupfromitsenvironment,also relevant information external to a group is often considered
knownasbridgingsocialcapital(Claridge2018).Thisaligns asoneofthetaskscarriedoutbyboundaryspanners(Ancona
withpreviousresearchindicatingthatbridgingsocialcapital and Caldwell 1990, 1992; Marrone et al. 2007). As such,
supports inter-group information exchange and resilience the network can also change and develop over time. This
in volatile settings such as disaster response (Hawkins and is for example the case in the context of international
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 15
humanitarian response operations in which, due to the high relatively stable origin (i.e. it is consistently provided by
staffturnover,fewconnectionsacrossgroupsenablinginter- the same node in the network). Further, a highly turbulent
groupinformationexchangeareavailableandnewonesneed and volatile environment can easily lead to informational
to be established ad-hoc during the humanitarian response overload.Inthissituation,retrievingandsharingallrelevant
(Altay and Labonte 2014). Zagorecki et al. (2009) studies informationneededbecomeschallenging.Thispapershows
the emergence of inter-group information exchange when that the availability of several contacts (here 20 or more)
enabling actors to establish connections that decay over that can share information across the groups is essential
time when unused. Their study finds that these networking for facilitating the emergence of more IBSs, which helps
activities lead to the emergence of actors that convey distribute the load of inter-group information exchange and
information across groups. However, the focus of their improves the effectiveness of such exchange. Moreover,
researchisplacedonthequantityofinformationratherthan when the inter-group contacts are numerous (20 or more),
onitsquality(e.g.,relevanceoftheinformationexchanged), and the level of environmental turbulence is high (above
and it does not measure the emergence of effective IBSs at 10 disruptive events per day), the performance of IBSs in
themicrolevel.Assuch,furtherresearchisrequiredtostudy facilitating inter-group information exchange is increased
theimpactofnetworkingactivitiesandcontactdecayonthe withlearning.
emergence of effective IBSs in volatile environments from Implications of this study include the possibility to use
themicrolevelperspective. theproposedmethodandABMframeworktoinvestigateand
Finally, the adaptation of information exchange prefer- understand mechanisms for the emergence of informational
ences over time can not only lead to the emergence of boundary spanning through a combination of case study
IBSs that facilitate information exchange across groups but research and agent-based simulation. Further, in promoting
also to the formation of information exchange bubbles that the emergence of IBSs through learning, actors from
isolate groups from others leading to fragmentation and a different groups exhibit collectively intelligent behavior
lack of collective intelligence (Comes et al. 2020). In other by choosing agents that effectively facilitate information
cases, fragmentation in the form of pre-defined functional exchange across groups. This collective intelligence is
divisionofroutinetasks(ordifferentiation)amongdifferent contingentonthevolatilityoftheenvironmentandrequires
organizations and groups (e.g., police and fire fighters) can stable sources of information and a high density of inter-
bebeneficialforoperationalefficiencyandcollectiveintelli- grouptiestobeeffective.Finally,policyimplicationsofthis
gence as it enables to operate according to pre-established research consist of the need to (a) collect and summarize
standards and procedures that require less integration and information from unstable origins (e.g., via crowdsourcing)
information exchange (Lawrence and Lorsch 1967). Such and release such information from stable sources so that
fragmentation can, however, be lost in volatile contexts as agentscanlearnwheretofindtheinformationtheyneedand
actorsandtheirgroupsadapttheiractivitiestoacontinually (b)buildandmaintaintrustedconnectionsamonggroupsto
and unpredictably changing environment (Wolbers et al. ensure collectively intelligent behaviour and effective inter-
2018; Nespeca et al. 2020). In such situations, inter-group group information exchange, and support coordination and
information exchange via IBSs is necessary to reinstate collaborationevenforhighlevelsofvolatility.
this fragmentation and support collective intelligence (Wol-
Further research will focus on investigating the interplay
bers et al. 2018). Further research is required to study the
between the emergence of boundary spanning, learning,
interplay between the emergence of IBSs on one hand and
andtheuseofinformationtechnology,strategicinformation
the formation of information bubbles, fragmentation, and
exchange behaviour (e.g. spread of misinformation, obfus-
collectiveintelligenceontheother.
cation, and persuasion to share back), and the formation of
informationexchangebubblesandfragmentation.
Conclusions
Inthisincreasinglychaoticandrapidly-changingworlddif-
Acknowledgements
ferentgroupsincludinggovernmentalandnon-governmental
organizations,andcommunitiesneedtoworktogethereffec- The authors thank Dr. V`ıtor V. Vasconcelos for his helpful
tively while operating in volatile conditions (characterized suggestions.
byhighturbulenceanduncertainty).Tothisend,theprompt
exchange of vital information concerning environmental
change across groups is crucial to support coordination
Funding
and collective intelligence. This article aimed to propose a
method to measure the emergence of Informational Bound- This work was partly funded by the COMRADES project
arySpanners(IBSs)andtheireffectivenessinfosteringinter- Grant agreement No 687847, under the EU’s Horizon 2020
group information exchange. Further, a novel Agent-Based researchandinnovationprogramme.
Modeling (ABM) framework was introduced to systemati-
callystudymechanismsthatleadtotheemergenceofIBSs.
The proposed method and ABM are then used to create
Declaration of conflicting interests
new insight into one specific mechanisms that explain the
emergenceofIBSsinvolatileenvironments:i.e,learning. Theauthor(s)declarednopotentialconflictsofinterestwith
Our results show that learning leads to the emergence respecttotheresearch,authorship,and/orpublicationofthis
of effective IBSs when the information needed has a article.
Preparedusingsagej.cls16 JournalTitleXX(X)
Figure10. Experiment1:comparisonofthenumberofemergentIBSsobtainedwithdifferentthresholdsrangingfromthe30th
(firstfigureontheleft)tothe80th(lastfigureontheright)percentilesforthetwoinformationcollectionmechanismsLN(LearNing)
andRC(RandomCollection).
Appendix A: Learning Mechanism such,ahigherQvalue(expectedreward)comparedtoother
contacts,entailsthattheagentwillbemorelikelytochoose
To implement the learning mechanism introduced in the
suchcontactamongtheotherswhencollectinginformation.
section ”Mechanisms for the emergence of informational
boundary spanners” and mentioned in Proposition 2
this study relies on a reinforcement learning algorithm. Appendix B: studying emergent IBSs with
Specifically,Q-learning(Watkins1989;WatkinsandDayan different thresholds
1992) was chosen given it enables agents to develop
Experiment 0 showed that multiple thresholds enable to
information collection preferences over time through a
individuate IBSs candidates that significantly contribute
series of information collection activities, as introduced in
to inter-group information exchange, thus qualifying as
Proposition 1. The following formula is used to update the
emergent IBSs. Further analysis is needed to determine
expected reward resulting from collecting information from
if such different thresholds yield the same results in the
eachoftheagents’contacts.
study of IBSs emergence. In this case, providing the same
resultsmeansthattheconclusionsregardingIBSsemergence
Q(s ,a )←(1−α)·Q(s ,a )+α·R(s ,a) (1) remain the same, i.e. the propositions remain supported
t t t t t+1
by experimental results independently from the thresholds
Where: adopted.
In this appendix, the data from Experiments 1 to 3 is
• Q(s ,a )=expectedrewardfortheactiona(collecting
t t analyzed through six different thresholds deemed adequate
information from a particular contact) at a given
tocaptureemergentIBSs,namelythe30th,40th,60th,70th,
observed state of the environment (responding to a
and 80th percentiles in the FEs distribution (cf. Experiment
disaster).Inpractice,Qrepresentstheextenttowhich
0-ResultsSection).Thefollowingparagraphscomparethe
theagentexpectsthataparticularcontactwillprovide
results obtained with these thresholds for each experiment.
informationthatcanaddressitsinformationneeds.
The appendix considers only the number of emergent
• α = learning rate determining the relative importance
IBSs and not their effectiveness in fostering inter-group
of the quality of the new information provided by
informationexchange.ThisisbecauseIBSseffectivenessis
contacts compared to the quality of the information
independentfromthethresholdadopted.
providedsofarbythecontacts.
Figure10showstheresultsofExperiment1andillustrates
• R(s ,a) = actual reward obtained by the agent
t+1 a comparison between the influence of LN compared to
throughcarryingouttheinformationcollectionaction
RC on the emergence of IBSs when adopting different
a given its information collection state s. In this
thresholds. Despite quantitative variations, LN consistently
study,thisrewardis1whenthecollectedinformation
producesmoreIBSsthanRC,therebysupportingProposition
addresses the collecting agent’s information needs,
1regardlessofthethresholdused.
and0otherwise.
Figure11presentstheresultsofExperiment2,comparing
The agents are assumed to be myopic, meaning that the number of emergent IBSs observed with different
they do not consider the strategic pursuit of long-term high thresholds for RC and LN when varying the stability of
rewards.Rather,theagentssimplyconsidercurrentrewards the information origin. In the figure, each row represents
in theirlearning process. Assuch, thevalue ofthe discount the results obtained with one threshold, while the columns
factor is equal to 0 (and thus not displayed in the equation represents varying levels of stability, namely stable (only
above). announcements),acombinationofunstableandstable(both
An agent’s information collection preferences are rep- announcements and shocks), and unstable (only shocks)
resented by the probabilities of the agent choosing each information. As can be observed by comparing the figures
of its contacts as its information collection source. Such in each row from the from left to right, an increasing
probabilities are computed for each contact as the ratio of number of shocks (unstable information origin) compared
theQvalueassociatedwiththecontact,dividedbythesum tothenumberofannouncements(stableinformationorigin)
ofallQvaluesassociatedwithalloftheagent’scontacts.As reduces the impact of learning on fostering the emergence
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 17
Figure11. Experiment2:comparisonofthenumberofemergentIBSsobtainedforLearNing(LN)andRandomCollection(RC)
withthe30th,40th50th,60th,70th,and80thpercentiles(eachrepresentedbyonerow)anddifferentnumbersofstableand
unstableinformationbecomingrelevantforthegroupsduringeachdayofsimulation(capturedinthethreecolumns).Whilethe
compositionisdifferent,thetotalnumberofdailyrelevantinformationremainsconstantat20piecesofinformationperday.
of more IBSs. This observation supports proposition 2 and adequate. Second, all of the other thresholds (four out of
holdsacrossallthresholds. six)consistentlyproducedsimilarresults,confirmingthatthe
Further, with only unstable information (right column), discrepancies observed with the 30th and 80th percentiles
learning minimally impacts the number of emerged IBSs, are due threshold selection rather than experimental data.
with effects varying by threshold. From the 40th to the Consequently,resultsfromthe30thand80ththresholdsare
70th percentiles, LN has no significant influence on IBS excluded.Theremainingfindingsfromthe40th,50th,60th,
emergence. However, the lowest and highest thresholds and70thpercentilesconsistentlyindicatethatlearninghasno
(respectivelythe30thand80thpercentiles)producedifferent impactontheemergenceofIBSswithunstableinformation
and conflicting results. Precisely, with the 30th percentile, origins,supportingProposition2.
LN increases IBS emergence, but with the 80th percentile,
this effect reverses. In this case, these discordant results Finally,Figure12presentstheresultsofexperiment3and
are considered outliers and disregarded for two reasons. showsacomparisoninthenumberofemergentIBSswithLN
First, they lead to opposite conclusions, likely because and RC for varying levels of environmental turbulence and
they are the most extreme among those found to be inter-groupties.Thisfigureillustratesthatforallthresholds
Preparedusingsagej.cls18 JournalTitleXX(X)
Figure12. Experiment3:comparisonofthenumberofemergentIBSsobtainedwithLearNing(LN)andRandomCollection(RC)
forthe30th,40th,50th,60th,70th,and80thpercentiles,differentlevelsofTurbulence,andnumbersofInter-GroupTies(#IGTs).
thenumberofIBSsemergedgrowswiththenumberofinter- Adam C and Gaudou B (2017) Modelling Human Behaviours
grouptiesandthelevelofenvironmentalturbulence.Further, in Disasters from Interviews: Application to Melbourne
the number of IBSs emerged is not significantly affected Bushfires.JournalofArtificialSocietiesandSocialSimulation
by the information collection mechanism adopted. These 20(3):12.
findingssupportproposition3andareevidentindependently Agger A and Jensen JO (2015) Area-based initiatives—and their
fromthethresholdadopted. workinbonding,bridgingandlinkingsocialcapital.European
This appendix demonstrates that using various adequate PlanningStudies23(10):2045–2061.
thresholds, as established in Experiment 0, leads to Aldrich DP and Meyer MA (2015) Social capital and community
consistentconclusionsacrossExperiments1to3,supporting resilience. Americanbehavioralscientist59(2):254–269.
Propositions 1, 2, and 3 regardless of the threshold used. Aldrich H and Herker D (1977) Boundary spanning roles and
It highlights the importance of comparing and assessing organizationstructure. Academyofmanagementreview2(2):
theconsistencyoffindingsacrossdifferentthresholdswhen 217–230.
using the method to study the emergence of IBSs. This is Altay N and Green III WG (2006) Or/ms research in disaster
necessary as, in specific instances like the 30th and 80th operations management. European journal of operational
percentiles in Experiment 2, different thresholds may yield research175(1):475–493.
conflictingresults.Suchdiscrepanciescanleadtoreconsider Altay N and Labonte M (2014) Challenges in humanitarian
and revise conclusions regarding the emergence of IBSs. information management and exchange: evidence from haiti.
In this case, the discordant results with the 30th and 80th Disasters38(s1):S50–S72.
wereconsideredoutliersanddisregardedgiventheirextreme
Altay N and Pal R (2013) Information Diffusion among Agents:
values and inconsistent results with the majority of the
Implications for Humanitarian Operations. Production and
other thresholds. Therefore, the conclusions of Experiment
Operations Management 23(6): 1015–1027. DOI:10.1111/
2remainedunchanged. poms.12102. URL https://onlinelibrary.wiley.
com/doi/abs/10.1111/poms.12102.
Ancona DG and Caldwell D (1990) Beyond boundary spanning:
Managingexternaldependenceinproductdevelopmentteams.
References
TheJournalofHighTechnologyManagementResearch1(2):
Abidin H, Andreas H, Gumilar I and Wibowo I (2015) On
119–135.
correlation between urban development, land subsidence and
Ancona DG and Caldwell DF (1992) Bridging the boundary:
floodingphenomenainjakarta. ProceedingsofIAHS370:15–
External activity and performance in organizational teams.
20.
Administrativesciencequarterly:634–665.
Abidin HZ, Andreas H, Gumilar I, Fukuda Y, Pohan YE and
AntoszP,SzczepanskaT,BoumanL,PolhillJGandJagerW(2022)
DeguchiT(2011)Landsubsidenceofjakarta(indonesia)and
Sensemakingofcausalityinagent-basedmodels.International
itsrelationwithurbandevelopment.Naturalhazards59:1753–
JournalofSocialResearchMethodology25(4):557–567.
1771.
Preparedusingsagej.clsNespecaetal. 19
ArgoteL(1982)Inputuncertaintyandorganizationalcoordination Flack J, Ipeirotis P, Malone TW, Mulgan G and Page SE (2022)
inhospitalemergencyunits.Administrativesciencequarterly: Editorialtotheinauguralissueofcollectiveintelligence.
420–434. Fleming L and Waguespack DM (2007) Brokerage, boundary
BallouRH(2007)Theevolutionandfutureoflogisticsandsupply spanning, and leadership in open innovation communities.
chainmanagement.Europeanbusinessreview19(4):332–348. Organizationscience18(2):165–180.
Baraba´siALandAlbertR(1999)Emergenceofscalinginrandom Go¨lgeci I and Kuivalainen O (2020) Does social capital matter
networks. science286(5439):509–512. for supply chain resilience? the role of absorptive capacity
Bharosa N (2011) Netcentric information orchestration: assuring andmarketing-supplychainmanagementalignment.Industrial
informationandsystemqualityinpublicsafetynetworks. PhD MarketingManagement84:63–74.
Thesis,BOXPress,Oisterwijk. OCLC:840441830. Hansen MT (1999) The search-transfer problem: The role of
Bharosa N and Janssen M (2015) Principle-Based Design: weak ties in sharing knowledge across organization subunits.
A Methodology and Principles for Capitalizing Design Administrativesciencequarterly44(1):82–111.
Experiences for Information Quality Assurance. Journal HawkinsRLandMaurerK(2010)Bonding,bridgingandlinking:
of Homeland Security and Emergency Management Howsocialcapitaloperatedinneworleansfollowinghurricane
12(3). DOI:10.1515/jhsem-2014-0073. URL https: katrina. BritishJournalofSocialWork40(6):1777–1793.
//www.degruyter.com/view/j/jhsem.2015.12. Hazy JK, Tivnan BF and Schwandt DR (2003) The Impact of
issue-3/jhsem-2014-0073/jhsem-2014-0073. Boundary Spanning on Organizational Learning: Computa-
xml. tional Explorations. Emergence 5(4): 86–123. DOI:10.
Bharosa N, Lee J and Janssen M (2010) Challenges and 1207/s15327000em0504 7. URLhttps://doi.org/10.
obstaclesinsharingandcoordinatinginformationduringmulti- 1207/s15327000em0504_7.
agency disaster response: Propositions from field exercises. Heavey C, Simsek Z, Kyprianou C and Risius M (2020) How
Information Systems Frontiers 12(1): 49–65. DOI:10.1007/ do strategic leaders engage with social media? a theoretical
s10796-009-9174-z. URL https://link.springer. framework for research and practice. Strategic Management
com/article/10.1007/s10796-009-9174-z. Journal41(8):1490–1527.
BodeCandMacdonaldJR(2017)Stagesofsupplychaindisruption HoldernessTandTurpinE(2015)Fromsocialmediatogeosocial
response: Direct, constraining, and mediating factors for intelligence: Crowdsourcing civic co-management for flood
impactmitigation. DecisionSciences48(5):836–874. response in jakarta, indonesia. Social media for government
Castellani B, Barbrook-Johnson P and Schimpf C (2019) Case- services:115–133.
basedmethodsandagent-basedmodelling:bridgingthedivide Jia X, Chowdhury M, Prayag G and Hossan Chowdhury
toleveragetheircombinedstrengths. InternationalJournalof MM (2020) The role of social capital on proactive
SocialResearchMethodology22(4):403–416. and reactive resilience of organizations post-disaster.
Claridge T (2018) Functions of social capital–bonding, bridging, International Journal of Disaster Risk Reduction 48:
linking. Socialcapitalresearch20(1):1–7. 101614. DOI:https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ijdrr.2020.101614.
Comes T (2016) Cognitive biases in humanitarian sensemaking URLhttps://www.sciencedirect.com/science/
and decision-making lessons from field research. In: article/pii/S2212420920300686.
2016 IEEE International Multi-Disciplinary Conference on Kapucu N (2005) Interorganizational coordination in dynamic
Cognitive Methods in Situation Awareness and Decision context: Networks in emergency response management.
Support(CogSIMA).IEEE,pp.56–62. Connections26(2):33–48.
Comes T, Van de Walle B and Van Wassenhove L (2020) The Kapucu N (2006) Interagency communication networks during
coordination-information bubble in humanitarian response: emergencies:Boundaryspannersinmultiagencycoordination.
theoreticalfoundationsandempiricalinvestigations. Produc- TheAmericanreviewofpublicadministration36(2):207–225.
tionandOperationsManagement29(11):2484–2507. KreissY,MerinO,PelegK,LevyG,VinkerS,SagiR,AbargelA,
Cummings JN (2004) Work groups, structural diversity, and BartalC,LinG,BarAetal.(2010)Earlydisasterresponsein
knowledge sharing in a global organization. Management haiti:theisraelifieldhospitalexperience.
science50(3):352–364. LawrencePRandLorschJW(1967)Organizationandenvironment
DelftHighPerformanceComputingCentre(DHPC)(2022)Delft- managingdifferentiationandintegration.
BlueSupercomputer(Phase1). https://www.tudelft. LeonardNEandLevinSA(2022)Collectiveintelligenceasapublic
nl/dhpc/ark:/44463/DelftBluePhase1. good. CollectiveIntelligence1(1):26339137221083293.
DuncanR(1979)Whatistherightorganizationstructure?decision LevinaNandVaastE(2005)Theemergenceofboundaryspanning
tree analysis provides the answer. Organizational dynamics competence in practice: Implications for implementation and
7(3):59–80. useofinformationsystems. MISquarterly:335–363.
DuncanRB(1972)Characteristicsoforganizationalenvironments Levina N and Vaast E (2006) Turning a community into a
and perceived environmental uncertainty. Administrative market:Apracticeperspectiveoninformationtechnologyuse
sciencequarterly:313–327. in boundary spanning. Journal of Management Information
EpsteinJMandAxtellR(1996)Growingartificialsocieties:social Systems22(4):13–37.
sciencefromthebottomup. BrookingsInstitutionPress. Lifshitz-Assaf H (2018) Dismantling knowledge boundaries at
FialaP(2005)Informationsharinginsupplychains. Omega33(5): nasa: The critical role of professional identity in open
419–423. innovation. Administrativesciencequarterly63(4):746–782.
Preparedusingsagej.cls20 JournalTitleXX(X)
Lindgren R, Andersson M and Henfridsson O (2008) Multi- Tim Y, Pan SL, Ractham P and Kaewkitipong L (2017) Digitally
contextuality in boundary-spanning practices. Information enabled disaster response: the emergence of social media as
SystemsJournal18(6):641–661. boundary objects in a flooding disaster. Information Systems
Malone TW (2018) Superminds: The surprising power of people Journal27(2):197–232.
andcomputersthinkingtogether. Little,BrownSpark. Tubaro P and Casilli AA (2010) “an ethnographic seduction”:
Malone TW and Bernstein MS (2022) Handbook of collective How qualitative research and agent-based models can benefit
intelligence. MITpress. each other. Bulletin of Sociological Methodology/Bulletin de
Malone TW and Crowston K (1994) The interdisciplinary study Me´thodologieSociologique106(1):59–74.
ofcoordination26(1):87–119. DOI:10.1145/174666.174668. Tushman ML (1977) Special boundary roles in the innovation
URLhttps://doi.org/10.1145/174666.174668. process. Administrativesciencequarterly:587–605.
MarroneJA(2010)Teamboundaryspanning:Amultilevelreview VandeWalleB,BrugghemansBandComesT(2016)Improving
of past research and proposals for the future. Journal of situationawarenessincrisisresponseteams:Anexperimental
management36(4):911–940. analysisofenrichedinformationandcentralizedcoordination.
Marrone JA, Tesluk PE and Carson JB (2007) A multilevel InternationalJournalofHuman-ComputerStudies95:66–79.
investigationofantecedentsandconsequencesofteammember Van Meerkerk I and Edelenbos J (2014) The effects of boundary
boundary-spanning behavior. Academy of Management spanners on trust and performance of urban governance
Journal50(6):1423–1439. networks:findingsfromsurveyresearchonurbandevelopment
NespecaV,ComesTandAlfonsoL(2018)InformationSharingand projectsinthenetherlands. PolicySciences47:3–24.
Coordination in Collaborative Flood Warning and Response VanOschW,SteinfieldCandZhaoY(2016)Towardsbehavioral
Systems. In:ISD2018ConferenceProceedings. measures of boundary spanning success: The effectiveness
Nespeca V, Comes T and Brazier F (2023) A Methodology andefficiencyofteamboundaryspanninginenterprisesocial
to Develop Agent-Based Models for Policy Support Via media. ResearchPapers.
QualitativeInquiry. JournalofArtificialSocietiesandSocial VanOschWandSteinfieldCW(2016)Teamboundaryspanning:
Simulation26(1):10. Strategic implications for the implementation and use of
Nespeca V, Comes T, Meesters K and Brazier F (2020) Towards enterprisesocialmedia.JournalofInformationTechnology31:
coordinated self-organization: An actor-centered framework 207–225.
for the design of disaster management information systems. WatkinsCJandDayanP(1992)Q-learning. Machinelearning8:
InternationalJournalofDisasterRiskReduction51:101887. 279–292.
Norris FH, Stevens SP, Pfefferbaum B, Wyche KF and Pfef- WatkinsCJCH(1989)Learningfromdelayedrewards.
ferbaum RL (2008) Community Resilience as a Metaphor, WattsJ,MorssRE,BartonCMandDemuthJL(2019)Conceptual-
Theory, Set of Capacities, and Strategy for Disaster izingandimplementinganagent-basedmodelofinformation
Readiness. American Journal of Community Psychol- flow and decision making during hurricane threats. Environ-
ogy 41(1-2): 127–150. DOI:10.1007/s10464-007-9156-6. mentalModelling&Software:104524DOI:10.1016/j.envsoft.
URLhttp://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10. 2019.104524. URL http://www.sciencedirect.
1007/s10464-007-9156-6/abstract. Read. com/science/article/pii/S1364815218309472.
PerroneD,RohdeMM,HammondWagnerC,AndersonR,Arthur WittenbaumGM,VaughanSIandStrasserG(2002)Coordination
S, Atume N, Brown M, Esaki-Kua L, Gonzalez Fernandez in task-performing groups. Theory and research on small
M, Garvey KA et al. (2023) Stakeholder integration predicts groups:177–204.
betteroutcomesfromgroundwatersustainabilitypolicy.Nature Wolbers J, Boersma K and Groenewegen P (2018) Introducing a
Communications14(1):3793. fragmentation perspective on coordination in crisis manage-
Pettit TJ, Fiksel J and Croxton KL (2010) Ensuring supply chain ment. OrganizationStudies39(11):1521–1546.
resilience:developmentofaconceptualframework.Journalof Zagorecki A, Ko K and Comfort LK (2009) Interorganizational
businesslogistics31(1):1–21. Information Exchange and Efficiency: Organizational Perfor-
Rockstro¨m J, Norstro¨m AV, Matthews N, Biggs R, Folke C, mance in Emergency Environments. Journal of Artificial
Harikishun A, Huq S, Krishnan N, Warszawski L and Nel SocietiesandSocialSimulation13(3):3.
D (2023) Shaping a resilient future in response to covid-19.
NatureSustainability:1–11.
ScottR(1992)Organizations:Rational,natural,andopensystems.
prentice-hall,englewoodcliffs.
Simon HA (1955) A behavioral model of rational choice. The
quarterlyjournalofeconomics:99–118.
Sternberg RJ, Salter W et al. (1982) Conceptions of intelligence.
Handbookofhumanintelligence1:3–28.
Sutton JN, Palen L and Shklovski I (2008) Backchannels on
the front lines: Emergency uses of social media in the 2007
southerncaliforniawildfires.
Tasic J and Amir S (2016) Informational capital and disaster
resilience: the case of jalin merapi. Disaster Prevention and
Management.
Preparedusingsagej.cls