1
Crossing Margins: Intersectional Users’ Ethical
Concerns about Software
Lauren Olson∗, Tom Humbert∗, Ricarda Anna-Lena Fischer∗, Bob Westerveld∗,
Florian Kunneman†, Emitza´ Guzma´n∗
∗ Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam, l.a.olson@vu.nl, t.humbert@vu.nl, r.a.l.fischer@vu.nl,
b.s.westerveld@student.vu.nl, e.guzmanortega@vu.nl
† Utrecht University, f.kunneman@uu.nl
Abstract—Manymodernsoftwareapplicationspresentnumer- cases include legal actions against Meta for alleged housing
ous ethical concerns due to conflicts between users’ values and discrimination and the facilitation of hate speech that incited
companies’ priorities. Intersectional communities—those with
violence [5]–[9].
multiplemarginalizedidentities—aredisproportionatelyaffected
Historically, the voices of intersectional communities have bytheseethicalissues,leadingtolegal,financial,andreputational
issues for software companies, as well as real-world harm for been marginalized [10], [11], often excluded from both aca-
intersectional users. Historically, the voices of intersectional demicresearchandindustrypracticesinsoftwareengineering.
communitieshavebeensystematicallymarginalizedandexcluded This systemic exclusion results in a lack of representation
from contributing their unique perspectives to software design,
and consideration of the unique challenges faced by these
perpetuating software-related ethical concerns.
populations, leading to software products that not only fail
This work aims to fill the gap in research on intersectional
to meet their needs but may also exacerbate existing social
users’software-relatedperspectivesandprovidesoftwarepracti-
tionerswithastartingpointtoaddresstheirethicalconcerns.We inequalities.
aggregatedandanalyzedtheintersectionalusers’ethicalconcerns Aprimeexampleofthisisthepervasiveissueofalgorithmic
over time and developed a prioritization method to identify bias, where intersectional communities experience dispropor-
critical concerns. To achieve this, we collected posts from over
tionately adverse outcomes. For instance, gender recognition
700 intersectional subreddits discussing software applications,
systems have demonstrated significant inaccuracies in identi- utilized deep learning to identify ethical concerns in these posts,
andemployedstate-of-the-arttechniquestoanalyzetheircontent fyingdarker-skinnedwomencomparedtotheirlighter-skinned
in relation to time and priority. Our findings revealed that and male counterparts, with error rates 20-35% higher for
intersectional communities report critical complaints related to darker-skinned women [3]. Such biases can lead to real-world
cyberbullying, inappropriate content, and discrimination, high-
negative consequences as this technology is employed in law
lighting significant flaws in modern software, particularly for
enforcement surveillance, airport passenger verification, and
intersectional users. Based on these findings, we discuss how
to better address the ethical concerns of intersectional users in employment and housing decisions [12], [13]. Similarly, gen-
software development. erativelanguagemodelstendtoproducestereotypicalandless
Index Terms—intersectional communities, ethics, user feed- diverseoccupationalpredictionsforwomen,particularlythose
back, human aspects attheintersectionsofrace,sexuality,andgenderidentity[14].
Beyond algorithmic bias, other software-related ethical is-
sues disproportionately affect intersectional communities. For
I. INTRODUCTION
example, Black Americans with chronic conditions, often
Software applications play a substantial role in shaping fromlower-incomehouseholds,encounterbarrierstoaccessing
how individuals communicate, work, and engage with the essential technologies due to software applications’ incom-
world, influencing nearly every aspect of daily life. Prior patibility with low-bandwidth environments [15]. Moreover,
researchindicatesthatuserfeedbackforsoftwareapplications digitalmaternalhealthapplicationsoverlookthespecificneeds
is predominantly provided by middle-aged men [1], and that of racial and ethnic minority women in their design [16].
feedback exhibits significant variation based on demographic Additionally, mainstream software user interfaces commonly
factors [2]. This demographic skew could lead to a lack of fail to accommodate the identity expression of transgender
critical insights on the preferences and needs of a broader, users [17]. While these studies examine specific populations
more diverse user base during software design and evolution. like Black Americans with chronic conditions, racial minority
The latter disproportionately affects intersectional communi- pregnant women, and trans folk, and thus offer valuable,
ties—those individuals who belong to multiple marginalized focused insights into those specific populations and domains
groups [3], [4] (e.g., Black women are marginalized via race via small-scale user studies, this research seeks to aggregate
and gender and thus have unique experiences that Black men socialmediadatafromhundredsofonlineintersectionalcom-
and white women do not have). The implications of neglect- munities.Byemployingstate-of-the-arttechniquestoidentify,
ing intersectional communities are particularly severe, posing categorize, and analyze this data, we take a first step towards
significantlegalandfinancialriskstosoftwarecompaniesdue addressingthedeephistoricalgapregardingthesoftwareneeds
to the tangible harm they inflict on users and society. Notable of intersectional populations.
4202
tcO
01
]ES.sc[
1v09080.0142:viXra2
Given the severity of certain ethical concerns, such as have been proposed. Although Dkabrowski et al. [27] con-
the propagation of hate speech causing real-word violence, ducted a systematic literature review on this topic, our focus
timely identification and remediation of these critical issues is restricted to studies addressing tasks similar to those in
are paramount for software practitioners seeking to main- this research: classification, prioritization (recommendation),
tain a positive impact on their user base. To systematically and time series analysis. Notably, Dkabrowski et al. do not
address these ethical concerns in software engineering, this categorizetimeseriesanalysisasadistinctanalysistypewithin
study presents a comprehensive methodology for identifying the literature due to its nascent stage in the field [27].
andanalyzingthesoftware-relatedethicalissuesintersectional Previous work has used traditional machine learning al-
users face through thematic, time series, and prioritization gorithms [22], [28]–[31] as well as deep learning tech-
analyses. niques [32]–[34] to classify user feedback. Prioritization sys-
Thematic analysis enables the identification and categoriza- tems for user feedback have historically been developed for
tion of prevalent ethical concerns based on user feedback, app store reviews, incorporating a range of variables to sort
offeringinitialinsightsintotheissuesthatmattermosttothese feedback effectively. Commonly utilized variables include
communities. Time series analysis allows for the detection of volume[35]–[38],sentiment[35],[38]–[41],rating[35],[36],
global and seasonal trends in these ethical concerns, enabling [38], and time [35], [36]. Notably, previous research has
practitioners to anticipate and address emerging problems addressed social media feedback prioritization by introducing
proactively. Prioritization analysis further refines this process unique variables such as popularity and social rank [29]. Our
by focusing on the most critical concerns, ensuring software proposedsystemextendsthisframeworkbyapplyingpopular-
practitioners can allocate resources efficiently to address the ity alongside entropy, sentiment, and recency to social media
most pressing issues. By integrating these analytical tech- feedback. Existing prioritization systems generally employ
niques, our approach aims to enhance the ethical respon- both internal [35], [36], [38], [41] and external [29], [37],
siveness of software development practices, aligning software [39]–[41] evaluation methods. However, within these studies,
functionalities more closely with all user expectations and external evaluations often rely on small samples, software en-
values. The contributions of this study are as follows: gineering graduate students or practitioners’ perspectives, and
(1) A dataset comprising 36,777 user posts from over 700 don’t report demographic information. For instance, Guzman
intersectional communities that mention the top 50 software et al. assessed the prioritization of user feedback in Tweets
applications by user count, with 4,231 posts specifically ad- using an assessment from nine software practitioners [29]. In
dressing ethical concerns. contrast, our evaluation methodology also uses an external
(2) An identification of the primary ethical concerns faced approach by incorporating feedback from over 100 users,
by eight different intersectional communities, providing valu- and ensuring that at least 50% of the sample represents an
able insights for researchers and practitioners. intersectional population.
(3)Atimeseriesanalysislinkingworldeventstotheethical Only a few studies have used time series analyses for
concerns of intersectional users over five years, offering a analyzing feedback through time [39], [42]. They have de-
nuanced understanding of the interplay between software use veloped automated approaches to detect thematic trends [39]
and real-world events. and to find anomalies (potential indicators for important user
(4)Anovel,evaluatedprioritizationapproachthatintegrates feedback) [39], [42]. In our work, we use time series anal-
LLMs, sentiment analysis, anomaly detection, and other tech- ysis to examine the evolution of intersectional communities’
niques to identify users’ critical ethical concerns. discussions about ethical concerns in software.
(5) A comprehensive survey of 102 participants from both User Feedback related to Ethical Concerns: Research
intersectional and general populations, establishing a user- has explored the identification of ethical concerns [34], [43]–
based ground truth for prioritizing ethical concerns. [45] and violations of human values [46], [47] within user
All code, datasets, and annotation guides are available in feedbackonsoftwaresystems.Reddithasemergedasacritical
our replication package 1. platformforthisanalysisduetoitssupportforextendedposts,
anonymity, and community-focused interactions [26]. Prior
Content Warning: This paper discusses sensitive topics,
studies validate Reddit’s utility as a source of user feedback,
including miscarriage, suicide, body image, transphobia, drug
finding that approximately 54% of posts in software-related
use, and misogyny.
subreddits provide actionable insights for software evolution
[25].
II. RELATEDWORK
Existing research has leveraged Reddit to probe into user-
Mining User Feedback: Users provide critical feedback expressed ethical concerns [26], [32]. For instance, one study
for software development through various channels, including highlighted that discussions often revolve around privacy
app stores [2], [18]–[20], Twitter [21]–[24], and Reddit [25], issues, including software policies and permissions [32].
[26]. For instance, research indicates that nearly 54% of Another investigated ethical concerns among marginalized
postsinsoftware-relatedsubredditsonRedditcontainvaluable communities, finding discrimination and misrepresentation to
information for software evolution [25]. Given the substantial be particularly relevant concerns [26]. However, this study
volume of feedback, methods for its automated processing only examines user preferences across single marginalized
identities,whileweexplorefeedbackfromuserswithmultiple
1www.doi.org/10.6084/m9.figshare.26888128 marginalized identities. By focusing on a single identity or3
none at all, the generalizability of findings is critically re- from marginalized communities due to its community-
stricted. Our study aims to bridge this gap by providing a based structure, anonymity features, and facilitation of in-
longitudinalanalysisofintersectionalethicalconcerns,linking depth discussions [26]. Reddit’s subreddits, user-created and
them to global events, and formulating a user-centric prioriti- community-moderatedspacesdedicatedtospecifictopics(e.g.,
zation framework that captures the varied and complex views “r/adhdwomen”), provide a rich data source for this analysis.
of intersectional communities [26]. Although our research focuses on software, the nature of
Intersectional Communities: Prior research on integrating discussions on Reddit limits our findings primarily to social
intersectional user perspectives into software products has mediaapplications,withnocleardistinctionwhenusersrefer-
employed methods such as constructing intersectional per- enceacompany,platform,orapplication(e.g.,‘Twitter’could
sonas [48], devising theoretical frameworks [49]–[54], and refer to any of these).
conducting focused user studies to meet the specific needs
ofintersectionalcommunities[15],[16],[55]–[59].Despiteits
IV. METHODOLOGY
utility,theuseofintersectionalpersonashasbeencritiquedfor For our study, we performed five steps: (1) Data collec-
potentially reinforcing biased and stereotypical identity views tion: We detected subreddits of intersectional marginalized
[60].Ourstudyaddressesthesecritiquesbyexaminingabroad communities on Reddit, selected the top-ranking apps on the
array of real intersectional users to showcase their diversity US Google Play store, and then scraped the subreddits for
and mitigate prevailing stereotypes. posts mentioning the top apps. (2) Ethical concern presence
Frameworks designed to facilitate user-centered research detection: We manually annotated a sample of the posts for
have yielded insights into the preferences of diverse inter- ethical concerns, then trained a BERT model [66] to label
sectional populations, such as Black perinatal women, Black the entire dataset automatically. (3) Ethical concern catego-
youth, Black COVID patients, Indian women, Indian queer rization: We prompted OpenAI’s GPT-4 [67] to categorize
individuals, and gender non-conforming users, across vari- all ethical concerns in posts and then manually evaluated
ous software applications [15], [16], [55]–[59]. For instance, the resulting labels. (4) Time series analysis: We trained
research involving LGBTQ individuals experiencing recent two forecasting models on a weekly time series of ethical
pregnancy losses revealed significant challenges in finding concern presence frequency and evaluated it manually in a
onlinesupportduetointersectingmarginalizedidentities[59]. visualization.(5)Prioritization:Weusedthewordembeddings
Our work seeks to expand on these findings, enhancing un- of a pre-trained deep learning model [68] to label topics in
derstanding and awareness of the unique concerns of different ethically concerned posts and applied a novel sorting scheme
intersectional groups. to order ethical concerns by user-centric urgency. We detail
Additionally, another line of inquiry has examined inter- each of the steps in further detail as follows.
sectional biases in software systems, particularly those lever-
A. Data Collection
aging machine learning [3], [61], [62] and natural language
processing technologies [14], [63]–[65]. These studies have 1) Community Detection: We chose seven marginalized
often found pronounced biases against intersectional groups, communities to detect intersections between, namely Black,
sometimes more severe than those affecting singly marginal- indigenous, and people of color (BIPOC), women or people
ized identities [3]. Highlighting these disparities is crucial, assignedfemaleatbirth(AFAB),LGBTQIA+,peopleoflower
and our research contributes to this effort by providing an socio-economic status (SES), people from the Global South,
in-depth analysis of the diverse and complex experiences of people that have physical health issues and people that have
intersectional groups, aiming to challenge and reduce existing mental health issues (includes neurodivergent communities).
stereotypes in software engineering. These marginalized communities were identified in previous
work [4].
We used a comprehensive list of 586 marginalized sub-
III. SCOPEANDRESEARCHQUESTIONS
reddits [26] as the seed list for identifying intersectional
Thegoalofthisstudyistoprovideinsightintointersectional subreddits. A subreddit was considered intersectional if its
users’ ethical concerns in the context of software systems description indicated that members belonged to at least two
andhowsoftwarepractitionerscanhandletheseconcerns.We of the seven marginalized communities.
utilize the same definition of ethical concern as Olson et al., For data collection, we searched each subreddit from our
“a worry or care the user or their group faces about what is seed list on Reddit, using the ‘communities’ results tab
right or good [26]” within the software platform. We address to manually identify additional relevant subreddits. Intersec-
the following research questions: tional communities were often evident from subreddit names,
(RQ1) What are intersectional users’ ethical concerns regard- such as r/BlackWomenDivest,’ which intersects BIPOC’ and
ing software? women/AFAB.’ In some cases, closer evaluation was needed,
(RQ2) How have intersectional users expressed their ethical such as with r/ketogd,’ where members manage gestational
concerns over time? diabetes, a condition affecting pregnant individuals. This sub-
(RQ3) What are intersectional users’ high-priority ethical reddit was categorized under women/AFAB’ and ‘physical
concerns? health.’ Repeating this process for each subreddit, we com-
To answer these questions, we utilize data from Red- piled 746 intersectional subreddits, included in the replication
dit, a platform well-suited for gathering user feedback package.4
Physical Health
Global South ✖
LGBTQIA+ ✖ Lower SES
1 DATA COLLECTION BIPOC Global South
Health ✖ LGBTQIA+
Women/AFAB
COMMUNITY APP DATA Mental Health
DETECTION SELECTION SCRAPING BIPOC ✖ Women/AFAB
7 su4 b6 r ein dte dr its se ctional U froS m to dp a r taa .n ak iing apps 3 p6 o, s7 ts7 7 fr oa mpp I- Sre Rla ted Women/AFAB BIPOC
LGBTQIA+ ✖
Mental Health
2 EC PRESENCE DETECTION
Women/AFAB ✖
Physical Health
SAMPLING MANUAL AUTOMATED
Created a LABELING LABELING MG elo nb taa ll HSo eau lt th h ✖ ✖
sample of 247/1,265 posts with BERT classifier BIPOC
1,265/36,777 posts ethical concerns l aa sb ee tle hd ic a6 l, 4 c0 o1 n/ c3 e6 r, n7 s77 W Go lom be an l / SA oF uA tB h ✖ ✖
BIPOC
3 EC CATEGORIZATION (RQ1) Sapphic ✖
Transfolk
FILTERING MULTI-CLASS LABEL
4,231/6,401 LABELING EVALUATION 0% 25% 50% 75% 100%
platform EC posts EC category 10 EC posts per
after 2017 assigned per post category evaluated
Fig.2. Intersectionalcommunityclusternamesaretotheleftofthecolumns.
4 TIME SERIES ANALYSIS (RQ2) The columns show which marginalized identities are represented in each
cluster.
WORLD EVENT FORECASTING MODEL
RANKING Predictions for EC EVALUATION
10 top scored frequency over time Trend and outlier
global news events on 36,777 posts examination applications(bynumberofusers)acrossAppStoreswithinthe
US.3 WechosetheUSasthegeographicaldomainasReddit’s
5 PRIORITIZATION (RQ3) primaryuserbaseisUS-centered[72].Fromthislist,weadded
the word “app” after app names that are homonymous with
THEME MEASURING EVALUATION
SCORING PRIORITY Gather priority scores often-used words to avoid false positives (e.g., “McDonalds
200 topics Calculating 4 from 102 survey
analysed for 4,231 variables to generate participants to → McDonalds app”).
EC posts priority score for determine ground truth
each post 3) Data Scraping: We wrote a custom scraper using
Python’s Reddit API Wrapper (PRAW) [73]. This scraper
collected the most recent 1000 posts (or less if the subreddit
did not contain that many) mentioning our app names from
Fig.1. Methodology
each intersectional subreddit. In total, we collected 36,777
posts on June 20, 2023. The posts encapsulate 14 years, from
Todetecttheintersectionalcommunities,we:(1)labeleach 2009 to 2023, with 2021 as a median date.
subreddit with a binary label per marginalized community,
‘1’ if they belong, ‘0’ otherwise, resulting in vector embed-
B. Ethical Concern Presence Detection
dings of the subreddits’ affiliations, (2) apply hierarchical
agglomerative clustering [69], [70] on these vectors to detect Thissteppreparesourdataforthenextsteps,whichanswer
clusters of subreddits based on their Euclidean distances. We our research questions, see Figure 1.
stop the clustering algorithm at the point where it iterates 1) Sampling: Due to the impracticality of annotating the
multiple times without combining clusters, indicated by a gap entiredatasetcomprising36,777posts,wecreatedarepresen-
in the dendrogram of the hierarchical clustering. We chose tative sample. The sampling strategy accounted for both the
this approach to avoid researcher bias during intersection intersectionality of communities and the diversity of software
discovery. domains. Given the insufficient number of posts available
Wenamedtheclustersafterthemajorityintersectionsofthe in some domains, our analysis was constrained to software
contained subreddits. Clusters can contain up to six different domains with an adequate volume of posts. Consequently,
marginalizedidentities,asshowninFigure2.Duetothenature the study concentrated on the following software domains:
of the algorithm, some subreddits fit the cluster better than business, entertainment, shopping, social media, and utility
others. and productivity.
The eight resulting intersectional communities are (see We generated a minimal-sized sample of 400 posts at a
Figure 2): Global South x LGBTQIA+ x BIPOC, Health 95% confidence level and 5% margin of error for manual
x Women/AFAB, BIPOC x Women/AFAB, LGBTQIA+ x annotation. We extended the sample twice to improve the
MentalHealth,Women/AFABxPhysicalHealth,GlobalSouth results of the binary classifier (see Section IV-B3), resulting
x Mental Health x BIPOC, Women/AFAB x Global South x in 1,265 posts. We randomly collected an equal number of
BIPOC, and Sapphic2 x Transfolk. posts per intersectional community and software domain to
2) App Selection: To generate a set of software applica- give each factor the same importance. However, we did not
tions to analyze, we started with data.ai’s list of the top 50 detectenoughpostsforeachsoftwaredomainandcommunity
combination.Inthiscase,weevenlyandrandomlyfilledinthe
2Sapphicreferstofemalesattractedtootherfemales,whomayidentifyas
lesbian,bisexual,queer,etc.[71] 3includedinthereplicationpackage5
few missing posts from other software domains in the same At the time of access (August 2023), GPT-4 was OpenAI’s
community. highest-performing model on a range of tasks. We then evalu-
2) Manual Labeling: Samples were annotated by two au- ate its results by inspecting ten GPT-labelled posts per ethical
thors. Their main task was to label whether the post contains concern category (120 total posts evaluated). These labels
any ethical concern. Before labeling the final samples, they provideuswithinformationaboutintersectionalcommunities’
conducted three trials to ensure a high inter-rater agreement ethical concerns.
rate.TheannotatorsscoredafairlyhighCohen’sKappainthe 1) Filtering: We first filtered our ethical concerns dataset
first trial (.74) due to the high volume of non-ethical concern bydateandbyapp,soastocopewiththelowvolumeofposts
posts in our dataset (80.5% did not have an ethical concern). before2018(3351/36777)andthesparsityofpostsfornon-top
Themaindifficultyofidentifyingethicalconcernsarosewhen apps(thetop7/50appsmakeup57%ofthedataset).Weonly
connecting the ethical concern to the software. For example, included posts mentioning YouTube, Facebook, Instagram,
oneannotatormistakenlylabeledapostwhereauserdiscussed Discord, Twitter, and TikTok, which were the most frequent in
domestic abuse as an ethical concern. Although there was an thedatasetandareallsocialmediaapps,focusingourresultant
ethicalconcern,itwasnotinrelationtothesoftware.Toensure analysis on social media. We excluded Amazon and Google,
a common understanding of the task and the definitions used although they were top apps, due to Google’s synonymy with
during the manual annotation, they used an annotation guide. search and users’ focus on Amazon products rather than the
Foreachtrial,theyannotated20-40postsofthedataset.Inthe application itself. We also filtered the dataset for posts after
lasttrialrun,theyachievedaCohen’sKappaof0.95,showing 2017, generating 18,015 posts. We then filtered for posts with
anexcellentcommonunderstandingofthelabelingtask.After ethical concerns, resulting in 4,231 posts.
each manual annotation round, annotators discussed all posts 2) Multi-class Labeling: To classify the ethical concern
inwhichtheydisagreedandassignedfinallabels.TheCohen’s type of the posts, we used the GPT-4 engine and an existing
Kappa of the whole labelled sample is 0.8 before assigning ethical concerns taxonomy [34].
final labels.
3) Automated Labeling: We constructed a deep learning EthicalConcern Definition
Addiction Theapplication’sdesignorcontentisaddic-
binaryclassifiertolabelourdatasetof36,777postsforethical
tivetotheuser.
concerns. First, we preprocessed the data by removing special Censorship The application hides certain information,
charactersandpunctuation.Then,wetokenizedoursamplevia ortheuser’scontentorprofilesareremoved
ordemoted.
the BertTokenizer [66]. Due to the length of Reddit posts, we
Cyberbullying The application’s users exhibit intentional
also windowed the post by taking the app name keyword and harmfulormeanbehaviortowardstheuser.
300charactersbeforeandafterthiskeyword.Thiswindowing Discrimination Theapplicationoritscommunityispartic-
ipating in prejudicial treatment of different
restricted the text to the post discussing the ethical concern.
categoriesofpeople.
In our manually annotated sample, we had 247/1,265 posts HarmfulAdvertising The application hosts advertisements that
labeled as ethical concerns, so we computed balanced class misleadorharmtheuser.
InappropriateContent Theapplicationhostscontent,includingbut
weights to address this data imbalance. We use the package
notlimitedtoposts,comments,ormultime-
ktrain[66]tosimplifythedeeplearningoptimizationprocess.
dia (not advertisements) that distresses the
We first initialize ktrain’s BERT text classification model4. user.
After, we instantiate the learner, which has a batch size of 16 Misinformation The application spreads false or inaccurate
informationtousers.
andamaximumlearningrateof5∗105.Wetrainedthislearner
Privacy The application and community does not
withaone-cyclepolicy[75],whichisanoptimal,widelyused keep the user’s information secure or uses
policy for increasing the speed of convergence. This training it for non-consensual purposes. The appli-
cationdoesnotprovidetheusertheability
functionranonunlimitedepochswithanearlystoppingpolicy
tocontrolaccesstotheirinformation.
if the final loss function per epoch increased for three epochs. Safety Theapplicationoritscommunityhascaused
This method resulted in a weighted precision, recall, and f1- physical or mental health issues or other
safetyrisksfortheuser.
score of 0.91 and a minority precision, recall, and f1-score
Scam The application or its community has en-
of 0.74, 0.70, and 0.72. After training, our learner classified gaged in deceitful behavior to gain some-
our entire dataset of 36,777 posts; it tagged 6,401/36,777 as thing, usually money or goods, from the
user.
containing an ethical concern.
SocialIsolation Theapplicationoritscommunitycausesthe
usertofeellonely.
C. Ethical Concern Categorization (RQ1)
Each API request to GPT-4 (date accessed: August 2024)
To determine intersectional communities’ ethical concerns
included a task prompt, definitions of the ethical concerns’
regarding software (RQ1), we first filter our data to focus
categories, and an ethical concern post, windowed to focus
our study on the most representative samples and on posts
the text (see Figure 3 for an example). We developed the task
mentioning ethical concerns. Next, we employ OpenAI’s API
prompt by referencing and summarizing our original annota-
to access GPT-4 (model=“gpt-4”) to then assign pre-existing
tion guide’s key points (see Section IV-B2), which included
ethicalconcerncategoriestoeachpost(seeTableIV-C2)[34].
the categories and definitions from previous work [34]. We
reduced this initial list after manually inspecting a sample of
4ktrain uses BERT’s original pretrained model, trained on BooksCorpus
andEnglishWikipedia[74] 400 posts; we removed content theft, identify theft, accessi-6
bility, and accountability as they did not occur in the sample. a diverse group (in terms of gender, age, ethnicity, seniority
See Table IV-C2 for all considered categories. We also gave level, Global South/Global North living experiences, and fa-
GPT-4 the option to label a post as ‘None.’ In addition, we miliaritywithethicsandsoftware)ofnineresearchers.Eachof
instructed GPT-4 to choose only one label. them independently assessed for each of the 65 world events
if it was -2 (irrelevant) to +2 (very relevant) to discussions
relating to ethical concerns about software applications. The
final scores (sums of participants scores) range from -14 to
16, with a median of 2, mean of 1.292 and a 3rd quantile of
8. For our evaluation, we limited events to those with a score
above 8, resulting in a collection of 9 events.
2) Forecasting: Werestrictthedatasettoallpostssincethe
start of the year 2018, resulting in 18,015/36,777 posts with
binary labels (ethical concern or no ethical concern) from the
modelinSectionIV-B3.Thistimeframewaschosenduetothe
low volume of relevant posts prior to 2018. To transform the
data for time series analyses, we measure weekly occurrence
frequencies,i.e.,numberofpostscontaininganethicalconcern
divided by the number of all weekly posts. We selected two
forecasting models, a generic ARIMA model with automated
Fig. 3. Sample Prompt and Post to the GPT-4 engine to classify ethical
parameter estimation from the R forecast package [77], [78]
concern types. The post is altered to maintain the author’s privacy. For the
studyweusedtheAPIratherthantheUIthatisshownhereforvisualization and the Prophet model [79]. ARIMA is widely recognized
purposes. Categories and their definitions were included at the end of the as the textbook standard for time series analysis, providing
prompt(hereexcludedforthesakeofreadability).
a reliable baseline for comparison. By contrast, the Prophet
model, developed by Facebook, is specialized for analyzing
3) Label Evaluation: We manually evaluated these labels
human activity at scale, particularly in the context of social
by ethical concern category. The first author validated ten
media data. It detects monthly seasonality and predictions
classifiedpostsfromeachcategory.Ifthepost’sGPT-4ethical
can be improved by providing a list of holidays, as they can
concern label fit the provided ethical concern definition, the
influence human activity online. We use the six US federal
author labeled the post as valid. For later analysis, we kept
holidays [80] as proposed by the Prophet documentation 5,
all categories that received an evaluation score of 8/10 or
to refine the model and further set it to do 1000 samples of
higher(socialisolation=10/10,scam=9/10,privacy=9/10,mis-
full Bayesian sampling. The ARIMA model, while unable to
information=9/10, inappropriate content=9/10, harmful adver-
detect seasonality, was utilized to provide a robust baseline
tising=10/10, cyberbullying=9/10, addiction=6/10). We found
comparison against the more specialized Prophet model.
that GPT-4 was too sensitive when labeling for addiction and
3) Model Application: We consider weekly observations
tendedtooverlabelpostsinthiscategory.Forexample,GPT-4
outside of the 0.95 confidence interval (CI) of the Prophet
labeled this post as addiction: ‘I want my partner’s attention
prediction as a strong outlier (shown as red dots in Figure 7),
24-7 and get super sad if he’s scrolling on TikTok next to
observations outside of the 0.85 CI, but inside the 0.95 CI are
me,’ confusing the poster’s constant need for attention with
considered weak outliers (shown as orange dots in Figure 7).
scrolling.
We visualize observations and model predictions, and add
indicators along the timeline to global events that have been
D. Time Series Analysis (RQ2)
ranked with a high potential to influence the discussion of
To study how intersectional communities’ express ethical ethical concerns with regards to software applications, i.e.,
concerns over time (RQ2), we first created a list of world scored above the 3rd quantile of 8.
events that could have potential effects on the discussion
surrounding ethical concerns. Then, we used univariate time E. Prioritization (RQ3)
series to detect moments of critical importance (outliers) and
To determine which ethical concerns in our dataset have
trends of behavior. Finally, we applied our models on posts
the highest priority from an intersectional user perspective
with ethical concerns.
(RQ3), we first sort our posts topically, then aggregate these
1) World Event Ranking: We collected major news events
topics into priority themes. Afterwards, we assign scores to
from the Western hemisphere, consistent with the choice of
the priority themes in terms of their appearance frequency.
app rankings and the majority population of Reddit, starting
We then measure each post’s overall priority score by com-
from the year 2013. To create a minimally biased selection of
bining four variables: entropy of priority themes, recency,
these,wescouredmultiplenewswebsitesforthetopstoriesof
popularity and sentiment. We exclude volume because some
a given year. Most useful was CBS’s The year in review [76]
ethicalconcerns,althoughinfrequent,possessthepotentialfor
that curates the top stories of each year. We collected news
severeconsequences,particularlyincasesrelatingtoviolence.
storiesthathaveapotentialsocietalimpactregardingsoftware
To then assess the priority level of each ethical concern
usage, e.g., MeToo and COVID-19. The resulting 65 events,
foundinourreplicationpackage,weresubsequentlyscoredby 5https://facebook.github.io/prophet/docs/quick start.html7
category, we average and weigh each category’s variables TABLEI
before generating a final priority score. As output, we have CRITICALEMPATHTOPICSINEACHPRIORITYTHEME
priorityscoresforeachpostandeachethicalconcerncategory.
Priority Themes EmpathTopics
1) Priority Theme Scoring: While we have already as- harm medicalemergency,pain,violence,death,injury,
signedethicalconcerncategoriestoourposts,thereisvariation kill,terrorism
negativity hate, negative emotion, nervousness, suffering,
intheurgencyoftheseethicalconcerns.Forexample,consider
fear, sadness, shame, confusion, aggression,
thetwofollowingethicalconcernsthatwereassignedthesame anger,disgust,rage
category: children children,youth
(1) Cyberbullying (low priority): “I’m kinda down
about something I know is pretty silly in the grand
Φ(p ) be the probability of a given post’s priority theme
scheme of things. I called out a Facebook group theme
value. The entropy H(p ) of a theme is defined as:
admin for being all passive-aggressive with group theme
members.” H(p )=−(Φ(p )∗log Φ(p )) (2)
theme theme 2 theme
(2) Cyberbullying (high priority): “She left a sui-
To generate a total entropy score of a given post, we sum the
cide note on her Facebook, and the comments were
entropy scores of our three priority themes:
just awful. It’s getting really bad now.”
While these two posts may have the same ethical concerns
category, the urgency of their issue varies widely. The first Ent (p)=H(p )+H(p )+H(p )
total harm negativity children
post describes a minor dispute while, in the second, a user (3)
threatens suicide and, after, experiences more harassment. To B: Recency. We use recency as a measure due to the often
ensure the safety of this user and others like her, we identify urgent nature of ethical concerns. For example, if users post
critical topic terms within our posts. contentaboutharmingthemselvesorothers,appsmustremove
To score our posts thematically, we use Empath [68], a this content and contact proper authorities as quickly as
tool for analyzing text across over 200 pre-validated topics. possible. Let integer(p ) be the date of the post scaled
date
Out of the box, this tool is trained on more than 1.8 billion to an integer value. We define the recency of a post as:
wordsofmodernfiction.Instead,weusetheirprovidedReddit
model to generate more relevant scores. Empath is trained via Rec(p)=integer(p date) (4)
adeeplearningskip-gramnetworktolearnwordassociations.
C: Popularity. The popularity of a post refers to the level
We utilize 21 of Empath’s built-in topics to create three
of engagement this post receives. We posit that the popularity
priority themes: harm, negativity, and children (see Table I).
of a post, and therefore the ethical concern described, likely
Westartedwithapre-existingsetof15topicsrelatingto‘hate,
indicates the level of salience this ethical concern has among
violence, discrimination, and negative feelings’ from previous
the online community. Let p be the number of upvotes a
work on right wing YouTube channels and children’s unsafe upvotes
post receives, p be the ratio of upvotes to downvotes, and
conversations on Instagram [81], [82]; then, after manually ratio
p bethenumberofcommentsaposthas.Additionally,
inspecting the complete set of topics, we added the following comments
let P and P represent the sets of upvote counts
topics: medical emergency, injury, death, fear, shame, and upvotes comments
and comment counts across all posts, respectively. We define
confusion. We then sorted these topics into three themes.
the popularity of a post as:
The harm theme’s topics relate to bodily harm; we developed
this theme to capture online mentions of disturbing content.
p p
The negativity theme captures negative sentiment but in a Pop(p)= upvotes +p + comments (5)
more fine-grained manner. Finally, we created a children max(P upvotes) ratio max(P comments)
theme(withthetopicschildrenandyouth)toprioritizeethical
D: Sentiment. We employ Jigsaw’s Perspective API toxi-
concerns that concern young people. Let p be a post and P
city detector [86] and the widely utilized sentiment analysis
be the set of all posts. Let t be a topic and T be the set of
tool VADER [87] to capture fine-grained representations of
topics within a theme p (harm, negativity, youth). For
theme negative sentiment. Prior research indicates that user com-
all posts, we sum all the Empath embedding values for each
plaints expressing ethical concerns are often characterized by
post’s priority theme:
heightenednegativity[34].Therefore,incorporatingadetailed
(cid:88) analysisofnegativesentimentcanserveasaneffectivemetric
p = empath(p,t) (1)
theme for prioritizing ethical concerns in software reviews. Let
t∈T Sent(p) denote the sentiment of a post. Each variable from
2) Measuring Priority: As mentioned above, we prioritize the Perspective API, along with the VADER score—namely
based on: A: Entropy of Critical Themes, B: Recency, C: Tox(p) (toxicity), Sev(p) (severe toxicity), Ins(p) (insult),
Popularity and D: Sentiment. Pro(p) (profanity), Thr(p) (threat), Ide(p) (identity threat),
A:EntropyofCriticalThemes.Tocalculatetherelevance and Vad(p) (sentiment score)—is assigned an individual
ofcriticalthemes,wecalculatetheirentropy.Thisisacommon weight before being aggregated to form the overall sentiment
anomaly detection metric used, for example, to find product score.Weweightthesevariablesseparatelyduetotheirdiverse
featuresthatareofutmostinteresttocustomers[83]–[85].Let nature and salience within this context.8
102 participants) of the sample. Nearly 60% of participants
Sent(p)=w ·Nor(Tox(p))+w ·Nor(Sev(p)) were from the Global South, including countries such as
a b
SouthAfrica,Mexico,Chile,Nigeria,India,Egypt,Venezuela,
+w ·Nor(Ins(p))+w ·Nor(Pro(p))
c d Somalia, and Eswatini. The participant demographic also
+w ·Nor(Thr(p))+w ·Ide(p)+w ·Nor(Vad(p))
e f g includedabalancedrepresentationofwomenandLGBTQIA+
(6)
individuals, each constituting 50% of the total sample (n =
Normalization. Due to the varying scales of the variables, 102). However, specific frequencies of lower socioeconomic
we normalize each variable from 0 to 1. Let v be one of statusorthosewithmentalorphysicalhealthchallengeswere
the input variables. Let V be the set of variables. We define not measured and remain unknown.
normalization as: Survey Design. Our survey, containing 353 total questions,
v−min(V) isarepresentativesampleofourdatasetof4,231labeledethi-
Nor(v)= (7)
max(V)−min(V) calconcerns(marginoferror=.05,confidencelevel=.95).Each
question in the survey represented an ethical concern from a
Priority. To prioritize according to aforementioned vari-
generatedrandomsampleof353ethicalconcernRedditposts.
ables, we use the following formula:
ThefirstauthorimportedalltheseRedditpostsintoQualtrics,
Prio(p)=Sent(p)+w h·Nor(Ent total(p)) manually shortened them to focus on the ethical concern,
(8)
+w ·Nor(Rec(p))+w ·Nor(Pop(p)) and then paraphrased them to protect the authors’ privacy.
i j
If a post contained an image or a link necessary to view
Weights.Todeterminetheoptimalvariableweightsforour
for context or was unclear, we replaced it with an alternate
prioritization equation, we utilize a parameter grid search,
randomly-generated post. We performed this step to minimize
evaluating weights from the set 1, 2, 5, 10 for each pa-
thedifficultyofthetaskforparticipants.Participantsevaluated
rameter. Let w be a variable that can take any value
i each ethical concern using a 5-point Likert scale to indicate
from the set {1,2,5,10}, for each i belonging to the set
its importance. Participants answered a balanced subset of 20
{a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h,i,j}:
questionssothateachquestionwouldhaveatleast5responses
(5.6 = (20 answers ∗ 102 participants)/353 total questions).
w ∈{1,2,5,10} ∀i∈{a,b,c,d,e,f,g,h,i,j} (9) The responses were then averaged to produce an overall
i
ground truth score for each question, facilitating a compre-
hensive evaluation of ethical concerns within the dataset. Our
3) Evaluation: To evaluate the proposed methodology, it
study aligned with the ethics review procedure at our univer-
was imperative to establish a reliable ground truth. In align-
sity,allowingustoproceedwithoutneedingafullreviewfrom
ment with a user-centered approach, we identified this ground
BETHCIE, the Faculty of Science ethics committee at Vrije
truth as the subjective opinions of users. Consequently, we
Universiteit Amsterdam.8 The full results of the survey are
conducted a survey involving 102 participants sourced from
included in the replication package.
the Prolific platform6. The participant pool was bifurcated
Metrics. In this evaluation, we used two key metrics to
into two distinct groups: an intersectional group (n=51) and a
assess the effectiveness of our scoring methodology: preci-
general population group (n=51), ensuring at least half of the
sion@k and recall@k. Precision measures the proportion of
participant pool was from an intersectional background. Both
relevant items, indicating how many of the items are truly
groups comprised individuals proficient in English. Gender
relevant. Recall, on the other hand, evaluates the proportion
balance was maintained across both groups, ensuring a 50:50
of identified relevant items relative to the total number of
male-to-female ratio. Participants were encouraged from all
relevant items available. We use both of these metrics ‘ at
available countries.
k as these metrics provide insight into our model’s ability to
To construct an intersectionally diverse participant group,
capture a comprehensive set of relevant items among its top
we implemented specific criteria targeting membership within
k recommendations. Our metrics were validated using 10-fold
LGBTQ+ and BIPOC communities. We selected LGBTQ+
cross validation; this process prevents overfitting by training
criteria to include a broad spectrum of sexual orientations
and testing the set on all data.
and gender identities. The inclusion of BIPOC participants
was strategically aimed to represent both individuals from the We use a grid search to determine an optimal weighting
Global South and other historically marginalized racial and scheme (see Equation IV-E2). The grid search is optimized
ethnicgroups.Duetotheambiguousnatureofsocioeconomic based on precision@k. We prioritize precision over recall
statusindicatorsprovidedbyProlific’sscreeningtools7 andto as our optimization metric due to the risk of overfitting in
avoidunduerisktopotentiallyvulnerablegroups,weexcluded our small dataset, which could result in an artificially high
socioeconomic status, mental health and physical health from recall.Giventhecriticalnatureofethicalconcernsinsoftware
our criteria. This decision allows for future work to explore engineering, it is imperative to prioritize the most significant
these demographics. user concerns at the top of the list, thereby minimizing the
The composition of our final participant pool was predom- occurrence of false positives that could otherwise dilute the
inantly BIPOC, comprising approximately 69% (69 out of focus on genuine issues.
6https://www.prolific.com/
7Q:Wherewouldyouputyourselfonthesocioeconomicladder?A:[1-10] 8https://surfdrive.surf.nl/files/index.php/s/tAYgecANd0allR99
Inappropriate Content
Twitter 67.82% Discrimination
Safety
Social Isolation
Facebook 62.42%
Cyberbullying
Privacy
Instagram 60.84% Misinformation
Censorship
TikTok 59.72% Harmful Advertising
Scam
Discord 56.16%
Fig.4. EthicalConcernFrequencyinFullDataset
YouTube 41.46%
We set the threshold for relevance to 4, aligning with our 0.00% 20.00% 40.00% 60.00% 80.00%
Likert rating scale where 5 represents “extremely important,”
4 represents “very important,” 3 represents “moderately im- Fig.5. EthicalConcernFrequencyAmongstApps
portant,” 2 represents “slightly important,” and 1 represents
“not important.” This threshold ensures that only items rated
occurring ethical concern was inappropriate content (13.7%,
as very important or higher are considered relevant. We chose
114/830).
the value of k to be 20, allowing us to focus on the top
2) Ethical Concerns by Intersection: We clustered the
20 recommendations. Together, these metrics and threshold
intersectional subreddits into eight communities/clusters (cf.
settings offer a balanced perspective on both the accuracy and
Section IV-A1). This section details the frequency of ethical
completeness of our model’s recommendations, ensuring that
concerns for each one. We calculated the frequency as the
our scoring methodology not only ranks relevant items highly
number of ethical concern posts per category and cluster
but also captures a wide range of them.
divided by the total number of posts from that cluster. For
example, in the Sapphic × Transfolk cluster, there are 286
V. RESULTS
postsrelatingtoinappropriatecontent,andthetotalnumberof
Inthissection,wereportintersectionalcommunities’ethical
postscollectedfromtheSapphic×Transfolkclusteris11,192
concerns about software (RQ1), changes in the expression of
posts; so, the frequency is 286/11,192=.026.
theseconcernsovertime(RQ2),andtheethicalconcernswith
Global South × LGBT × BIPOC most often experiences
the highest priority (RQ3).
discrimination(.016),encountersinappropriatecontent(.016),
and has privacy concerns (.010). Health × Women/AFAB
A. Intersectional Communities’ Ethical Concerns (RQ1) primarily reports experiencing social isolation (.039), safety
We report results after running a BERT model to identify concerns (.035), and inappropriate content (.016). BIPOC ×
ethical concerns (6,401/36,777 ethical concerns posts), filter- Women most frequently faces discrimination (.039), inappro-
ingbydateandapp(18,015/36,777postsafter2017regarding priate content (.028), and cyberbullying (.010). LGBTQIA+
our chosen apps). Overall, 23.5% (4,231/18,015) of the inter- × Mental Health encounters inappropriate content (.102),
sectional users’ posts after 2017 contained an ethical concern. discrimination (.070), and cyberbullying (.047) as their most
By prompting GPT-4, ethical concerns categories were then prevalent issues. Women/AFAB × Physical Health most often
assignedautomaticallyto2,639/4,231oftheseethicalconcerns has experiences with inappropriate content (.029), safety con-
posts.Thefollowingsectionsregardthisdataset(2,639ethical cerns (.026), and privacy matters (.017). For Global South ×
concern category posts). MentalHealth×BIPOC,theprimaryconcernsrevolvearound
1) Ethical Concerns Frequency by Category and App: The safety (.016), feelings of social isolation (.007), and instances
top ethical concerns found in the dataset were inappropri- of discrimination (.007). In the case of Women/AFAB ×
ate content (22.3%, 589/2639 posts), discrimination (20.5%, GlobalSouth×BIPOC,theirmostcommonissuesaredealing
540/2639posts),andsafety(16.4%,433/2639posts)whilethe with inappropriate content (.029), safety concerns (.016), and
leastfrequentethicalconcernswerecensorship(3.0%,79/2639 censorship (.014). Lastly, the Sapphic × Transfolk community
posts), harmful advertising (1.0%, 23/2639 posts), and scam most frequently reports discrimination (.028), inappropriate
(0.6%, 16/2639 posts) (refer to Figure 4). content (.026), and safety (.017).
To calculate the frequency of ethical concerns on apps,
we normalized each app’s number of ethical concerns by
B. Ethical Concerns Over Time (RQ2)
the total mentions of that app within our dataset. We find
that 67.8% (432/637) of posts mentioning Twitter contain Over the last six years, the number of posts that include
ethicalconcerns,followedbyFacebook(62.4%,553/886)and ethicalconcernshasincreasedconsistently.Wefound91posts
Instagram (60.8%, 505/830), as shown in Figure 5. in2018,214in2019,482in2020,892in2021,1456in2022,
Discrimination was Twitter’s most common ethical concern and1096inthefirsthalfof2023.Evenafternormalization,we
(21.5%, 137/637). Facebook most frequently had privacy- identify an upward trend of ethical concerns in intersectional
concerned posts (14.3%, 127/886), while Instagram’s most communities.ThedataoverrepresentstheSapphic×Transfolk10
Fig.6. EthicalConcernFrequencybyintersectionalcommunity
Fig.8. DecompositionofProphetforecastintoglobaltrend,holidayeffects
andyearlyseasonality.
lowed by a drop until April. The seasonal trend plateaus until
anincreaseinJunethatlaststhroughSeptember.Theseasonal
trend then drops in October and December. Thus, the Reddit
communities appear to be most concerned during January,
June, August, and September. Since the ARIMA model does
not detect seasonality, we can compare its forecasts to these
seasons of heightened ethical concern occurrence in Figure 7.
For instance, ARIMA’s forecasts for the months following the
2020 April downtime are below Prophet’s forecasts until the
end of the year. In contrast, ARIMA’s forecasts for the same
months in 2022 are generally above Prophet’s.
Fig.7. Weeklyethicalconcernfrequency(dots),forecastsofARIMAmodel
(yellowline),forecastofProphetmodel(blueline),its.95and.85CI(grey 4) Outliers: We analyze the three outliers after January
areas)andtrend(blackline).Dotsarecoloredredwhen>5%error,orange
2020, for which a significant real-world event happened not
when > 15% and grow in size according to their distance to the Prophet
trend.Worldeventspointatthemonthoftheiroccurrence. longer than a month before. First, we analyze the outlier in
June 2020, a month after Black Lives Matter (BLM) protests
erupted following the death of George Floyd [5]. During June
communityinthistimeseries,with55%ofpostscomingfrom 2020, 16% (12/76 posts) of ethically concerned posts ad-
their subreddits. dressed Black Lives Matter, but almost exclusively in BIPOC
1) Global Trends: We observe (cf. Figure 7) that the ×Womensubreddits(9/18posts).BLMwasmentionedfirstin
frequency of ethical concerns in Reddit posts increases over ourdatasetinJune2020andismentionedfrequentlyuntilthe
time. Until January 2020, it trended at a rate of 0.14, from endofJuly,afterwhichthethemeswellsoff.Inthosemoments
whenitstartedincreasinglinearlyuntilapproximatelyJanuary ofheightenedawarenessaboutanissue,issuesinsoftwareare
2022toarateof0.2.Thissuddenrisecoincideswiththestart experienced and shared. One user writes: “Blackout Tuesday
of the COVID-19 pandemic, as does the plateau after 2022 onInstagramiswherewhiteuserspostablacksquareto‘am-
withtheeasingofCOVID-19restrictions.LookingatARIMA plify black voices over white voices.’ Despite good intentions,
forecasts towards the end of our time series, activity is still it comes off as performative activism, cluttering BLM tags
declining. and preventing access to actual important information and
2) Initial Fluctuations: Until January 2020 (cf. Figure 7), videos.”.Communicationisessentialtohumanrightsactivists,
there are frequent outliers (∼27 before, ∼9 after). We posit and a software company can support their work by avoiding
that these outliers occur due to the sparsity of the data during unhelpful noise ‘cluttering’ communication channels.
that period. We could not identify common themes relating We find another outlier in February 2021, where both
to the first two events in a manual analysis of the concerned ProphetandARIMAforecastlittleactivityshortlyafterTwitter
posts.Astherateofethicallyconcernedpostsincreases,there banned Donald Trump from Twitter, yet none of the posts
is an overall increase in the total volume of Reddit posts in mention the ban. The outlier that happened in March 2022,
intersectional communities. Therefore, the extreme frequency shortly before Twitter’s acquisition by Elon Musk, is the
fluctuations after the Cambridge Analytica Scandal and the only ‘strong’ outlier (outside 95% CI) after 2019. None of
ensuing appearance of Mark Zuckerberg in Congress until the posts refer to this event. All we can observe for the
January 2020 do not allow for proper interpretation. latter two examples is an increase in concern about issues
3) Seasonal Component: Nevertheless, we detect a yearly specific to the intersectional communities, e.g., reports of
seasonality during that time and after with the Prophet model transphobia in the Sapphic × Transfolk community. Although
(cf. Figure 8). We see increased activity during January, fol- not rated high enough to appear in our world event selection11
(cf. Section IV-D1), the “Don’t Say Gay” bill was passed in 3) PrioritybyEthicalConcern: Wereportthespecificuser
Florida shortly after the strong outlier in April 2022. concerns for the top 5 ethical concerns (cf. Figure 9 and
Figure 10) by summarizing the top ten concerns from users
C. Ethical Concerns Prioritization (RQ3) as follows.
We find that our prioritization system has a precision and 1. Cyberbullying Multiple users reported receiving death
recall (k=20) of .773 and .89, respectively. To calculate the threats and other violent threats when discussing trans issues
highestpriorityethicalconcerns,weaveragethepriorityscore online or coming out as transgender. One user recounted
of all posts for that concern. The ethical concerns with the that their father sent them transphobic videos on Facebook
highest priority are cyberbullying, inappropriate content, and after they changed their name on the platform, leading to
discrimination; those with the lowest priority are privacy, suicidal ideation. Additional posts detailed instances where
scam, and social isolation. Figure 9 shows the prioritized users’ friends threatened suicide, the pervasive presence of
ethical concerns from highest to lowest priority scores. We transphobia online contributing to suicidal thoughts, and a
summarise the content of the top ten priority posts of the trans user being told they were ‘lucky to be raped’ because
overall dataset and then examine the ten highest priority user they are unattractive. Another account described a Twitter
concerns for each ethical concern category. thread where a 17 year old trans guy was exposed as a
1) Weights,RecallandPrecision: Ourprioritizationsystem groomer, causing him to stop attending school.
has a precision (k=20) of .773 and recall (k=20) of .89. These 2. Inappropriate Content In this section, we exclude the
recallandprecisionvaluesresultfromouroptimizedweighting top two ethical concerns, as they were previously recounted
scheme, which sets recency to 2, entropy and popularity to 5, in Top Ten Priority Posts. The otherwise top post details
identity threat to 10, and the rest of the parameters to 1. As an instance where a black woman is killed by domestic
comparison, when all weights are set to one, precision is .25 violence and her killer publicly jokes about it on Facebook.
andrecallis1.Arandompriorityscoringgeneratesaprecision Subsequently, some reports highlight conflicting viewpoints
of .1 and a recall of 1. regardingyoungtransgenderindividualsonTikTok;oneposter
describesangeratyoungtranspeopleonTikTokandtheother
details frustration with this anger at children. Next, we see a
post critiquing the superficial efforts of social media activism
aimed at addressing rape. An additional report discusses the
particularly insidious nature of TERFism9 propagated by gay
men on Twitter. After, a transgender user shares their with-
drawal from Facebook, driven by the overwhelming presence
oftransphobiccommentaryonnewsarticles.Anotheralarming
postdiscussesthedefenseofasongonFacebookthatglorifies
the rape of young Black girls. Lastly, a user reports that
the search results for ”transgender” on YouTube reveals a
Fig.9. Averagepriorityvaluesforeachethicalconcernscategory.
predominance of negative and transphobic content.
3. Discrimination Misgendering, particularly via non-
binary-inclusive terms like using “transmasc” instead of
“transman,” is reported by one user. A Black woman user
describes receiving backlash from black men on Twitter for
posting about Black womens’ experiences of sexual assault
and domestic violence on the site. Transphobia is reportedly
worsening, exemplified by an incident where a woman with
breast cancer and a double mastectomy receives transphobic
hate. One user expresses regret about transitioning due to
societal focus on trans issues. Additionally, a trans user fears
ridicule and harassment when posting selfies, with concerns
about images being cross-posted on Twitter by transphobic
Fig.10. AveragePerspectivevaluesforeachethicalconcernscategory. individuals. Another user laments on how TERFs deadname10
a murdered trans woman on Twitter. Another trans individual
2) Top Ten Priority Posts: Seven out of ten of the top reports being told to remain silent about transphobia because
priority posts regard users getting death threats, being told other groups, such as Black and Asian communities, suffer
to commit suicide, or discussing the desire to commit suicide. more. Users also report the mass bullying of a transmedicalist
The top post details a young kid being told to commit suicide YouTuber and the fetishization of gay relationships within the
because of a YouTube video he posted about neo-pronouns. TikTok trans community.
Anothertoppost,fromarapesurvivor,detailshateonlinethey 4. Harmful Advertising Several users reported frustra-
received for discussing pro-choice opinions online. The other
twopostsdetailtraumaandhowsomeonlinecontenttriggered 9trans-exclusionaryradicalfeminism
memories of this trauma. 10useofatransperson’sbirthname12
tion with the receipt of transphobic and anti-abortion ad- practitionerstoengagewithdiverseusersfromdifferentinter-
vertisements on YouTube. Despite attempts to modify ad sectional groups (e.g., by asking for their feedback regularly)
preferences—specifically requests not to see such ads—these to understand and address their needs related to the software.
users noted that the undesired content continued to appear, In addition, we see that app design highly influences the
indicating a potential failure in the platform’s ad targeting presence of ethical concern categories. For example, while
andpreferencemanagementsystems.Furthermore,someusers inappropriate content was the second most popular concern
who had recently experienced miscarriages detail being sub- overall, it was seventh most popular for Discord, an app with
jectedtotargetedbabyproductadvertisements.Thismismatch no feed-based content, implying practitioners should focus on
between user experiences and ad targeting led to reports of inappropriate content when creating a feed feature.
significant emotional trauma. Additionally, one user detailed (RQ2)OvertheobservedtimeperiodfromJanuary2018to
their experience with targeted advertisements for questionable June 2023, the number of posts from intersectional communi-
dietary supplements, which were promoted during that users’ tiescontainingappfeedbackhassteadilyincreased.Moreover,
menstrual periods. Finally, one transman reports feeling ‘like the ratio of app feedback that contains ethical concerns has
a bad woman’ after receiving YouTube ads targeted at weight grown by 50% since 2020. The accelerated upwards trend
loss for ciswomen. of ethically concerned posts appears to coincide with the
5. Safety. The highest priority post is a report of a user’s beginningoftheCOVID-19pandemic.Italsoappearstoslow
girlfriend threatening suicide on Discord and then losing down again since COVID-19 restrictions on the population
contact.Otherpostswithinthiscategorydisclosefeelingupset have eased. Although, whether a world event, that is rarely
afterseeingTikTokvideosthatblamepregnantpeople’sstress talked about in the posts in question, can have an ‘unspoken’
levels for miscarriage or online pregnancy announcements. effect on people’s sensitivity for ethical problems remains to
Another post details the harassment of a trans school teacher be seen in future work. Similar effects have been observed
onatownFacebookpage,leadinghimtofearforhissafetyin in teens with mental health concerns on Reddit, showing
public. Finally, one poster discusses their gender dysphoria’s an increased display of negative emotion after heavy news
fluctuations and questions social media’s role in their trans coverageoftwomassshootingsintheUS[88].Wealsofound
identity. an exceptionally high rate of ethically concerned posts, the
monthfollowingthedeathofGeorgeFloydatthehandsofthe
policeandtheensuingBLMprotests.Wefoundfurtheractivity
VI. DISCUSSIONANDCONCLUSION
spikes, but none of the other world events seem to align.
We find that (RQ1) intersectional communities’ most It follows that some communities are influenced more than
frequent ethical concerns are discrimination and inappropriate others by certain world events. Furthermore, if a community
content, but differ per community and software application, isinfluencedbyanevent,weseethisinfluencewaningslowly
(RQ2) their ethical concerns are growing and respond to real over years to come.
worldfactors,and(RQ3)criticalusercomplaintsofteninclude Since our results show that ethical concerns increase over
descriptions of trauma. Our findings are directly relevant to time,practitionersneedtostartaddressingintersectionalusers’
practitionerswhocanuseourmethodologyandresultstomake ethicalconcerns.Inaddition,seasonally,wefindthatincreased
their software more ethical for intersectional communities. reporting occurs during January and summer months. Future
(RQ1) While there are similarities in intersectional users’ research could confirm these trends and examine their root
ethicalconcerns,likelyduetotheirpositionalongthemargins causes. Practitioners can use our results to develop communi-
of society, these groups are not a monolith. As discussed in cationandsoftwareevolutionprocessesresponsivetotemporal
Section V-C3, there is a substantial overlap among ethical trends and world events. Especially after a world event with
concerns,suchasdiscriminationandcyberbullying,whichare high visibility in media, it is important to quickly address
inherentlylinkedtoinappropriatecontent.Cyberbullyingoften ethical concerns raised by users to avoid reputational and
arises from discriminatory attitudes, and harmful advertising revenue losses for the company as well as harm to users.
may have a discriminatory nature. Despite these overlaps, By establishing connections between some ethical concerns
the distinct characteristics of each concern offer practition- to world events, practitioners can develop standard response
ers specific targets for feature development. For instance, processes for addressing intersectional users’ needs.
cyberbullying is primarily associated with user interactions, (RQ3) Recent research [89] has demonstrated a need for
whereas inappropriate content often relates to feed-based, user feedback tools for prioritization and thematic analysis.
hostedcontent.Thisdistinctionallowspractitionerstofocuson As a solution, we propose a novel methodology for identi-
developingfeaturesthataddressmessagingsystemsorcontent fying high-priority ethical concern feedback from users that
feed management, respectively. practitioners can use to find critical feedback, though it may
Whereas inappropriate content and discrimination were initially be most accurate within this specific data context and
widely popular, taking up nearly half of all reported ethi- requiredatamanipulationandadditiontobegeneralizable.The
cal concerns (42.8%), half of our communities did not ex- noveltyofthissystemliesintheentropyofcriticalthemesand
press these concerns as their top two concerns (Health × fine-grainedsentimentvariables,whichallowsustosortposts
Women/AFAB, Global South × Mental Health × BIPOC, by the urgency of the content from a user perspective. Our
Women/AFAB × Physical Health, Women × Global South current system categorizes harmful advertising as the fourth
× BIPOC). This result highlights the necessity for software highest ethical concern despite its lack of volume; it is the13
second least frequent concern in our dataset. Prioritization sign features from users to be held accountable and easily
systems typically include volume as a metric for priority; distinguished.
however, we chose to exclude volume as a measure because Therecommendationsprovidedfor(RQ1)and(RQ3),while
some ethical concerns may happen infrequently but can have specifically tailored to the social media software domain,
potentiallydevastatingeffects.Inaddition,someintersectional are broadly applicable to a wide range of software systems
communities’ feedback may be lower in volume due to their that host user-generated content. Overall, implementing our
marginalization; this should not result in lower priority. proposedpolicieshasthepotentialtoenhanceusersatisfaction,
Foraddressinghigh-priorityconcernsofintersectionalcom- safeguard the reputation of software companies, and foster an
munities,wefindthatthemajorityofissuesrelatetotraumatic equitableenvironmentforusers.Itisimportanttoacknowledge
content. We find that Scott et al.’s Trauma-Informed Social that these recommendations represent only a limited subset of
Media Design presents particularly salient solutions [90]. possible measures to address the ethical challenges discussed
Thistrauma-informedframeworkacknowledges‘thateveryone in this paper.
likelyhasatraumahistory’andconsidersthemultiplelevelsat Thereissignificantriskindevelopingautomatedmethodsto
whichpeopleexperiencetrauma(e.g.,developmental,cultural, mine intersectional communities’ ethical concerns feedback;
community).Thefirstrelevantdesignfeature,termed‘context this process is potentially extractive and tokenistic [4]. Our
moderation,’ is based on the idea that contemporary content method is potentially extractive because we mine the ideas
moderation practices often overlook the situational context, of intersectional communities to be built into marketed prod-
such as the author and the target audience. Consider two ucts [4]. Currently, practitioners surveil users’ app engage-
cases from Section V-C3: a father sending his recently-out ment [89]. They extract user behavior as implicit feedback
trans daughter (who had just updated her Facebook name) and use it to change products for their fiscal benefit. By
anti-trans content on Facebook, and women who have experi- contrast,ourapproachconsidersusers’moreexplicit feedback
enced miscarriages receiving targeted ads for baby products. by considering their voices. However, it is important to note
When considering the context of these scenarios, the content that gathering real-time user feedback could also lead to mass
becomesmoreharmful.Iftop-downautomatedcontentmoder- surveillance of marginalized groups.
ation techniques (where platforms remove content) accounted Inaddition,ourapproachcouldbecometokenistic,allowing
for contextual factors, they could more accurately identify practitioners to implement a symbolic and perfunctory effort
critically harmful content. To infer context, platforms could to integrate intersectional communities’ views into design [4].
implement a manipulable design feature allowing users to User personas, often abstracted as developers’ stereotypes of
select their preferences for seeing potentially trauma-inducing users, are an ‘easy’ method for incorporating diverse user
content [91]. perspectives without spending time or resources. Like user
It is essential to consider, when developing new software personas, we acknowledge that our method implements ab-
features related to content moderation, that preferences vary stractions; Reddit communities are not valid stand-ins for the
significantly by identity. For instance, a recent study found actual communities, especially for Global South communities
that transgender users find exposure to be undesirable [92]; whose native language is not English. This abstraction is
however, most modern social media platforms tend to pri- a limitation, although our results are derived directly from
oritize engagement highly. Several high-priority reports from communities’ opinions rather than practitioners’ perceptions
Section V-C3 detail unwanted attention online, such as the of those communities.
unintended virality of a trans user’s Tweet describing sexual To prevent tokenism and extraction, practitioners should
assault, a TikTok video about coming out as trans or a alternatelyimplementaco-designprocesswithstrongcommu-
trans user worrying that their selfie would be mocked across nity accountability measures by giving community members
platforms.Allowinguserstocustomizeaudiencetargetingand input and decision-making power at each stage of the design
thus size, including tools to disallow screenshotting and non- process. Community members should likewise possess their
consensualspreadoftheirimages,mayhelppreventmalicious design concepts, including the resulting products, patents,
actors from interacting with their content. Furthermore, to methods, acknowledgment, exposure, and renown [4]. Our
mitigate death threats, suicide baiting, and other forms of process can aid in gathering community input to facilitate
violentharassment,wesuggestplatformstakeinspirationfrom designanddiscussion;however,structuralchangeisultimately
Block Party app’s Lockout Filters 11, which trauma-informed required to create products suitable to intersectional popula-
design considers crucial for giving users ‘power and agency tions.
to respond to mass harm’ [90].
Our findings indicate that social media apps should make VII. LIMITATIONS
significant changes to safeguard the welfare of intersectional
Our observations and conclusions about our data are re-
communities. Regarding scams, app features should allow
stricted to the US population. We used US top app rankings
users to communicate feedback to businesses and fellow
and only analyzed English language posts on an app used
consumers easily and clearly to combat fraudulent business
mainly by US residents. Also, events we collected from the
practices online. Business accounts should have separate de-
news primarily concern the western hemisphere. In addition,
wecouldnotconfirmtheintersectionalidentitiesofthousands
11https://www.blockpartyapp.com/how-it-works/ of people, but we verified each subreddit’s relevance to its14
purportedintersectionalcommunityduringdatacollection.We size, limiting its generalizability for new data. However, the
also note that our ethical concern taxonomy for annotations goal of creating this prioritization system was to discover
is a work in progress and likely to change. Inconsistencies, intersectional users’ critical concerns; we consider building
i.e.,ethicalconcerntypesthatareparentcategoriesofanother a full-fleshed prioritization system, capable of handling new
(harmfuladvertisingandmisinformationarealsoinappropriate data, to be a project for future research.
content),areknownbutdonotnegativelyinfluenceourobser-
vations. In addition, we use GPT-4, a LLM with algorithmic
REFERENCES
bias, to assign ethical concerns categories; more analysis is
necessary to understand the potential impact of this bias on [1] J. Tizard, T. Rietz, X. Liu, and K. Blincoe, “Voice of the users:
our results. an extended study of software feedback engagement,” Requirements
Engineering,vol.27,no.3,pp.293–315,2022.
In addition, data was too sparse in the time series analysis
[2] R.A.-L.Fischer,R.Walczuch,andE.Guzman,“Doesculturematter?
of 2018 and 2019 to make reliable observations. Future work impactofindividualismanduncertaintyavoidanceonappreviews,”in
will concentrate on maximizing the volume of user feedback 2021IEEE/ACM43rdInternationalConferenceonSoftwareEngineer-
ing:SoftwareEngineeringinSociety(ICSE-SEIS). VirtualEventSpain:
from intersectional communities. Further, we changed app
IEEE,2021,pp.67–76.
names to avoid confusing them with common concepts (e.g., [3] J. Buolamwini and T. Gebru, “Gender shades: Intersectional accuracy
McDonald’s → McDonald’s app), giving some apps an unfair disparitiesincommercialgenderclassification,”inConferenceonfair-
ness,accountabilityandtransparency. NewYork,NY,USA:PMLR,
occurrence disadvantage as users rarely refer to apps in this
2018,pp.77–91.
way.Also,inthefuture,weplantoemploymulti-variatetime [4] S. Costanza-Chock, Design justice: Community-led practices to build
seriesanalysestounderstandbetterwhichvariablesinfluenced theworldsweneed. TheMITPress,2020.
[5] K. Benner, G. Thrush, and M. Isaac, “Facebook engages in
ethical concern frequencies.
housing discrimination with its ad practices, u.s. says,” Mar 2019.
Regarding the reliability of our results, all five researchers [Online]. Available: https://www.nytimes.com/2019/03/28/us/politics/
identifyasfeministsandarecontinuallyinvolvedinsocialjus- facebook-housing-discrimination.html
[6] B. Biron, “Facebook sued over death of federal officer,” Jan
tice activities but have no personal, financial, or professional
2022. [Online]. Available: https://www.nbcnews.com/tech/internet/
stake in any of the technologies we use or analyze. Addi- facebook-sued-death-federal-officer-rcna11098
tionally, three of our researchers are part of an intersectional [7] J. Clayton, “Rohingya sue facebook for $150bn over myanmar hate
speech,” Dec 2021. [Online]. Available: https://www.bbc.com/news/
community. Naturally, the researchers’ personal histories and
world-asia-59558090
opinions (internalized biases) guide the motivations and goals [8] C. Thorbecke, “Facebook hit with lawsuit over kenosha protest
of the work. However, we tried to circumvent personal bias deaths,” Sep 2020. [Online]. Available: https://abcnews.go.com/US/
facebook-hit-lawsuit-kenosha-protest-deaths/story?id=73189351
during labeling to the best of our ability. We did this by using
[9] D. Whitcomb, “Families of san bernardino shooting sue facebook,
clear definitions and processes in our annotation guidelines, google, twitter,” May 2017. [Online]. Available: https://www.reuters.
discussed before the annotation, to eliminate differences in com/article/us-sanbernardino-attack-lawsuit-idUSKBN1802SL
[10] K. Crenshaw, “Demarginalizing the intersection of race and sex: A
understanding. We labeled posts such that the post authors’
black feminist critique of antidiscrimination doctrine, feminist theory
expressions of concern, not the beliefs of the annotators, were and antiracist politics,” in Feminist legal theories. Routledge, 2013,
coded. In future work, we would also like to rate news events pp.23–51.
[11] K. W. Crenshaw, “Mapping the margins: Intersectionality, identity
by more people with even more diverse backgrounds. Finally,
politics, and violence against women of color,” in The public nature
we must point out that in response to recent decisions by ofprivateviolence. Routledge,2013,pp.93–118.
Reddit management, many subreddits protested by closing [12] A. J. League, “What is facial recognition technology?” [Online].
their doors to the public. Posts from these subreddits are not Available:https://www.ajl.org/facial-recognition-technology
[13] D. Oliver, “Facial recognition scanners are already at
accessible anymore, and it is unknown if they will open again
some us airports. here’s what to know.” [Online].
or if further subreddits will follow their decision. Available: https://eu.usatoday.com/story/travel/airline-news/2019/08/16/
The evaluation of the prioritization system presents several biometric-airport-screening-facial-recognition-everything-you-need-know/
1998749001/
limitations. Firstly, despite efforts to achieve a sample gen-
[14] H.R.Kirk,Y.Jun,F.Volpin,H.Iqbal,E.Benussi,F.Dreyer,A.Sht-
eralizable to both intersectional and general populations, the edritski, and Y. Asano, “Bias out-of-the-box: An empirical analysis
sample only captures a subset of intersectional identities. For of intersectional occupational biases in popular generative language
models,” Advances in neural information processing systems, vol. 34,
example,keydimensionssuchassocioeconomicstatus(SES),
pp.2611–2624,2021.
mental health, and physical health are unknown, and not all [15] J.Kim,J.Muhic,L.P.Robert,andS.Y.Park,“Designingchatbotswith
countries from the Global South are included. Additionally, blackamericanswithchronicconditions:Overcomingchallengesagainst
covid-19,” in Proceedings of the 2022 CHI Conference on Human
the sample size (102 participants) is insufficient for broad
FactorsinComputingSystems. NewOrleans,LA,USA:ACM,2022,
generalizability. The use of a 5-point Likert scale, chosen for pp.1–17.
its simplicity, restricts participants’ ability to express nuanced [16] V.O.Oguamanam,N.Hernandez,R.Chandler,D.Guillaume,K.Mc-
keever,M.Allen,S.Mohammed,andA.G.Parker,“Anintersectional
views on the criticality of ethical concerns. Averaging re-
look at use of and satisfaction with digital mental health platforms:
sponsesfromtheLikertscalenotonlyreducesthediversityof A survey of perinatal black women,” in Proceedings of the 2023 CHI
theoutputbutalsoobscuresimportantvariationsinparticipant Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems. Hamburg,
Germany:ACM,2023,pp.1–20.
responses. Furthermore, the manual paraphrasing of ethical
[17] A. Oakley, “Disturbing hegemonic discourse: Nonbinary gender and
concerns by the first author introduces potential subjectivity; sexual orientation labeling on tumblr,” Social Media+ Society, vol. 2,
however, this was critical for protecting post authors’ privacy. no.3,p.2056305116664217,2016.
[18] D.PaganoandW.Maalej,“Userfeedbackintheappstore:anempirical
Lastly,themethodusedforcalculatingweightsintheprioriti-
study,”inProc.oftheInternationalRequirementsEngineeringConfer-
zationalgorithmispronetooverfittingduetothesmalldataset ence. RiodeJaneiro-RJ,Brazil:IEEE,2013,pp.125–134.15
[19] L.Hoon,R.Vasa,J.-G.Schneider,J.Grundy,andOthers,“Ananalysis Conference on Software Engineering. Gothenburg, Sweden: IEEE,
ofthemobileappreviewlandscape:trendsandimplications,”Swinburne 2018,pp.48–58.
UniversityofTechnology,Tech.Rep,2013. [40] F.M.Kifetew,A.Perini,A.Susi,A.Siena,D.Mun˜ante,andI.Morales-
[20] E.Guzman,L.Oliveira,Y.Steiner,L.C.Wagner,andM.Glinz,“User Ramirez,“Automatinguser-feedbackdrivenrequirementsprioritization,”
feedback in the app store: a cross-cultural study,” in Proceedings of InformationandSoftwareTechnology,vol.138,p.106635,2021.
the 40th International Conference on Software Engineering: Software [41] S.Malgaonkar,S.A.Licorish,andB.T.R.Savarimuthu,“Prioritizing
EngineeringinSociety. Gothenburg,Sweden:IEEE,2018,pp.13–22. user concerns in app reviews–a study of requests for new features,
[21] E. Guzman, R. Alkadhi, and N. Seyff, “A needle in a haystack: What enhancementsandbugfixes,”InformationandSoftwareTechnology,vol.
dotwitteruserssayaboutsoftware?”in2016IEEE24thinternational 144,p.106798,2022.
requirementsengineeringconference(RE). Beijing,China:IEEE,2016, [42] G.H.Strønstad,I.Gerostathopoulos,andE.Guzma´n,“What’snextin
pp.96–105. mybacklog?timeseriesanalysisofuserreviews,”inProceedingsofthe
[22] G.WilliamsandA.Mahmoud,“Miningtwitterfeedsforsoftwareuser WorkshoponEmpiricalRequirementsEngineering,2023.
requirements,” in Proc. of the International Requirements Engineering [43] M. Tushev, F. Ebrahimi, and A. Mahmoud, “Digital discrimination in
Conference(RE). Lisbon,Portugal:IEEE,2017,pp.1–10. sharingeconomyarequirementsengineeringperspective,”in2020IEEE
[23] M.Nayebi,H.Cho,andG.Ruhe,“Appstoreminingisnotenoughfor 28thInternationalRequirementsEngineeringConference(RE). Zurich,
appimprovement,”EmpiricalSoftwareEngineering,vol.23,no.5,pp. Switzerlands:IEEE,2020,pp.204–214.
2764–2794,2018. [44] H.Khalid,E.Shihab,M.Nagappan,andA.E.Hassan,“Whatdomobile
[24] S. Tabbassum, R. A.-L. Fischer, and E. Guzman, “Towards a cross- app users complain about?” IEEE software, vol. 32, no. 3, pp. 70–77,
country analysis of software-related tweets,” in International Working 2014.
Conference on Requirements Engineering: Foundation for Software [45] A. R. Besmer, J. Watson, and M. S. Banks, “Investigating user per-
Quality. Barcelona,Spain:Springer,2023,pp.272–282. ceptions of mobile app privacy: An analysis of user-submitted app
[25] T. Iqbal, M. Khan, K. Taveter, and N. Seyff, “Mining reddit as a new reviews,” International Journal of Information Security and Privacy
source for software requirements,” in 2021 IEEE 29th international (IJISP),vol.14,no.4,pp.74–91,2020.
requirements engineering conference (RE). Notre Dame, IN, USA: [46] H.O.Obie,W.Hussain,X.Xia,J.Grundy,L.Li,B.Turhan,J.Whittle,
IEEE,2021,pp.128–138. andM.Shahin,“Afirstlookathumanvalues-violationinappreviews,”
[26] L. Olson, E. Guzman, and F. Kunneman, “Along the margins: in 2021 IEEE/ACM 43rd International Conference on Software Engi-
Marginalised communities’ ethical concerns about social platforms,” neering:SoftwareEngineeringinSociety(ICSE-SEIS). VirtualEvent
2023,p.toappear. Spain:IEEE,2021,pp.29–38.
[27] J.Dkabrowski,E.Letier,A.Perini,andA.Susi,“Analysingappreviews [47] R. A. Shams, W. Hussain, G. Oliver, A. Nurwidyantoro, H. Perera,
for software engineering: a systematic literature review,” Empirical andJ.Whittle,“Society-orientedapplicationsdevelopment:Investigating
SoftwareEngineering,vol.27,no.2,p.43,2022. users’valuesfrombangladeshiagriculturemobileapplications,”inPro-
[28] E. Guzman, M. El-Haliby, and B. Bruegge, “Ensemble methods for ceedingsoftheACM/IEEE42ndInternationalConferenceonSoftware
app review classification: An approach for software evolution (n),” in Engineering: Software Engineering in Society. Seoul, South Korea:
201530thIEEE/ACMInternationalConferenceonAutomatedSoftware IEEE,2020,pp.53–62.
Engineering(ASE). Lincoln,NE,USA:IEEE,2015,pp.771–776. [48] C.Mendez,L.Letaw,M.Burnett,S.Stumpf,A.Sarma,andC.Hilder-
[29] E. Guzman, M. Ibrahim, and M. Glinz, “A little bird told me: Mining brand, “From gendermag to inclusivemag: An inclusive design meta-
tweets for requirements and software evolution,” in 2017 IEEE 25th method,” in 2019 IEEE Symposium on Visual Languages and Human-
International requirements engineering conference (RE). Lisbon, CentricComputing(VL/HCC). Memphis,Tennessee,USA:IEEE,2019,
Portugal:IEEE,2017,pp.11–20. pp.97–106.
[30] W. Maalej and H. Nabil, “Bug report, feature request, or simply [49] Y.A.RankinandJ.O.Thomas,“Straightenupandflyright:Rethinking
praise? on automatically classifying app reviews,” in 2015 IEEE 23rd intersectionalityinhciresearch,”Interactions,vol.26,no.6,pp.64–68,
internationalrequirementsengineeringconference(RE). Ottawa,ON, 2019.
Canada:IEEE,2015,pp.116–125. [50] S. Erete, A. Israni, and T. Dillahunt, “An intersectional approach to
[31] S. Panichella, A. Di Sorbo, E. Guzman, C. A. Visaggio, G. Canfora, designinginthemargins,”Interactions,vol.25,no.3,pp.66–69,2018.
andH.C.Gall,“Howcaniimprovemyapp?classifyinguserreviews [51] J. R. Foulds, R. Islam, K. N. Keya, and S. Pan, “An intersectional
for software maintenance and evolution,” in 2015 IEEE international definitionoffairness,”in2020IEEE36thInternationalConferenceon
conferenceonsoftwaremaintenanceandevolution(ICSME). Bremen, DataEngineering(ICDE). Dallas,TX,USA:IEEE,2020,pp.1918–
Germany:IEEE,2015,pp.281–290. 1921.
[32] Z. S. Li, M. Sihag, N. N. Arony, J. B. Junior, T. Phan, N. Ernst, and [52] N.McDonald,K.Badillo-Urquiola,M.G.Ames,N.Dell,E.Keneski,
D.Damian,“Narratives:theunforeseeninfluencerofprivacyconcerns,” M.Sleeper,andP.J.Wisniewski,“Privacyandpower:Acknowledging
in2022IEEE30thInternationalRequirementsEngineeringConference the importance of privacy research and design for vulnerable popula-
(RE). Melbourne,Australia:IEEE,2022,pp.127–139. tions,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2020 CHI Conference on Human
[33] M.Shahin,M.Zahedi,H.Khalajzadeh,andA.R.Nasab,“Astudyof FactorsinComputingSystems. Honolulu,Hawaii,USA:ACM,2020,
gender discussions in mobile apps,” in 2023 IEEE/ACM 20th Interna- pp.1–8.
tionalConferenceonMiningSoftwareRepositories(MSR). IEEE,2023, [53] M. Sa´nchez-Gordo´n and R. Colomo-Palacios, “A framework for inter-
pp.598–610. sectionalperspectivesinsoftwareengineering,”in2021IEEE/ACM13th
[34] L. Olson, N. Tjikhoeri, and E. Guzma´n, “The best ends by the best InternationalWorkshoponCooperativeandHumanAspectsofSoftware
means:Ethicalconcernsinappreviews,”EmpiricalSoftwareEngineer- Engineering(CHASE). Madrid,Spain:IEEE,2021,pp.121–122.
ing,2024,acceptedforpublication. [54] G.Klumbyte˙,C.Draude,andA.S.Taylor,“Criticaltoolsformachine
[35] C.Gao,Y.Li,S.Qi,Y.Liu,X.Wang,Z.Zheng,andQ.Liao,“Listening learning:Workingwithintersectionalcriticalconceptsinmachinelearn-
tousers’voice:Automaticsummarizationofhelpfulappreviews,”IEEE ing systems design,” in Proceedings of the 2022 ACM Conference on
TransactionsonReliability,vol.72,no.4,pp.1619–1631,2023. Fairness,Accountability,andTransparency. Seoul,SouthKorea:ACM,
[36] N.Chen,J.Lin,S.C.Hoi,X.Xiao,andB.Zhang,“Ar-miner:mining 2022,pp.1528–1541.
informative reviews for developers from mobile app marketplace,” in [55] S. Hedditch and D. Vyas, “Design justice in practice: Community-led
Proceedingsofthe36thinternationalconferenceonsoftwareengineer- design of an online maker space for refugee and migrant women,”
ing,2014,pp.767–778. Proceedings of the ACM on Human-Computer Interaction, vol. 7, no.
[37] S.Ga¨rtnerandK.Schneider,“Amethodforprioritizingend-userfeed- GROUP,pp.1–39,2023.
backforrequirementsengineering,”in20125thInternationalWorkshop [56] N.Kumar,N.Karusala,A.Ismail,andA.Tuli,“Takingthelong,holistic,
onCo-operativeandHumanAspectsofSoftwareEngineering(CHASE), and intersectional view to women’s wellbeing,” ACM Transactions on
2012,pp.47–49. Computer-HumanInteraction(TOCHI),vol.27,no.4,pp.1–32,2020.
[38] S. A. Licorish, B. T. R. Savarimuthu, and S. Keertipati, “Attributes [57] M.Wong-Villacres,A.Kumar,A.Vishwanath,N.Karusala,B.DiSalvo,
that predict which features to fix: Lessons for app store mining,” in andN.Kumar,“Designingforintersections,”inProceedingsofthe2018
Proceedings of the 21st International Conference on Evaluation and DesigningInteractiveSystemsConference. HongKong,China:ACM,
AssessmentinSoftwareEngineering,2017,pp.108–117. 2018,pp.45–58.
[39] C.Gao,J.Zeng,M.R.Lyu,andI.King,“Onlineappreviewanalysisfor [58] A. Moitra, M. Marathe, S. I. Ahmed, and P. Chandra, “Negotiating
identifying emerging issues,” in Proceedings of the 40th International intersectional non-normative queer identities in india,” in Extended16
Abstractsofthe2021CHIConferenceonHumanFactorsinComputing [80] Wikipedia, “Public holidays in the united states.” [On-
Systems. Yokohama,Japan:ACM,2021,pp.1–6. line]. Available: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Public holidays in the
[59] N.Andalibi,A.Lacombe-Duncan,L.Roosevelt,K.Wojciechowski,and United States#Federal holidays
C.Giniel,“Lgbtqpersons’useofonlinespacestonavigateconception, [81] R. Ottoni, E. Cunha, G. Magno, P. Bernardina, W. Meira Jr., and
pregnancy,andpregnancyloss:anintersectionalapproach,”ACMTrans- V. Almeida, “Analyzing right-wing youtube channels: Hate, violence
actions on Computer-Human Interaction (TOCHI), vol. 29, no. 1, pp. and discrimination,” in Proceedings of the 10th ACM Conference on
1–46,2022. Web Science, ser. WebSci ’18. New York, NY, USA: Association
[60] N. Marsden and M. Haag, “Stereotypes and politics: reflections on for Computing Machinery, 2018, p. 323–332. [Online]. Available:
personas,”inProceedingsofthe2016CHIconferenceonhumanfactors https://doi.org/10.1145/3201064.3201081
incomputingsystems. SanJose,CA,USA:ACM,2016,pp.4017–4031. [82] S. Ali, A. Razi, S. Kim, A. Alsoubai, J. Gracie, M. De Choudhury,
[61] A´. A. Cabrera, W. Epperson, F. Hohman, M. Kahng, J. Morgenstern, P. J. Wisniewski, and G. Stringhini, “Understanding the digital
andD.H.Chau,“Fairvis:Visualanalyticsfordiscoveringintersectional lives of youth: Analyzing media shared within safe versus unsafe
biasinmachinelearning,”in2019IEEEConferenceonVisualAnalytics private conversations on instagram,” in Proceedings of the 2022 CHI
ScienceandTechnology(VAST). Vancouver,BC,Canada:IEEE,2019, Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’22.
pp.46–56. New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2022.
[62] R. Steed and A. Caliskan, “Image representations learned with unsu- [Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3491102.3501969
pervisedpre-trainingcontainhuman-likebiases,”inProceedingsofthe [83] G.SomprasertsriandP.Lalitrojwong,“Amaximumentropymodelfor
2021 ACM conference on fairness, accountability, and transparency. product feature extraction in online customer reviews,” in 2008 IEEE
VirtualEventCanada:ACM,2021,pp.701–713. ConferenceonCyberneticsandIntelligentSystems. Chengdu,China:
[63] W. Guo and A. Caliskan, “Detecting emergent intersectional biases: IEEE,2008,pp.575–580.
Contextualized word embeddings contain a distribution of human-like [84] R.Takahira,K.Tanaka-Ishii,andL.Debowski,“Entropyrateestimates
biases,”inProceedingsofthe2021AAAI/ACMConferenceonAI,Ethics, for natural language—a new extrapolation of compressed large-scale
andSociety. VirtualEventUSA:ACM,2021,pp.122–133. corpora,”Entropy,vol.18,no.10,p.364,2016.
[64] B.Ghai,M.N.Hoque,andK.Mueller,“Wordbias:Aninteractivevisual [85] R. Zhang and T. Tran, “An entropy-based model for discovering the
toolfordiscoveringintersectionalbiasesencodedinwordembeddings,” usefulnessofonlineproductreviews,”in2008IEEE/WIC/ACMInterna-
inExtendedAbstractsofthe2021CHIConferenceonHumanFactors tionalConferenceonWebIntelligenceandIntelligentAgentTechnology,
inComputingSystems. Yokohama,Japan:ACM,2021,pp.1–7. vol.1. Sydney,Australia:IEEE,2008,pp.759–762.
[65] Y. C. Tan and L. E. Celis, “Assessing social and intersectional biases [86] Jigsaw, “Perspective api,” https://www.perspectiveapi.com, 2024, ac-
incontextualizedwordrepresentations,”Advancesinneuralinformation cessed:2024-06-20.
processingsystems,vol.32,2019. [87] C.HuttoandE.Gilbert,“VADER:AParsimoniousRule-basedModel
[66] A. Maiya, “Package ktrain,” Jul 2023. [Online]. Available: https: for Sentiment Analysis of Social Media Text,” in Proceedings of
//amaiya.github.io/ktrain/index.html the International AAAI Conference on Web and Social Media, 2014,
[67] OpenAI,“Openai/openai-python:Theofficialpythonlibraryfortheope- accessed: 2024-06-20. [Online]. Available: http://comp.social.gatech.
naiapi.”[Online].Available:https://github.com/openai/openai-python edu/papers/icwsm14.vader.hutto.pdf
[68] E. Fast, B. Chen, and M. S. Bernstein, “Empath: Understanding topic [88] S. Zhang, M. Liu, Y. Li, and J. E. Chung, “Teens’ social media
signalsinlarge-scaletext,”inProceedingsofthe2016CHIconference engagementduringthecovid-19pandemic:Atimeseriesexaminationof
on human factors in computing systems. San Jose, CA, USA: ACM, postingandemotiononreddit,”InternationalJournalofEnvironmental
2016,pp.4647–4657. ResearchandPublicHealth,vol.18,no.19,2021.[Online].Available:
[69] D.Mu¨llner,“Modernhierarchical,agglomerativeclusteringalgorithms,” https://www.mdpi.com/1660-4601/18/19/10079
2011. [89] Z. S. Li, N. N. Arony, K. Devathasan, M. Sihag, N. Ernst, and
[70] Z. Bar-Joseph, D. K. Gifford, and T. S. Jaakkola, “Fast optimal leaf D. Damian, “Unveiling the life cycle of user feedback: Best practices
ordering for hierarchical clustering ,” Bioinformatics, vol. 17, no. 1, fromsoftwarepractitioners,”arXivpreprintarXiv:2309.07345,2023.
pp. S22–S29, 06 2001. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.1093/ [90] C. F. Scott, G. Marcu, R. E. Anderson, M. W. Newman, and
bioinformatics/17.suppl 1.S22 S. Schoenebeck, “Trauma-informed social media: Towards solutions
[71] M. Eversoll, “The meaning of sapphic: Unraveling forreducingandhealingonlineharm,”inProceedingsofthe2023CHI
the power of identity,” Jun 2023. [Online]. Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’23.
Available: https://rvalibrary.org/shelf-respect/book-reviews/ New York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2023.
the-meaning-of-sapphic-unraveling-the-power-of-identity/#:∼: [Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3544548.3581512
text=In%20contemporary%20usage%2C%20œSapphic,%2C%202022% [91] B. Bradford, F. Grisel, T. L. Meares, E. Owens, B. L. Pineda, J. N.
3B%20Kennedy%202020). Shapiro,T.R.Tyler,andD.E.Peterman,“Reportofthefacebookdata
[72] W. P. Review. [Online]. Available: https://worldpopulationreview.com/ transparencyadvisorygroup,”YaleJusticeCollaboratory,2019.
country-rankings/reddit-users-by-country [92] S. Schoenebeck, O. L. Haimson, and L. Nakamura, “Drawing from
[73] B. Boe, “Praw-dev/praw: Praw, an acronym for “python reddit api justicetheoriestosupporttargetsofonlineharassment,”newmedia&
wrapper”,isapythonpackagethatallowsforsimpleaccesstoreddit’s society,vol.23,no.5,pp.1278–1300,2021.
api.”2016.[Online].Available:https://github.com/praw-dev/praw
[74] J.Devlin,M.-W.Chang,K.Lee,andK.Toutanova,“Bert:Pre-training
of deep bidirectional transformers for language understanding,” arXiv
preprintarXiv:1810.04805,2018.
[75] L. N. Smith and N. Topin, “Super-convergence: Very fast training of
neuralnetworksusinglargelearningrates,”inArtificialintelligenceand
machinelearningformulti-domainoperationsapplications,vol.11006.
Baltimore,Maryland,USA:SPIE,2019,pp.369–386.
[76] J. Pauley and D. Morgan, “The year in re-
view: Top news stories of 2022 month-by-month,”
Jan 2023. [Online]. Available: https://www.cbsnews.com/news/
the-year-in-review-top-news-stories-of-2022-month-by-month/
[77] R. Hyndman, G. Athanasopoulos, C. Bergmeir, G. Caceres, L. Chhay,
M. O’Hara-Wild, F. Petropoulos, S. Razbash, E. Wang, and
F. Yasmeen, “forecast: Forecasting functions for time series and
linear models,” 2023, r package version 8.21.1. [Online]. Available:
https://pkg.robjhyndman.com/forecast/
[78] R. J. Hyndman and Y. Khandakar, “Automatic time series forecasting:
the forecast package for R,” Journal of Statistical Software, vol. 26,
no.3,pp.1–22,2008.
[79] S. J. Taylor and B. Letham, “Forecasting at scale,” The American
Statistician, vol. 72, no. 1, pp. 37–45, 2018. [Online]. Available:
https://doi.org/10.1080/00031305.2017.1380080