75th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
IAC-24,E2,3-GTS.4,12,x86872
Lunar Subterra: a Self-Integrative Unit with an Automated Drilling System
Anthony Sfeira*, Asya Petkovab, Sabine Chaayac, Karina Chichovad, Marta Rossie, Anna Vockf,
Alessandro Mosutg, Akshayanivasini Ramasamy Saravanarajh, Dr. Valentina Suminii, Dr. Tommy
Nilssonj
a Politecnico di Milano, Italy, anthony.sfeir@mail.polimi.it
b Politecnico di Milano, Italy, asya.petkova@mail.polimi.it
c Politecnico di Milano, Italy, sabine.chaaya@mail.polimi.it
d Politecnico di Milano, Italy, karina.chichova@mail.polimi.it
e Politecnico di Torino, Italy, marta.rossi@polito.it
f Politecnico di Milano, Italy, annalea.vock@mail.polimi.it
g Politecnico di Milano, Italy, alessandro.mosut@mail.polimi.it
h Politecnico di Milano, Italy, akshayanivasini.ramasamy@mail.polimi.it
i Politecnico di Milano, Italy, valentina.sumini@polimi.it
j European Space Agency (ESA), Germany, tommy.nilsson@esa.int
*Corresponding Author
Abstract
As humans venture deeper into space, the need for a lunar settlement, housing the first group of settlers, grows steadily. By
means of new technologies such as in situ resource utilisation (ISRU) as well as computational design, this goal can be
implemented in present years. Providing the first arrivals with an immediate underground habitat safe from radiation and
other environmental constraints is of crucial importance to initialise a prolonged mission on the Moon. The project’s
proposal revolves around the idea of establishing a base which provides an immediately habitable space with the possibility
for future expansion. Advanced construction methods and sustainable practices lay the groundwork for a permanent human
presence, predominantly based on ISRU.
The narrative outlines a two-phase initiative aimed at the foundation of the Lunar Subterra, followed by an extension of the
habitat above ground. The mission initiates upon the arrival of the Lander on the lunar surface, which delivers the initial
circular modules designed to respect a common spaceship payload diameter. Subsequently these units are ejected onto the
ground where they integrate themselves autonomously into the lunar soil using their core’s integrated drilling mechanism,
immediately forming a temporary safe habitat. In the following phase, the unit inflates a Kevlar membrane on its top to
create an additional habitable space above the subterranean modules, which provides a habitable space on the surface for
up to 6 settlers. Utilising the local regolith soil, a protective shield is 3D-printed above the inflatable membrane. This shield
is individually adapted to each module, following the use of a structural analyser software, ensuring efficient material use
by outlining stresses and displacement, guaranteeing an optimised printed structure. The interior inflatable membrane
175th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
dimensions are obtained using an algorithm-based computational design, which optimises the membrane’s size and interior
habitable space area, following parameters such as tensile strength and internal pressure. In later stages of the settlement,
the core showcases its multifunctionality by acting as a vertical connector (1.5m) between under- and aboveground areas.
In this manner the proposed design stands out through its rapid implementation and infinite expansion possibilities through
sustainable approaches. Following our collaboration with the PoliSpace Sparc Student Association group, a Virtual Reality
(VR) reproduction enabled quick iterative testing of the habitable space with the use of a Meta Quest 2 headset. This not
only allowed an evaluation of the environment and its impact on human residents but also eradicated the need for tangible
models to conceptualise the idea, enabling rapid user-centred design and implementation in the future of space exploration.
Keywords: Lunar Settlement, In Situ Resource Utilisation (ISRU), Underground Habitat, Inflatable Structure, Virtual
Reality (VR) Testing.
strategies required for living in extreme, off-Earth
Acronyms/Abbreviations
environments.
● Computer-Aided Design (CAD)
However, establishing a lunar habitat involves
● Galactic Cosmic Rays (GCR)
overcoming significant challenges, including exposure
● Human Landing System (HLS)
to cosmic radiation, extreme temperature fluctuations,
● In Situ Resource Utilisation (ISRU)
micrometeorite impacts, and the absence of an
● Mining Automation Program (MAP)
atmosphere. In addition, logistical issues such as
● Real-Time 3D (RT3D)
transporting materials from Earth and constructing
● Solar Particle Events (SPE)
reliable and scalable habitats remain a significant
● Virtual Reality (VR)
obstacle.
To address these challenges, this paper introduces an
innovative concept for a lunar base that can be instantly
deployed and easily expanded into a larger permanent
settlement. The primary base is envisioned to
autonomously deploy itself on the Lunar surface,
providing immediate safety and functionality for the
initial group of settlers. Furthermore, the paper details
the evolution of the base from an instantly deployable
unit into a permanent settlement, describing how it
functions and adapts over time, laying the foundation
for a larger lunar colony. This approach highlights the
Fig. 1. Lunar Sub-Terra Overall Vision Rendering
concept’s potential to play a key role as a prototype in
the long-term development of lunar habitats and future
1. Introduction
space exploration.
As humanity pushes the boundaries of space
1.1 Lunar Frontier
exploration, the Moon stands out as a pivotal stepping
stone for future missions, including those aimed at
One of the primary conditions for a permanent human
Mars. Its proximity to Earth makes it an ideal testing
presence on the Moon is its proximity, predisposing
ground for developing and refining technologies needed
rapid transportation of base facilities and astronaut
for sustainable living in the harsh conditions of space.
teams. This logistical advantage is crucial for
Establishing a sustainable lunar settlement not only
establishing a sustainable human presence. The
provides a platform for scientific research and resource
relatively short travel time—approximately three
extraction but also helps develop the technologies and
days—enables quick resupply missions and emergency
275th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
evacuations, making the Moon a practical option for 1.2 Objectives
ongoing human activity.
1.2.1 Instant Lunar Base: the stepping stone of a
Despite the promising opportunities for resource permanent settlement
utilisation on the Moon, several significant challenges
must be addressed to ensure the successful Following the above mentioned prerequisites, an
establishment of a permanent settlement. One of the instant base is required upon arrival to provide the
primary concerns is the harsh lunar environment, astronauts with protection from the hostile
characterised by extreme temperature fluctuations that environment. This outpost should provide protection
can range from -173 degrees Celsius during the night to from intense cosmic radiation, solar flares, drastic
127 degrees Celsius in direct sunlight[1]. Additionally, temperature changes, and micrometeorites, while also
the Moon's surface is exposed to high levels of radiation meeting basic human needs for oxygen and water.
due to the lack of a protective atmosphere and magnetic Acting as a foundation of the permanent settlement, this
field. Astronauts living on the lunar surface would face instant base will allow the astronauts to start conducting
increased risks from cosmic rays and solar particle their research from the very beginning of their mission
events, which implies the need for effective radiation and facilitate the further construction and expansion of
shielding in habitat designs. Moreover, the isolation and the new, permanent one.
confinement associated with living on the Moon can
have psychological impacts on astronauts, making However, establishing a new habitat for humanity on
mental health support and social dynamics critical the Moon involves complex tasks that necessitate
components of habitat design. The limited availability specialised on-site research. Investigating the potential
of resources and the need for self-sufficiency may also extraction and utilisation of in-situ materials is crucial,
create logistical hurdles, particularly in terms of as it will minimise the reliance of future lunar crews on
maintaining life support systems and ensuring a expensive material deliveries from Earth. Although the
continuous supply of essential materials. available energy sources on the Moon are known, a
detailed strategy for their appropriation specific to the
However, the lunar poles have been identified as location is required. Additionally, both the technical
suitable locations for habitation due to their unique and spatial qualities of the design proposal must be
environmental conditions. Unlike other areas on the thoroughly examined before permanent settlement can
Moon that experience extreme temperature be considered.
fluctuations, the poles maintain a more stable thermal
environment, with average surface temperatures around 1.2.2 Underground Shelter
-50 degrees Celsius (-58 degrees Fahrenheit)[2]. This
One of the most plausible solutions, providing natural
stability simplifies the design of habitats and reduces
shielding and protection from the harsh environment, is
the energy required for thermal control, contributing to
the underground shelter. Such an outpost delivers a
a more pleasant atmosphere for future inhabitants.
crucial precedent for survival once the essentials for life
Moreover, the lunar poles are not only sunlit but also in
are met[4]. In order to mitigate the intense bursts of
proximity to significant water ice deposits[3],
radiation, which have an annual dosage of
particularly in permanently shadowed craters. It has
approximately 300 mSv on the Moon [5],it has to be
been observed that these cold traps may hold enough
executed with a sufficient depth[4]. In this way also
water ice, crucial for supporting human life. Water can
meteorites rain and solar flare could not reach the
be used for drinking, as well as for producing oxygen
subterranean base, which becomes a safe environment
and hydrogen (in theory usable for rocket fuel). The
for direct exploitation. Furthermore, positioning it
combination of constant sunlight, which simplifies
under the ground offers the possibility for mining the
energy production through solar panels, and access to
lunar regolith, enabling ISRU to facilitate future
water resources makes the Moon an ideal candidate for
expansion of the habitat.
a permanent human settlement, capable of supporting
both life and ongoing exploration efforts in the solar
system.
375th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
1.2.3 Extension of The Habitat systems to manage the construction process in the
inhospitable environment. The construction methods
While an initial outpost provides immediate protection, will be highly automated due to the limited availability
it is inadequate for long-term habitation due to limited of human labour in the early stages of establishing the
space and insufficient natural light, which can adversely lunar settlement. This process will require reliable
affect the mental health of the inhabitants[6]. To robotic systems for regolith processing and habitat
effectively address this challenge, establishing a visual assembly. The advancement of robotics over the past
connection to the exterior environment is essential. This five decades has significantly transformed terrestrial
necessitates an extension of the outpost above ground mining and construction practices, establishing a
level. A viable solution for achieving this expansion is foundation for similar applications on the Moon[9]. The
the incorporation of an inflatable structure[7]. This methodologies developed for Earth-based mining were
structure would not only increase the available living made through programs like the Mining Automation
space but also would provide functions required to Program (MAP)[4]. Through the MAP, various tasks
support the needs of the future inhabitants. Given it will including exploration drilling, tunnel drilling,
be situated above ground, additional radiation explosives loading and ignition, material removal and
protection is necessary. The paper will explore the transport, rock stabilisation, and longhole drilling for
utilisation of lunar regolith as a natural shield against ore transportation are now applicable for lunar habitat
harmful radiation, leveraging its properties to enhance construction and can also be used for mining water and
safety. other essential resources on the Moon[4]. The
adaptation of these techniques for extraterrestrial
1.3 Lunar regolith as a source for radiation shielding environments allows for remote operation of machinery
increasing safety and speed, which is crucial given the
This section explores the potential of the lunar regolith
risks associated with human presence on the lunar
as a primary resource for shielding permanent habitats,
surface. Another vital utilisation of robotics can be
focusing on its role in radiation shielding and ISRU.
water mining where the creation of a collaborative
ISRU is defined as the “extracting, transforming,
underground lunar outpost and mining facility focused
storing, and utilising material resources under the
on extracting water could be crucial for sustaining long-
specific conditions of the lunar surface
term human presence on the Moon. Through this
environment”[5].
method we can facilitate the establishment of a
permanent lunar base.
Lunar regolith is composed of fine dust and rocky
fragments, generated through a process called
1.4 Immersive Interiors: Virtual Reality for human-
gardening. The concept of "gardening" refers to the
centred Design Solutions
natural processes that create lunar soil over geological
time. The Moon is continuously bombarded by Space habitation solutions have historically been
meteoroids and micrometeoroids, which contribute to designed with a primary focus on ensuring basic life
the formation of regolith. The natural properties of support, prioritising the technical necessities required to
regolith allow it to act as an effective barrier against sustain human life in extreme environments.
radiation sources, including Galactic Cosmic Rays Addressing immediate physiological needs of the crews
(GCR) and Solar Particle Events (SPE) that pose risks - such as oxygen supply, radiation shielding, and
to health. Another benefit of the material is its structural temperature regulation - thus consistently dominated
integrity: regolith can be compacted and used as a load- the design agenda. Comparatively less consideration
bearing material, providing structural support for was given to psychological factors related to interior
habitats while also serving as a shield against design, such as comfort, aesthetics, or long-term
micrometeorite impacts and extreme temperature livability[10].
fluctuations[8].
With renewed interest in lunar exploration, future
While regolith is abundant, its effective utilisation missions are poised to grow more ambitious in both
requires advanced technologies for extraction and scope and duration. Simultaneously, ongoing
processing which includes the need for automated democratisation of access to space, fueled by the rise of
475th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
the private space industry, is expanding and space systems engineering and user-centred design
diversifying the user base. Against this backdrop, there approaches[11].
Drawing on these advantages, we created a digital
replica of the Lunar Subterra habitat concept and
utilised VR for its initial design assessment. Our goal
was not only to validate interior architectural elements
crucial for the long-term well-being of future
occupants, but also to demonstrate VR’s unique
capacity to support inclusive design processes. In the
remainder of this section, we offer a detailed reflection
on this approach and its outcomes.
2. Methodology
1. Researching previous documentation on lunar
regolith, in order to evaluate the integrity of
the used techniques
2. Establishing a clear phasing strategy to define
the parameters for the execution of each of the
is a growing recognition that future design efforts must
modules
go beyond traditional utilitarian requirements[11].
3. Designing the self-integrative unit, outlining
Once considered an afterthought, factors such as
the adaptation to the size of the spaceship, the
psychological well-being of the increasingly diverse
multifunctionality of the core and the use of
space travellers will inevitably play a key role in the
materials
success of future long-term expeditions. This shift
4. Using computational design programs to
amplifies the need to integrate inclusive user-centred
simulate the inflatable membrane via
design principles into future habitat development
Kangaroo, Octopus and Karamba
projects, ensuring that both physiological and emotional
5. Developing a shielding strategy through
requirements are addressed.
comparative analysis of materials for the shell
6. Demonstrating how virtual reality benefits the
Design efforts in this area have traditionally relied on
design through verification of the habitat’s
analogue field studies conducted in remote locations,
spatial performance
such as Antarctica or the Utah desert, to approximate
some of the challenges associated with off-Earth
3. Lunar Subterra: The habitat, theory and
habitation[12]. While these studies are generally useful,
implementation
they are often costly and only involve a small number
of participants, leading to relatively slow and less
inclusive design processes.
3.1 Concept Timeline
An emerging alternative in the space industry involves
simulating field studies using immersive Virtual Reality
Fig. 2. Lunar Sub-Terra Evolution
(VR) technology. This method offers a cost-effective
and safe way for users to experience hypothetical The project employs a phased construction approach.
design solutions within representative extraterrestrial Initially, a pod designed for integration with most Lunar
environments, thereby enabling evaluation and rapid Landers is ejected onto the Moon's surface. It then
iterative development of novel concepts in a controlled submerges itself into the ground using an Integrated
setting. Moreover, the comparatively accessible nature drilling mechanism in its design, creating an immediate
of VR allows for the involvement of a wide range of underground base that provides initial shelter for the
prospective users from the earliest stages of a design first group of settlers. Once they are settled, an
process, helping to bridge the gap between traditional inflatable membrane deploys on its top. Although
575th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
connected, the primary module can operate 3.2. The initial self-integrative unit
independently from the inflatable extension, which is
subsequently covered with excavated lunar regolith to Fig. 3. Early Conceptual render of the first unit and its
create a more permanent habitat. activated drill
The primary pod is a prefabricated and autonomous The initial unit is an automated module characterised
living module. In this regard, since all essential by its "site independence," meaning it can be easily
functions required to sustain the settlement will be transported and deployed across various locations
located within this module, it should be treated and without being tied to a specific site. This unit is
designed as the safest and most secure space available. cylindrical with rounded edges, a structural choice
On the other hand, the added Inflatable should extend optimised for handling internal pressure. It has a
the functionality layer beyond the basic survival needs, diameter of 6 metres and a height of 4 metres, with
it will provide crucial functions for the settlers' research dimensions tailored to fit within the payload capacity of
and well-being—both physical and psychological—by modern lunar landers, such as the Starship HLS [14].
This design enables smooth and rapid deployment of
the pod from the spacecraft to the lunar surface. The
bottom is equipped with an integrated circular drilling
mechanism that matches the pod's diameter, allowing
for autonomous subterranean deployment. At the pod’s
core a 1.5-metre wide rotational shaft is positioned, it is
responsible for the functioning of the drill. It
significantly influences the interior layout with its
central location, dividing the internal space. This
rotational core plays a critical role in the later stages of
offering additional space for social areas, a gym, etc.
This extension serves as a public and interactive area
necessary, though not vital in emergencies. This
synergy between primary and secondary infrastructure
influences significantly all further design decisions,
such as those concerned with the interior layout
distribution, the choice of materials, or the arrangement
of needed equipment.
Although further expansion is not the primary objective
of this paper, it is briefly discussed here. It involves the habitat’s expansion, showcasing its
linking multiple similar base modules, each adhering to multifunctionality through adopting several different
the underground and inflatable concept. These modules uses.
would be interconnected via underground tunnels,
forming a colony where multiple astronaut teams can 3.3 The multifunctionality of the drilling system
operate independently until the connections are fully
established. This growth strategy resembles the Fig. 4. Conceptual render of the first unit submerged
branched design proposed by D. Nagy, A. Bond, and O. in the lunar soil
Bannova, which features one vertical module for life
support and two horizontal modules interconnected Upon landing on the Moon, the lander ejects the
through nodes for shared utilities and science[13]. cylindrical pod onto the lunar surface. Equipped with
While the construction method is uniform, functional support legs, the pod elevates itself slightly to allow the
differences persist among the modules. i n t e g r a t e d d r i l l t o i n i t i a t e soil excavation without
675th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
causing damage to the unit. The rotational core powers
the drill to dig into the lunar soil, deep enough to
accommodate the full height of the module. Once the
excavation is complete, the rotational core facilitates
the pod’s descent into the ground, using a rotational
motion to position it securely. This process typically
takes about 20 hours[15], resulting in a habitat that is
insulated from the Moon’s extreme surface conditions.
The materials used for the execution of the pod are
resistant to the temperature fluctuations and radiation
on the Moon, while its integration into the lunar soil
adds an additional layer of safety. The pod’s floor and
ceiling are designed to accommodate all necessary
mechanical, technical, and electrical systems required
for the drill's operation and the overall life support of
the future base.
Fig. 5. Conceptual Schematic of the Integrated Drill
Mechanism
Fig. 7. Kangaroo form finding optimisation
Following this initial phase, the expansion of the base
begins. An inflatable Kevlar membrane is automatically 3.4 The inflatable membrane
deployed from the top centre of the pod. This
A computational design approach for both the inflatable
membrane, inflated by an onboard oxygenator located
membrane and the radiation shield was used. The plug-
in the pod’s ceiling, takes the shape of a dome.
in Kangaroo for the Rhinoceros 3D software is a Live
Once the inflatable is established, the rotational core Physics engine for interactive simulation, optimisation
showcases its multi-functionality by acting as a vertical and form-finding directly within Grasshopper. It
connector, linking the new upper level with the facilitated the form-finding process and defined the
subterranean pod to form a larger settlement. The inner dimensions of the inflatable membrane, shaping the
part of the rotational core acts as a shaft, inside of which habitable upper volume while accounting for various
a ladder is installed to facilitate movement from the parameters. The chosen membrane material is
bottom to the mezzanine level of the inflatable Kevlar[16] since it has suitable properties for inflatable
structure. Although the rotational core only extends to membranes, such as high tensile strength, impact
the top of the pod, the partition layout within the
inflatable follows a circular pattern, as if the core
continues to the top of the dome. This design ensures a
seamless and efficient vertical connection throughout
the entire structure.
Fig. 6. Section Drawing of the overall Lunar Sub-Terra
Despite the Kevlar membrane's protection, additional
shielding is necessary to protect against external harsh
conditions. A regolith shield is 3D-printed over the
inflatable using the lunar soil extracted through the
excavations by the integrated drill. This shield covers
the entire inflatable membrane, providing protection
against impacts and direct exposure to the lunar
resistance, and lightweight nature. Its flexibility allows
environment.
it to form tough, puncture-resistant outer layers. Kevlar
775th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
also has excellent thermal stability, low thermal the Kevlar inflatable membrane to be a semi-sphere of
conductivity, and abrasion resistance, offering a 5.2 m radius with a total floor area of 167 sqm.
protection against extreme lunar temperatures and
surface wear[17]. These material properties were Finally, the last step of the computational design flow
reported into Kangaroo (especially tensile strength and is the structural analysis of the inflatable membrane
internal pressure) in order to accurately generate the using the Karamba 3D which is an interactive,
form of the mesh (membrane). Kangaroo generated a parametric engineering tool that allows you to perform
sphere-shaped mesh under several parameters and quick and accurate Finite Element Analysis in
conditions, including environmental constraints (SPEs Grasshopper. Displacement, stress, horizontal and
and GCR radiations, extreme temperature variations, vertical isocurves were analysed to verify the structural
microgravity and absence of atmospheric pressure) and rigidity and robustness of the obtained volume.
needs (floor areas adapted to 6 crew members). The
criteria used for evaluation were the pressurised 3.5 The lunar regolith shield
volume, the kevlar shell surface and the habitable area.
Following a similar process to the one described in 3.4,
The main design variable was the interior radius of the a radiation shield protecting the membrane is conceived
semi-sphere mesh. The first form generated by using Karamba3D. The data from the optimised shape
Kangaroo had a radius of 6 m corresponding to a total of the inflatable is then used to create an offset, which
floor area of 247 sqm with 2 floor levels. Then a multi- serves as the foundation for the regolith shell, ensuring
objective optimisation was conducted via the Octopus that the membrane’s surface and the outer shell do not
plug-in in order to further improve the initial form. A overlap.
Pareto Filter/ Pareto Front Visualisation was integrated
to navigate the process according to 3 objectives, each
represented by one axis in the diagram:
1. Maximise volume
2. Minimise shell surface (in order to reduce material and
resulting costs)
3. Maximise total floor areas
Fig. 9. Shield Horizontal and vertical Iso curves
Then via Karamba 3D horizontal and vertical Iso
curves are determined, based on which robots will 3D
print the regolith into a protective shell over the
inflatable semi-sphere membrane. This process
involves depositing layers of regolith in a precise,
dome-like structure that conforms to the habitat’s
shape. The regolith is sintered, using heat or binding
agents, to create a solid, durable shell [18]. The final
shape is determined by stress and displacement
diagrams obtained using Karamba3D, ensuring
structural integrity based on the weight of the lunar
regolith and the shape of the shield.
Fig. 8. Octopus multi-objective optimisation
determining r=5.2m
After running Octopus' optimisation, a set of different
solutions was obtained, outlining the best scenario for
875th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
Fig. 13. Shield Displacement and Stress distribution
analysis with Karamba 3D
3.6 The interior distribution and design
The obtained inflatable volume adds up to the initial
underground base. The vertical connection between
both is located in their coinciding centre and exploits
the space formerly used by the drilling system. Each
level hosts different functions, assigned according to
their requirements in terms of space, sound and visual
comfort.
The interior design was structured around a conceptual
daily schedule that vaguely leans on the routine of an
astronaut on the International Space Station: eight hours
allocated for laboratory work, eight hours for sleep, two
hours for physical exercise, two to three hours for meals
and social interactions, and one to two hours of personal
downtime. This schedule guided the spatial allocation
Fig. 10. Lunar Sub-Terra Ground and Mezzanine Floor
of key functional areas, including the kitchen/social
Plans.
space, sleeping quarters, working facilities, and
laboratory environments.
Given the design constraints imposed by the rocket
payload, the underground pod was optimised for
sleeping and working areas to maximise protection
against radiation and micrometeorite impacts. This
configuration also aimed to mitigate feelings of spatial
confinement. The laboratory, positioned on the ground
level, facilitates direct access to post-extravehicular
activities while minimising contamination risks. The
kitchen, strategically located behind the lab, serves as
both a dining and social hub, recognising the
fundamental role of communal eating in astronaut well-
being. Adjacent to the kitchen, a working area equipped
with desks and computers supports extended work
periods and may include a green area for added
comfort.
975th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
Fig. 11. Interior Render finalising the spatial design and while considering
various design alternatives, we utilised virtual reality to
On the upper level, supported by a metal mezzanine visualise these proposals. Three students were engaged
independent of the inflatable structure, the design to explore the VR environments. The feedback
incorporates a multi-purpose workstation, logistics collected from this exercise was crucial in refining and
stowage, and a multifunctional space for physical finalising the interior layout. In particular, this test
exercise. This layout balances functional efficiency revealed that ceiling height variations, compounded by
with comfort, ensuring adequate facilities for both work the effects of microgravity, significantly influenced
and leisure. Additionally, a central storage area between their perception of space, affecting overall comfort and
floors houses critical life support systems essential for usability assessments. For instance, environments that
habitant survival. seemed adequately spacious on renderings and sketches
were perceived as claustrophobic in VR, highlighting
3.7 VR Implementation and Initial Evaluations the need to account for both spatial and gravitational
factors in the design process. Furthermore this
Following the initial architectural design phase utilising
illustrates that this technology, by providing a more
Rhinoceros and Grasshopper software, the project
human and lifelike perspective, significantly enhances
transitioned into the VR Unity environment, as justified
the intuitive understanding and projection of spaces.
in the preceding section. For the VR implementation,
Unity was utilised as the development RT3D platform, Lighting emerged as a crucial element impacting the
while the Meta Quest 2 headset, a high-performance habitability of the environment, with both general and
hardware solution, was deployed for the final execution task lighting available throughout the habitat to enhance
of the virtual experience. The software suite also orientation and functionality [19]. The contrast between
included Cinema 4D and Substance 3D Painter. These CAD renderings and VR experiences underscored the
tools were used to optimise the 3D models for VR and need for precise spatial and lighting design to ensure an
to enhance texturing, to achieve high-quality optimal living experience. Further detailed feedback on
visualisation. This approach facilitated an iterative the final design will be gathered with more tests in the
exploration of interior layouts, allowing us to refine our future, enabling a more comprehensive assessment of
designs based on spatial considerations and user the habitat’s interior.
experience insights.
3.8 Future Evaluations
The initial interior design of the habitat was
concentrated on a single unit, intended to function
independently with all necessary components
integrated within this solitary unit. However, for future
considerations, we are exploring the potential benefits
of modularity within the habitat. This involves
investigating how multiple units, when combined,
could operate as a cohesive lunar colony. Consequently,
the interior design will be adapted to meet this new
Fig. 12. Interior Render challenge. Engaging with experts, including analog
astronauts, professional astronauts, and VR specialists,
Conceptual sketches and 3D renderings provided the will facilitate the process providing critical feedback
team with the foundation for internal discussions and
brainstorming sessions on the fundamental design and In the future, we plan to allow more individuals to
layout of the habitat. Subsequent instantiation of these interact with this environment virtually to gather
concepts in an immersive VR environment allowed for additional data. This hands-on experience will be
a more detailed and realistic visualisation, enabling the complemented by qualitative feedback gathered
team to assess spatial considerations and other relevant through post-hoc semi-structured interviews with the
dynamics. In the formative stages of the project, before study participants, which will be instrumental in
1075th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
refining the habitat design and addressing any identified References
issues.
[1] R. Bajaj, Lunar Habitat Design and Construction
5. Conclusion Exploring Architectural and Structural Challenges and
Evaluating Materials and Construction Methods for
This paper comprehensively explores the design and Lunar Conditions, 2024
implementation of the Lunar Subterra habitat,
emphasising the need for innovative solutions to [2] P. Gläser, D. Gläser, Modeling near-surface
support long-term human settlement on the Moon. By temperatures of airless bodies with application to the
integrating advanced methodologies such as Moon, 2019
computational design, modular architecture, and virtual
reality, the project addresses both the physiological and [3] F. Tavares, Ice Confirmed at the Moon's Poles, 20
psychological needs of future lunar inhabitants. August 2018, https://moon.nasa.gov/news/59/ice-
confirmed-at-the-moons-poles/
The phased construction approach outlined ensures a
fast and secure deployment, utilising prefabricated [4] G. R. Baiden, L. L. Grenier, B. Blair, J. S. Logan,
autonomous modules and inflatable extensions to create Establishing a Lunar Underground Outpost: Shifting
a multifunctional living space. The emphasis on a self- the Paradigm for Future Space Exploration, Settlement
integrative unit demonstrates adaptability and and Commerce, 2022
resilience against lunar conditions, while the use of
regolith for shielding not only maximises resource [5] X. Zheng, C. Zhao, X. Sun, W. Dong, Lunar
efficiency but also reinforces the habitat's safety. Regolith, Lunar Regolith Geopolymer Concrete for In-
Situ Construction of Lunar Bases: A Review, Polymers
Incorporating virtual reality as a tool for iterative design 16, no. 11(2024): 1582,
enhances understanding of spatial dynamics and user https://doi.org/10.3390/polym16111582
experience, fostering a more inclusive design process.
This paper emphasises the need to address [6] A. Arone, T. Ivaldi, K. Loganovsky, S. Palermo, E.
psychological well-being alongside technical Parra, W. Flamini, D. Marazziti, The Burden of Space
necessities for a sustainable space habitat development. Exploration on the Mental Health of Astronauts: A
Future considerations include examining Narrative Review. Clin Neuropsychiatry. 2021
microgravity's effects on human physiology, Oct;18(5):237-246. doi:
developing efficient ventilation systems, fire 10.36131/cnfioritieditore20210502. PMID: 34984067;
suppression systems and emergency evacuation PMCID: PMC8696290.
protocols, and planning for effective food storage and
[7] D. Cadogan, J. Stein, M. Grahne, Inflatable
waste management.
composite habitat structures for lunar and mars
Ultimately, the Lunar Subterra project contributes exploration, Acta Astronautica, Volume 44, Issues 7–
valuable insights into future lunar missions, positioning 12, 1999
itself as a potential Prototype for the next era of space
[8] Y. Akisheva, Y. Gourinat, Utilisation of Moon
Habitats.
Regolith for Radiation Protection and Thermal
Acknowledgments Insulation in Permanent Lunar Habitats. Appl. Sci.
2021, 11, 3853. https://doi.org/10.3390/app11093853
We would like to thank Polispace, the student space
association of Politecnico di Milano, for its support in [9] M. Novara, P. Putz, L. Maréchal, S. Losito,
this project. Robotics for lunar surface exploration, Robotics and
Autonomous Systems, Volume 23, Issues 1–2, 1998
[10] А. Vock, Т. Nilsson, Holistic Outpost Design for
Lunar Lava Tubes, 73rd International Astronautical
Congress, 2022, October, DOI: 10.31219/osf.io/wqe2m
1175th International Astronautical Congress (IAC), Milan, Italy, 14-18 October 2024.
[11] T. Nilsson, L. Bensch, F. Dufresne, F. Rometsch, [16] G. Valle, Gerard, D. Litteken, T. C. Jones,
P. de Medeiros, E. Guerra, F. Saling, A. EM Casini, A. “Review of Habitable Softgoods Inflatable Design,
Cowley, Out of this World Design: Bridging the Gap Analysis, Testing, and Potential Space Applications,
between Space Systems Engineering and Participatory Ntrs.nasa.gov. January 7, 2019,
Design Practices, A Conference on Human-Computer https://ntrs.nasa.gov/citations/20190000847.
Interaction for Space Exploration (SpaceCHI 3.0), MIT
Media Lab, MA, USA, 2023 [17] K. K. Chang, Aramid Fibers,
Asminternational.org., 2001,
[12] C. Heinicke, M. Arnhof, A review of existing https://dl.asminternational.org/handbooks/edited-
analog habitats and lessons for future lunar and Martian volume/60/chapter/704887/Aramid-Fibers
habitats, REACH 21 (2021): 100038
[18] M. Fateri, R. Sottong, M. Kolbe, J. Gamer, M.
[13] C. Testi, D. Nagy, J. Dow, A. Bond, O. Bannova, Sperl & A. Cowley, Thermal properties of processed
A Proposed Strategy for the Assembly Concept of lunar regolith simulant. International Journal of Applied
Operations of a Permanent Lunar Habitat, 53rd Ceramic Technology, 2019, 16(6), 2419-2428.
International Conference on Environmental Systems,
Louisville, Kentucky, 2024, 21-25 July [19] M. Gernhardt et al., “Deep Space Habitability
Design Guidelines Based on the NASA NextSTEP
[14] E. Seedhouse, Starship. In SpaceX: Starship to Phase 2 Ground Test Program,” 2019. Accessed: Sep.
Mars–The First 20 Years (pp. 171-188). Cham: 20, 2024. [Online]. Available:
Springer International Publishing, 2022 https://ntrs.nasa.gov/api/citations/20200001427/downl
oads/20200001427.pdf
[15] D. Sivolella, Space Mining and Manufacturing,
Springer EBooks, Springer., 2019,
https://doi.org/10.1007/978-3-030-30881-0
12