Auctioning Escape Permits for Multiple Correlated
Pollutants Using CMRA
Keshav Goyal∗, Sooraj Sathish† and Shrisha Rao‡
IIIT Bangalore
Email: ∗keshav.goyal@iiitb.ac.in, †sooraj.sathish@iiitb.ac.in, ‡srao@iiitb.ac.in
Abstract—In the context of increasingly complex environmen- reductions among its autonomous subsidiaries. The solutions
talchallenges,effectivepollutioncontrolmechanismsarecrucial. proposed in their work are based on the Vickrey-Clarke-
Byextendingthestateoftheartauctionmechanisms,weaimto
Groves (VCG) auction mechanism. Another work in the
develop an efficient approach for allocating pollution abatement
single-pollutant domain is that of Khezr and MacKenzie [7]
resources in a multi-pollutant setting with pollutants affecting
eachother’sreductioncosts.WemodifytheCombinatorialMulti- which proposes a modification to the uniform-price auction
Round Ascending Auction [1][2] for the auction of escape per- fortheefficientallocationofpollutionpermitsthroughtruthful
mits [3][4] of pollutants with co-dependent reduction processes, bidding. However, in the multi-pollutant setting where emis-
specifically, greenhouse gas emissions and nutrient runoff in
sion enterprises will have various combinations of pollutants
Finnish agriculture. We show the significant advantages of this
todischargeintheproductionprocess,Guoetal.[8]showthat
mechanism in pollution control through experiments on the bid
prices and amount of escape permits sold in multiple auction single-pollutant auction mechanisms are no longer applicable.
simulations. Guoetal.[8]proposeamodificationofSimultaneousMulti-
Index Terms—CMRA, escape permits, simultaneous multi- Round Ascending auction (SMRA) for auctioning escape
pollutant reduction, correlated reduction costs, economic safety permits in a multi-pollutant setting. This study by Guo et
valve mechanism
al. represents the only work that specifically addresses the
multi-pollutant setting. SMRA is a multi-item combinatorial
I. INTRODUCTION
auction where the buyers can choose their own combination
As the world becomes more industrialized and our popu- of emission rights. This research focuses on the combined
lation continues to grow, we are witnessing an increase in transactions for emission rights of international carbon se-
the complexity of environmental issues ranging from air and questration and other pollutants in forestry. The feasibility
waterpollutiontoclimatechange.Pollutioncontrolisacritical and applications of SMRA auction are explored through 4
aspect of environmental conservation through strategies that experimentsconductedbyhumansubjectsactingasbuyersand
aimtoreducetheemissionofpollutantsintotheenvironment. sellers in the simulated auction. Although SMRA is popularly
An effective and economic strategy is the use of auctions used worldwide, Bedard et al. [9] show that even a classical
for pollution permits, also known as escape permits [3][4]. First-Price Sealed-Bid (FPSB) auction performs better than
These permits allow individuals and organizations to emit a SMRA in terms of efficiency, revenue generated and winner’s
certain amount of pollution, thus limiting the total pollution curse. SMRA also does not achieve effective allocation when
and driving research in emission reduction. the escape permits are complementary (reducing one pollu-
In a multi-pollutant setting, the escape permit auctions aim tant increases another). Another popular multi-item auction
to allocate permits for different pollutants in a single auction. mechanism is the Combinatorial Clock Auction (CCA) [10].
This is done to incorporate the economic and environmental However, CCA faces various objections from the bidders.
gainsorlossesfrommulti-pollutantreductiontechnologies[5] JanssenandKasberger[11]showthatundercertainconditions,
which might decrease or increase the cost of reduction for CCA does not achieve equilibrium and the bidders are left
multiple pollutants. Thus, by avoiding the assumption that dissatisfied.TheseshortcomingsrenderCCAincompatiblefor
any 2 pollutants are uncorrelated in their reduction costs, escape permits auctions as it is essential to have willingness
we are able to model the real world context. However, the to participate and low price bids to incentivize pollution
multi-pollutant setting carries an added level of complexity as reduction.
compared to independent pollution types. For example, for Our solution is to use the Combinatorial Multi-Round
a particular agent, reducing the emissions of one pollutant AscendingAuction[2][1]toaddresstheallocationofmultiple
mightleadtoanonlinearreductionintheemissionsofanother different escape permits to autonomous agents. The CMRA
pollutant thus reducing the total cost of reduction for both the auction was pioneered by the Danish Energy Agency in 2016
pollutants. [2] and is based on CCA while also aimed at covering its
Bagchi et al. [6] present a solution for auctioning escape shortcomings. Applications of CMRA are limited to spectrum
permits in a single pollutant setting. The study proposes two auctions where spectrums with similar bandwidths affect the
solutions, a reverse auction protocol and a forward auction utility of the buyer. In spectrum auctions, CMRA solves
protocol,tosolvethecaseofanenterpriseallocatingpollutant the problem of direct correlations between the utilities of
4202
guA
91
]TG.sc[
1v84101.8042:viXradifferent spectrum groups. A buyer would be willing to pay a • InSectionIII-Aweshowtheflexibilityofourmechanism
higher cost for grouped spectrums having similar bandwidths as it does not necessitate the sale of all the escape
than ones with unrelated bandwidths. Thus, the process for permitsunderauction.Thisisahighlydesirableproperty
determining utilities is straightforward. This is the first work as it incentivizes autonomous agents to reduce their
to extend CMRA in the domain of pollution reduction. We emissions instead of buying a lot of escape permits. A
extend the CMRA mechanism to the case where utilities of significant advantage of this flexibility is the opportunity
two escape permits are indirectly related by their reduction to implement the “safety valve” mechanism [13] without
processes and costs. Our modified CMRA mechanism applies exceeding the permit cap, serving as a safeguard against
totheauctionofescapepermitswheretheutilityfortheescape unforeseenspikesinthecostofpollutionreduction.Thus,
permits is determined indirectly from the cost of reduction of wecanachievepollutionreductionbotheconomicallyand
thepollutants.Theauctioninvolvesmultipleroundswitheach environmentally.
agentabletomakemultiplebidsineachround.Ineachround, • In Section III-B we show the low costs incurred by the
theagentsindependentlydecidethenumberofescapepermits agents who have a higher correlation between the reduc-
for each pollutant involved in a bid and the price of the bid tionoftwopollutants.Thisisanessentialpropertyofthe
according to their cost functions. At the end of the auction, auctionmechanismasitincentivizestheresearchanduse
every agent is allocated a certain combination of escape ofbetterpollutionreductiontechnologies.Reducingcosts
permits for the different pollutants. An allocation mechanism for the agents enhances their willingness to participate,
ensures that no agent ends up with an allocation that they fostering an economically efficient allocation of permits
do not bid for. Kasberger and Teytelboym [1] study the and achieving reduction goals.
properties of CMRA and show that it can achieve equilibrium
in cases where CCA truthful bidding might fail. Kasberger
II. CMRAAUCTIONFORPOLLUTIONREDUCTIONPERMITS
and Teytelboym [1] also highlight that CMRA might lead to A. CMRA Auction Architecture
reduced revenue under certain conditions, however, this does
We first discuss the CMRA auction mechanism and its
not pose a problem for our use case as for the multi-pollutant
salient features. The following terminology is followed:
reduction setting, reaching an equilibrium is more important
than generating maximum revenue.
• Goods: There are m goods {G i| 1≤i≤m} to be auc-
tioned.Thetotalamountstobeauctionedarerepresented
We consider the setting of multiple pollutants where the
as a single vector of length m : {g ,g ,...,g }.
reduction of a pollutant can affect the reduction of other 1 2 m
pollutants linearly. An efficient and economical mechanism is
• Bidders: There are n autonomous bidders {B i| 1≤i≤
n} with their private utility functions U (x|G ) which
proposed for the problem of allocating multi-pollutant escape i j
mapthemaximumvaluethattheycanpayforanamount
permitshavingcorrelatedcoststodifferentagents.Weperform
x of the good G . U (x) is the vector of utilities for the
multiplesimulationsmodelingthereductionofgreenhousegas j i
vector x representing amounts of all the goods.
emissionsandnutrientrunoffemissionsduetoagriculturalac-
The auction consists of multiple rounds of bidding. Each
tivities. Lo¨tjo¨nen and Ollikainen [12] construct cost functions
round has an associated price vector (clock price p) of size m
for reducing greenhouse gas emissions and nutrient runoff
which contains the prices of all goods. In each round a bidder
in Finnish agriculture for crop and dairy farming. Through
can make two types of bids:
the use of real world data, they focus on determining the
cost of reduction of GHG pollution while taking into account • Headline Demand: At every clock price p, a bidder
the benefits of reducing nutrient runoff pollution and vice B i submits exactly one headline demand bid vector
versa. The GHG and nutrient runoff reduction costs for our h i(p)∈[0,1]m. This represents how much of each good
simulations are derived from the results obtained by Lo¨tjo¨nen the bidder wants to buy at the current clock price. If the
and Ollikainen [12]. We perform experiments to determine total demand for any good is more than the supply, its
the Transaction Proportion and Transaction Price achieved by clock price increases in the next round. Thus, If for any
implementing our mechanism to the above setting. We show G j,
n
the high willingness to participate and the incentive to reduce (cid:88)
[h (p)[j]]>1
pollutants achieved by our mechanism. i
i
Our contributions are:
• In Section II-B we present an extension of the CMRA p[j] is increased for the next round.
auction mechanism for the correlated multi-pollutant set- • Additional Bids: This is a novelty of CMRA. A bidder
ting.Themechanismusesthepollutantreductioncostsas canmakebidsfordifferentamountsattheirchosenprices
the cost functions for the escape permits. It works with (under a few constraints). The additional bid by a bidder
a combined cost curve of all the pollutants instead of B i for an amount vector x will be a vector A i(x) of size
individual cost functions for each pollutant. To the best m representing the price at which B i wants to buy x.
of our knowledge, this is the first work that discusses Some constraints are:
the application of CMRA mechanism in the auction of – If x=[0]m, then A (x)=[0]m
i
escape permits for pollution reduction. – ∀j ≤m, A (x)[j]<x[j].c[j]
i– Additional constraints of CMRA ensure that addi- Algorithm 2 Auction
tionalbidsdonotdeviatetoomuchfromtheheadline Require: Bidders: List of bidders with Utility functions U i
demand. Require: Total Goods: Vector of total quantities of goods g
• Closing Rule: The allocation is done by picking exactly Require: Initial clock price: p initial
one bid from each bidder such that maximum revenue Ensure: Bidfunctionsatclockpricepforallbidders:B i(;p)
is generated. This could be a headline demand or an 1: procedure AUCTION(Bid functions,p,Bidders)
additional bid. If such an allocation is not possible, the 2: MaxBid=−Infinity ▷ Initialize
auction continues. Moreover, the revenue generated by 3: # Find maximum allocation
excluding any bidder must not exceed the maximum 4: for all allocations (x 1,x 2,..,x n)∈[0|g|,g]n do
allocation’s revenue. 5: if
MaxBid<(cid:80)n
i=1(B i(x˜ i;p)) then
Algorithm II-A is used for calculating headline demand 6:
MaxBid=(cid:80)n
i=1(B i(x˜ i;p))
and additional bids. In lines 2 and 3, each bidder, with a 7: x=(x 1,x 2,.,x n)
utility function (U ), calculates their headline demand (h (p)) 8: end if
i i
at a given clock price (p) using the inverse of their utility 9: end for
function. In line 5, additional bids (A (x;p)) are calculated 10: if MaxBid is feasible then
i
for quantities less than the headline demand. The bid function 11: Return x ▷ End auction with allocation x
(B (;p)) maps different amounts of the goods to the final 12: else
i
bids submitted by the agent for the current round (clock 13: # Increase the clock price
price p). This may also contain bids from previous rounds. 14: p=p+δ ▷ δ is a small increment
In line 6, the bid functions (B (;p)) are updated to reflect 15: end if
i
the maximum value between previous bid functions and these 16: end procedure
newly calculated additional bids.
Algorithm1CalculateHeadlineDemandandAdditionalBids for x amount of pollutant is high, would like to bid more for
Require: Bidders: List of bidders with Utility functions U an escape permit of x amount for the pollutant. Conversely, if
i
Require: Clock Price: p theagentcanreduceemissionsatalowercost,itwouldprefer
Ensure: Bidfunctionsatclockpricepforallbidders:B (;p) to do that over bidding high on escape permits. The primary
i
1: procedure BIDFUNCTIONS(p,U i) aim of the auction is to create an efficient equilibrium over
2: for each i do ▷ Iterate over all Bidders the escape permits and also introduce an escape permit cap.
3: h i(p)=U i−1(p) ▷ Calculate headline demand The inputs to the extended auction mechanism are:
4: for each x<h i(p) do • Pollutants: There are m pollutants {P i| 1 ≤ i ≤ m}.
5: A i(x;p)=U i−1(x) ▷ Find Additional bids Any two of these pollutants might be co-dependent or
6: B i(x;p)=max(B i(x;p),A i(x;p)) ▷ Update independent concerning emission patterns and reduction
7: end for costs.
8: end for • Bidders: There are n bidders, {B i| 1 ≤ i ≤ n}. Each
9: Return Bid functions: B i(;p) for each bidder bidder has its private cost function C i. So, for bidder B i,
10: end procedure costofreducingpollutantP j independentlybyxamount
is C (x|p ). Whereas the combined cost function for all
i j
Algorithm II-A outlines the process of conducting an auc- pollutants is C i(x) where x is the vector of amounts of
tion. It starts with a list of bidders with cost functions, all pollutants. The combined cost function is a result of
total goods, and an initial clock price. In line 2, The bid thecodependencebetweenthereductioncostsofdifferent
functions are first initialized for all the agents. In each round pollutants. Thus, the relation
the maximum bid (MaxBid) for all possible allocations is (cid:88)
C (x)= C (x|P )
calculatedasshowninlines3-9.Inline10,IftheMaxBidis i i j
j
feasible, the auction ends with the allocation. Otherwise, the
is not guaranteed.
clock price is increased by a small increment in line 13, and
theprocessrepeats.Itadjuststheclockpricebasedonthebids • Escape Permits: There are m escape permits {E i| 1≤
i ≤ m}. Each escape permit is a single unit indivisible
andcontinuesuntilafeasibleallocationisfound.Thisensures
good in the auction. The relation between two escape
that the auction process is dynamic and responsive to the bids
permits depends on the relation between corresponding
made by the participants.
pollutants. For example, if two pollutants are substitutes
B. Extended CMRA for Escape Permits
of each other (reducing one also reduces the other pol-
We now show how the CMRA auction mechanism is lutant), then their escape permits are also substitutes of
extended to our problem of allocating escape permits for each other. The total amounts to be auctioned (escape
multiplecodependentpollutants.Astheproblemismodeledas permit caps) are represented as a single vector of length
anauctionofescapepermits,anagentwhosecostofreduction m : {e ,e ,...,e }.
1 2 mThen, for extending the CMRA auction, we define the utility As shown in section II-B, the utility of an agent for x units
of every bidder B for 1 unit of a permit E as the cost of ofanescapepermitintheextendedmechanismisthesameas
i j
reduction of 1 unit of pollutant P for that bidder. the cost of reduction of x units of corresponding pollutant
j
for the agent. The reduction costs are represented by cost
U (x|E )=C (x|P )
i j i j functions(C (x|P ))whichmapanamountxofthepollutant
i j
and P to its cost of reduction for bidder B . The cost functions
j i
U (x)=C (x) used for our experiments are based on the results obtained
i i
by Lo¨tjo¨nen and Ollikainen [12]. Their work resulted in the
Some of the features of this CMRA process in the context
development of aggregated cost functions for the reduction
of escape permits are:
of GHG and nutrient runoff in Finnish agriculture while
• A bidder will not get any escape permit only if they do accounting for their codependence. As the obtained functions
bid for zero escape permits.
are aggregated over multiple data points, instead of using the
• A bidder will never get a combination of permits that costfunctionsatfacevalue,weaddGaussianrandomnoiseto
they did not bid for.
thefunctionsandinterpolatethemtobeassignedtotheagents
• The codependence of escape permits is taken care of as in different instances of the simulation.
the bidders themselves create their combinations.
Using the implemented mechanism under the above as-
• The bidders do not have the incentive to falsify their sumptions, we calculate the transaction price and transaction
headline demands as they can always make additional
proportionover50independentauctioninstances.Theinsights
bids at lower prices in later rounds.
gained in Sections III-A and III-B conclude the benefits of
• Extended CMRA ensures either efficient allocation of applying the extended CMRA mechanism to the problem of
permits(onlythepartieswithahighcostofreductionget
multi-pollutant escape permit auction.
more permits) or it ensures an allocation that guarantees
cheap escape permits to everyone but fewer permits A. Transaction Proportion
issued.
Transaction proportion is the percentage units of each
III. EXPERIMENTSANDRESULTS pollutant sold from the total available with the auctioneer.
Figure 1 is the comparison of transaction volume, reflecting
We want to study the advantages of using CMRA auction
the proportion of the number of each auction item in all
inamulti-pollutantsettinginvolvingnutrientrunoffandGHG
transactions to the total amount to be traded. A high trans-
emissionsin Finnishagriculture forboth dairyand cropfarm-
action proportion indicates the success of an auction and also
ing.Wequantifythesebenefitsbynotingthetransactionprice
reflects the willingness to participate in the agents. A higher
andthetransactionproportionofmultipleauctioninstancesof
transaction proportion means that a higher quantity of escape
the extended CMRA mechanism in the setting.
permits are sold to the agents and thus they will be willing to
Forconductingtheexperiments,theextendedCMRAmech-
participate.
anism from Section II-B is implemented using the algorithms
We note the observation that in almost all auctions more
discussedinSectionII-A.Sinceweareworkinginthetruthful
than 30% percent of GHG escape Permits are unsold. The
bidding paradigm of the auction mechanism,
reason for this is that on average, the cost of reduction of 1
• For each agent, we need to calculate all possible bids
unit (kgNe) of nutrient runoff is higher than that of 1 unit
having a non-negative surplus.
(kgCO2e) of GHG. So the agents would prefer to reduce
• In the Closing Rule, we need to consider all possible
the GHG emissions (consequently reducing nutrient runoff)
combinations of different bids to find the maximum
insteadofbuyingescapepermitsforGHG.Fornutrientrunoff,
allocation.
the agents would rather buy the escape permits than try to
Thus, the computational time complexity of one round of
reduce them through higher costs.
the extended CMRA mechanism is calculated to be O(em.n)
τ Classical auctions like VCG or English auctions would
where n is the number of agents, m is the number of
almost always lead to 100% transaction proportion, all the
different escape permits (or number of pollutants) and e is
τ permits need to be sold. Whereas, in the extended CMRA
the maximum value among the different escape permit caps.
auction,theaboveobservationhighlightsitsflexibilitywherein
τ =argmax(e ) the agents are encouraged to reduce the pollutant instead of
i
i buying its escape permits if the auction price exceeds their
This result is supported by the work by Lehmann et al. [14] cost of reduction. The unsold permits will allow the seller
showing that the winner determination problem in combina- enterprise to implement the “safety valve” mechanism [13]
torial auctions is NP-hard. Due to the high complexity, for without exceeding the escape permit caps. Under a “safety
experimental purposes, the implemented simulation assumes valve”mechanism,theenterprise,seekingtoreduceemissions,
2 agents and 2 codependent pollutants (GHG emissions and commits to selling escape permits to its autonomous sub-
nutrient runoff). The 2 agents can be any combination of crop sidiaries upon request at a predetermined fixed price. Usually,
farmers and dairy farmers (having different or slightly similar safety valve permits are issued over and above the escape
reduction cost functions). permit caps which poses an environmental problem. This isconsideredamajorshortcomingofthesafetyvalvemechanism priceistheincreasedwillingnesstoparticipateintheagentsas
[15][16]. However using the unsold permits of the extended theycanextracteconomicoutcomesfromtheauctionprocess.
CMRA mechanism, there is room for safety valve permits in Thus, the modified CMRA mechanism helps both economi-
the current escape permit allowance. cally and environmentally when the reduction mechanisms of
the pollutants are related.
Fig.1. TransactionProportionAnalysis
Fig. 2. Transaction Price for 2 agents with correlation coefficients 0.5 and
B. Transaction Price 0.1respectively
Transaction price signifies the average spending of a buyer
at the end of the auction. It is desirable to have low spending IV. CONCLUSION
in the auction for the agents. For an agent, a lower cost for
In this work, we have extended the CMRA auction mech-
each unit of escape permits means a higher surplus. Precisely,
anism for the auction of multiple correlated pollutants using
the transaction price is measured as:
escape permits as auction goods. This is done by indirectly
BidPrice determining the utility functions of each agent using their
TotalBidUnits pollution reduction costs. We have presented the implications
We compare the transaction prices across auction instances ofutilizingtheCMRAauctionforpollutionreductionthrough
for 2 agents with different correlation coefficients in Figure 2. autonomous agents. We utilize the truthful bidding paradigm
This means that the correlation between the reduction cost of of the auction and highlight the major benefits gained by the
the 2 pollutants is different for the 2 agents. CMRAmechanisminthesectorofcropanddairyfarmingfor
We note the observation that agent 2 with a correlation of thereductionofGHGemissionsandnutrientrunoffpollution.
0.1,hasamuchhigheravg.priceascomparedtoagent1witha We implement the extended CMRA auction mechanism
correlationof0.5.Thereasonforthisisthatonaverage,agent for a simulated setting in the Finnish agriculture sector and
2hastobuyreasonableamountsofboththepermitsincluding show how the extended CMRA auction mechanism would
thecostliernutrientrunoffpermits.Thisisineffectduetothe have a high willingness for individuals and enterprises to
low-correlationcoefficientofagent2asitcanreduceonly0.1 participate in the auction as opposed to classical auction
units of nutrient runoff on reducing 1 unit of GHG emissions. mechanisms. Transaction proportion reveals that with unsold
Whereas agent 1 can reduce nutrient runoff at a lower cost by permits acting as a buffer, our extended mechanism addresses
reducingGHGemissionsusingthehighcorrelationcoefficient a major shortcoming of the safety valve mechanism [13] and
of 0.5 . Thus agent 1 need not buy the escape permits for makesiteconomicinapracticalcontextwithoutexceedingthe
nutrientrunoffasitwillbereducingitthroughGHGreduction. permitcaps.Weshowthroughananalysisoftransactionprice
In a single-pollutant auction mechanism, the correlation thatthemechanismgivescrucialimportancetothecorrelation
coefficient doesn’t factor in which would lead to a higher between the reduction costs of pollutants, thus encouraging
transaction price as compared to CMRA irrespective of the multi-pollutant reduction technologies. Thus the proposed
correlation between the reduction of pollutants. Whereas, the CMRA algorithm modified for the multi-pollutant framework
extended CMRA auction is able to benefit those agents who isbeneficialtotheenvironmentasitdrivespollutionreduction
have a high correlation in the cost of reduction of the two and research in multi-pollution reduction technologies while
pollutants.Thisisanoverwhelmingincentivetodeploymulti- being economic for the pollution emitters.
pollutant reduction technologies [5] and invest in its research
and development as they will inadvertently lead to higher
correlation coefficients. Another result of the low transactionREFERENCES essays in honour of Andries Nentjes, ISSN: 0301-4215.
[1] B. Kasberger and A. Teytelboym, The combinatorial DOI: https://doi.org/10.1016/S0301-4215(03)00150-2.
multi-round ascending auction, 2022. arXiv: 2203 . [Online]. Available: https://www.sciencedirect.com/
11783 [econ.TH]. science/article/pii/S0301421503001502.
[14] D. Lehmann, R. Mu¨ller, and T. Sandholm,
[2] DotEcon, “The combinatorial multi-round ascending
“297The Winner Determination Problem,” in
auction (cmra): Proposal for a new auction format,”
Technicalreport,DotEconPerspectives,2016,February. Combinatorial Auctions, The MIT Press, Dec.
[3] F.Alvarez,C.Mazo´n,andF.J.Andre´,“Assigningpollu-
2005, ISBN: 9780262033428. DOI: 10 . 7551 /
tionpermits:Areuniformauctionsefficient?”Economic mitpress/9780262033428.003.0013. eprint: https:
Theory, vol. 67, pp. 211–248, 2019. / / academic . oup . com / mit - press - scholarship -
online/book/0/chapter/244789405/chapter-ag-pdf/
[4] I.A.MacKenzie,“Theevolutionofpollutionauctions,”
ReviewofEnvironmentalEconomicsandPolicy,vol.16, 44575290/book\ 29406\ section\ 244789405.ag.pdf.
[Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.7551/mitpress/
no. 1, pp. 1–24, 2022.
9780262033428.003.0013.
[5] X. Gao, C. Zheng, P.-C. Chiang, and K. Cen, “Multi-
[15] M. MacLeod, What is the ”safety valve”? —
pollutant removal system and technology evaluations,”
in Multi-Pollutant Control for Flue Gases: Principles blogs.edf.org, https://blogs.edf.org/climate411/2007/06/
andApplications.Singapore:SpringerSingapore,2021, 05/what-is-the-safety-valve/, [Accessed 12-12-2023],
2007.
pp. 281–323, ISBN: 978-981-16-1518-4. DOI: 10.1007/
[16] T. J. Gilbert, “Tradable pollution permits,” 2008. [On-
978-981-16-1518-4 5. [Online]. Available: https://doi.
line]. Available: https://api.semanticscholar.org/
org/10.1007/978-981-16-1518-4 5.
[6] D.Bagchi,L.Lakshmi,Y.Narahari,etal.,“Mechanism CorpusID:166737876.
designforallocationofcarbonemissionreductionunits:
Astudyofglobalcompanieswithstrategicdivisionsand
partners,” in Aug. 2013, pp. 37–60, ISBN: 978-94-007-
5994-7. DOI: 10.1007/978-94-007-5995-4 3.
[7] P.KhezrandI.A.MacKenzie,“Anallocativelyefficient
auction for pollution permits,” en, Environ. Resour.
Econ. (Dordr.), vol. 78, no. 4, pp. 571–585, Apr. 2021.
[8] H. Guo, Z. Lv, J. Hua, H. Yuan, and Q. Yu, “Design of
combined auction model for emission rights of interna-
tionalforestrycarbonsequestrationandotherpollutants
based on smra,” Sustainability, vol. 13, no. 20, 2021,
ISSN:2071-1050.DOI:10.3390/su132011200.[Online].
Available: https://www.mdpi.com/2071-1050/13/20/
11200.
[9] N. C. Bedard, J. K. Goeree, P. Louis, and J. Zhang,
“Sealed-bid versus ascending spectrum auctions,” Ex-
perimental Economics, May 2023. DOI: 10 . 1007 /
s10683-023-09805-x. [Online]. Available: https://doi.
org/10.1007%2Fs10683-023-09805-x.
[10] J. Levin and A. Skrzypacz, “Properties of the com-
binatorial clock auction,” American Economic Review,
vol. 106, pp. 2528–2551, Sep. 2016. DOI: 10.1257/aer.
20141212.
[11] M. Janssen and B. Kasberger, “On the clock of the
combinatorial clock auction,” Theoretical Economics,
vol. 14, no. 4, pp. 1271–1307, 2019. DOI: 10.3982/
te3203. [Online]. Available: https://doi.org/10.3982%
2Fte3203.
[12] L. S. S and O. M., “Multiple-pollutant cost-efficiency:
Coherentwaterandclimatepolicyforagriculture,”Am-
bio. 2019 Nov;48(11):1304-1313. doi:, vol. 10. 2019.
[13] H. D. Jacoby and A. Ellerman, “The safety valve and
climate policy,” Energy Policy, vol. 32, no. 4, pp. 481–
491, 2004, An economic analysis of climate policy: