A Stochastic Geo-spatiotemporal Bipartite Network
to Optimize GCOOS Sensor Placement Strategies
Ted Holmberg Elias Ioup Mahdi Abdelguerfi
Department of Computer Science Center for Geospatial Sciences Cannizaro-Livingston Gulf States
University of New Orleans Naval Research Laboratory, Center for Environmental Informatics
New Orleans, LA, USA Stennis Space Center New Orleans, LA, USA
eholmber@uno.edu Mississippi, USA. chairman@cs.uno.edu
elias.ioup@nrlssc.navy.mil
Abstract—This paper proposes two new measures applicable II. BACKGROUND
in a spatial bipartite network model: coverage and coverage
Various ongoing initiatives are engaged in monitoring and
robustness.Thebipartitenetworkmustconsistofobservernodes,
observable nodes, and edges that connect observer nodes to reportingbothhistoricalandreal-timestatesoftheGoM.This
observable nodes. The coverage and coverage robustness scores paper focuses on two: The Gulf of Mexico Coastal Ocean
evaluate the effectiveness of the observer node placements. This Observing System (GCOOS) and HYbrid Coordinate Ocean
measureisbeneficialforstochasticdataasitmaybecoupledwith
Model (HYCOM).
Monte Carlo simulations to identify optimal placements for new
observernodes.Inthispaper,weconstructaGeo-SpatioTemporal
A. GCOOS
BipartiteNetwork(GSTBN)withinthestochasticanddynamical
environment of the Gulf of Mexico. This GSTBN consists of The GCOOS is the Gulf of Mexico regional component of
GCOOS sensor nodes and HYCOM Region of Interest (RoI)
the U.S. Integrated Ocean Observing System (IOOS). It is the
eventnodes.Thegoalistoidentifyoptimalplacementstoexpand
onlycertifiedcomprehensivedatacollectionanddissemination
GCOOS to improve the forecasting outcomes by the HYCOM
ocean prediction model. centerforcoastalandoceandataintheGulf.GCOOScollects
Index Terms—coverage and coverage robustness measures, data from 1,655 sensors located at 163 non-federal and 159
geo-spatiotemporal network modeling, bipartite network anal- federal stations [1].
ysis, stochastic event dynamics
B. HYCOM
HYCOM is a real-time three-dimensional grid mesh ocean
I. INTRODUCTION model with 1/25° horizontal resolution that provides eddy-
resolvinghindcast,nowcast,andforecastasnumericalstatesof
TheGulfofMexico(GoM)isenvironmentallyandeconom- theGoM.HYCOMassimilatesdatafromvarioussensors,such
ically vital to the US. Its coastline extends across five U.S. assatellites,buoys,ARGOfloats,andautonomousunderwater
states: Texas, Louisiana, Mississippi, Alabama, and Florida. gliders (AUGs). The forecast system is the Navy Coupled
It hosts multiple major ports and transportation waterways Ocean Data Assimilation (NCODA), a multivariate optimal
which provide the US with many critical resources: oil, gas, interpolation scheme that assimilates surface observations.
wind,waves,andseafood[2].Adiversegroupofcommercial, By combining these observations via data assimilation and
academic, federal, and local organizations jointly support op- using the dynamical interpolation skill of the model, a three-
erationsintheGoMtoobserve,measure,andstudytheregion. dimensional ocean state can be more accurately nowcast and
However,theGoMisvast,withover17,000milesofshoreline, forecast [4].
and its basin encompasses 600,000 square miles. Despite
the concerted effort between organizations to build a shared
III. OBJECTIVE
sensor array, the current number of sensors only observes This research aims to construct a GSTBN model using
a sparse fraction of the GoM [1]. It is critical to supply HYCOM and the observational sensor data from GCOOS.
these institutions with guidance on where optimal new sensor This GSTBN aims to identify regions of interest within the
placements may go to best contribute to the sensor array. HYCOM model to recommend how best to utilize the sensor
Thisproblembecomesevenmorechallenging,consideringthe array of GCOOS and provide guidance on where to expand
GoM continuously changes states. Unlike land terrain, which it.
remains relatively stable, water bodies are dynamic systems
[5]. Network models and analysis provide key insights into IV. MOTIVATION
where to place new GCOOS sensors.
Localized regions of temporal variability within HYCOM
hinder the accuracy of its nowcast/forecast. A region of
Acceptedversion.©2022IEEE.Personaluseofthismaterialispermitted.
PermissionfromIEEEmustbeobtainedforallotheruses.
DOI10.1109/BigData55660.2022.10020928
4202
rpA
22
]AM.sc[
1v75341.4042:viXratemporal variability is where significant changes in a numer- B. GSTBN Model
ical property occur within the same coordinate between two
A geo-spatiotemporal network comprises a set of geo-
consecutive temporal frames [6]. HYCOM produces nowcasts
spatiotemporalnodesandasetofgeo-spatiotemporaledges.A
andforecastsbycombiningitsreal-timeobservationsandprior
geo-spatiotemporal node has a geographical longitude/latitude
historical data. The forecasting error rate generally increases
coordinate and may occur at select times or be persistent
as the values between snapshots differ [6]. The best approach
across all times. It may also move over time or remain
to mitigate such regions of temporal variability is to acquire
stationary. A geo-spatiotemporal edge connects two nodes
new observations to feed into HYCOM [6]. The next set
and may occur just once or multiple times or across all
of nowcasts and forecasts will then use the most up-to-date
times. Geo-spatiotemporal edges have a numerical weight
measures and ensure the error rate is as minimal as possible.
representing the geodesic distance between the linked nodes.
By placing instruments into the regions of interest (RoI),
This graph model assumes a bipartite network structure, ideal
GCOOScangetthedataneededtomaximizetheaccuracyrate
for mapping relations between two sets of nodes [9].
in the HYCOM nowcasting and forecasting model. However,
the number of sensors is limited and proper planning should
1) GSTBN Nodes:
maximize their effectiveness in improving the nowcasting and
Since this is a bipartite network, there are two types of
forecasting model.
nodes, observers and observables. Both types of nodes in
V. APPROACH this GSTBN represent geospatial coordinate points within the
GoM, but they differ in the following ways, as outlined in
By modeling a GSTBN composed of a set of observable
this section.
nodes representing the RoI within the GoM and a set of
observer nodes representing the GCOOS sensors. An RoI is
a) GCOOS Sensors (static):
identifiedbytakingasetoftemporalsnapshotsfromHYCOM
GCOOS sensor nodes are observer types. GCOOS sensor
and computing the residuals over time, where the residual
nodes are modeled as static or stationary, which means their
is the magnitude difference between snapshots. The nodes
geolocationispersistentacrossalltimeframes.Theproperties
representing the GCOOS sensors have attributes consistent
of each GCOOS node are in Table 1.
with that particular instrument, such as its operational sta-
tus, geo-coordinates, current data readings, mobility speed,
TABLEI
and institutional membership. The GSTBN establishes a link
(GCOOS)OBSERVERNODEPROPERTIES
between the sensor nodes to all potential nearby RoI nodes.
It facilitates the decision-making to assess which location to Label Description
recommend planning for new installations for sensors, for
id Uniqueidentifiernumberforeachnode
relocation, or when to perform maintenance. Other decisions membership Federalassetorlocaldatanode(ldn)asset
involving the sensor array might be when and where to grow datasource InstitutionthatoperatestheGCOOSsensor
platform Nameofobservatoryplatform
the sensor network. Monte Carlo simulations identify optimal
mobility Stationaryormobile
sensorplacementsbyattemptingtoaddaGCOOSnodetothe geolocation LatitudeandLongitudeofplatform
GSTBN randomly, and its effectiveness is then subsequently operationalstatus ActiveorInactive
evaluated. observationsa Typesofmeasuressampledbythisplatform
aObservationswerelimitedtothoseusedbytheHYCOMforecastingmodel,
VI. METHODS whicharetemperature,salinity,andoceancurrentvelocities.
This is a stochastic problem, therefore there is no deter-
ministic solution, and it is best to rely on random samplings b) HYCOM RoI Events (temporal):
to construct temporal graph representations by evaluating HYCOMRoInodesareobservabletypes.HYCOMRoInodes
potential outcomes between GCOOS sensor placements and represent locations between consecutive snapshots where a
RoIpositions.Graphanalysisidentifiesandselectstheoptimal significant change occurred in an observation. The properties
positions to maximize the GCOOS coverage and its coverage for each RoI node are in Table II and Table III. The residual
robustness. formula quantifies the significance of the change between
snapshots.
A. Temporal Graph Representation
GSTBN is a type of temporal graph. A temporal network
TABLEII
is an ordered set of static graphs. The ordering is the static (HYCOMROI)EVENTNODEPROPERTIES
network’s temporal occurrence or ”snapshot” at a particular
timestamp. Label Description
(cid:16) (cid:17)
TG= G , G , ..., G (1) id Uniqueidentifiernumberforeachnode
t0 t1 tn
geolocation LatitudeandLongitudeofplatform
where a Graph is a set of Nodes and a set of Edges. RoIsnapshots TemporaldictionarywithcorrespondingROIdata
(see:TableIII)
(cid:16) (cid:17)
G= N, E (2)TABLEIII
ROISNAPSHOTPROPERTIES
Label Description
snapshots NestedDictionary,outerkeysaretimestamps,
innerkeysareHYCOMobservations.
Thevalueistheresidualscore(realnumber)
i) Residual formula
In this paper, a residual is the squared difference between
a given value from the same geospatial coordinate at two
different times. Squaring the difference serves dual purposes.
The first purpose is to ensure that the residual is always
positive between the two times. The second purpose is to
boost or diminish the residual based on the magnitude of its
difference. If the difference is less than 1, it is diminished; if
itisgreaterthan1,itisboosted.SeeFig.1foravisualization
of the residuals between two frames.
(cid:0) (cid:1)2
residual= value −value (3)
tn+1 tn
In Fig. 1, the top and middle images are colormaps of
the water temperature from the HYCOM model separated
by a 24-hour period. The bottom image is a colormap
illustrating the residual difference between the two frames.
These brighter locations within the bottom image depict the
regions of interest for water temperature.
ii) RoI formula
The RoI is computed as the sum of residual values across all
observations between time t and t . The resulting value is
n n+1
then compared to a thresholding value to determine if it is an
RoI or ignored. The threshold value in Fig. 2 and Fig. 3 is
0.5.
(cid:26) (cid:27)
(cid:88) residual(v)≥threshold
RoI = (4)
otherwise 0
v∈observations
2) GSTBN Edges:
GSTBN edges link GCOOS nodes and HYCOM nodes. Edge Fig.1. Computingresidualsbetweentimeframes
generation starts with an RoI Node and pairs with a GCOOS
Node based on the shortest geodesic distance from the RoI
θ = Longitude of the first coordinate in radians
node to the closest GCOOS node. The geodesic distance, LON1
θ = Longitude of the second coordinate in radians
in this case, is the spherical distance between two points, LON2
otherwise known as the ”great circle distance” or “haversine”
3) GSTBN Realizations:
distance.
In Fig. 2, the GCOOS sensor nodes are colored red and
dx=sinθ ∗sinθ remain stationary. In contrast, the HYCOM RoI nodes are
LAT1 LAT2
dy=cosθ LAT1∗cosθ LAT2∗cosθ (LON1-LON2) (5) grayscale with coloring relative to the strength of the residual
distance=arccos(dx+dy)∗R
and dynamic between frames.
Note:
distance = distance between two coordinates. In Fig. 3, the zoom window is the same position but each
R = radius of Earth (approximately 6371.0090667KM) snapshot differs as the set of RoI nodes varies, illustrating the
θ = Latitude of the first coordinate in radians inherent stochastic problem of selecting optimal placements
LAT1
θ = Latitude of the second coordinate in radians for new sensors.
LAT2GCOOS sensor node typically being close to an HYCOM
RoI node. A suboptimal coverage could result in GCOOS
sensornodesbeingoutofrangefromtheHYCOMRoInodes.
1) Static Coverage :
The static network coverage may be numerically computed as
the sum of edge weights across all edges for a single discrete
time step. This GSTBN encodes the geospatial distance be-
tween the closest GCOOS sensor node and an HYCOM RoI
node as the edge weight. Given a set of weights, the formula
below provides the coverage score for that timestep.
(cid:88)
coverage= edge weights (6)
Fig.2. AsnapshotofGSTBNattimet0.(Globalview)
2) Temporal Coverage :
There are two approaches for measuring temporal network
coverage by expanding the above definition for the static
coverage measure:
a) Sum of Static Coverage Scores:
The total temporal coverage is the sum of the static coverages
across all timesteps within the GSTBN.
(cid:88)
total temporal coverage= coverage(t) (7)
t∈Timesteps
This approach may be unduly influenced by the presence
of a bimodal distribution of coverage scores across the
GSTBN timesteps. One poor performance in a timestep
heavily penalizes the total temporal coverage, or one positive
performance greatly benefits it.
b) Average of Static Coverage Scores:
The average temporal coverage score better represents the
expected coverage for any given time step within the GSTBN
by using the quotient between the total temporal coverage
and the total number of time steps. The Average Temporal
Coverageistheprimarymeasureusedtoranktheperformance
of the GSTBN configurations in this paper.
total temporal coverage
average temporal coverage= (8)
number of timesteps
Fig.3. TwotemporalsnapshotsoftheGSTBNattimest0andt2fromsame
region.(Zoomview)
B. Coverage Robustness measure
This measure quantifies the robustness of the GCOOS
VII. ANALYSIS
sensor nodes in its ability to cover the HYCOM RoI
The goal of the GSTBN is to measure sensor placement nodes adequately. Maximal robustness results in a network
strategies.CoverageandCoverageRobustnessaretheprimary configuration whereby the coverage would be minimally
and secondary considerations used to measure the effective- affected by removing a critical sensor node. With minimal
ness of the spatial configuration of the GSTBN sensor nodes. robustness,removingasensornodemaysubstantiallypenalize
These measures are defined in the subsections below. the coverage score. Nodal centrality is a useful measure for
determining the most critical sensor positions. To maximize
A. Coverage measure
robustness, the distribution of degree centrality should spread
This measure quantifies the coverage of the GCOOS across multiple nodes instead of residing in only a few select
sensor nodes to the HYCOM RoI nodes across all snapshots critical nodes.
in the GSTBN. A maximal coverage would result in a1) Static Degree Centrality : IX. RESULTS
The static network degree centrality computes the distribution All results use the Average Total Coverage measure. The
of edges across the GCOOS sensor nodes within the network. score for the initial GCOOS sensor configuration is below.
The distribution is the count of edges per node against the
A. Initial Sensors
degree frequency across all nodes.
coverage score: 180222.806856
2) Temporal Degree Centrality :
There are two approaches to measuring the temporal network
degree centrality.
a) Overall Centrality:
The sum of all connections each node has through time over
the entire temporal sequence [7].
b) Per-Timestep Centrality:
The sum of all connections each node has through time per
time point [7].
Via simulations, the network robustness is evaluated by
removing the nodes with the highest nodal degree and recom-
putingthenewnetworkedgesbasedonthereviseddistancesto
derivethenewcoveragescore.Ifthecoveragescoreincreases
significantly,thenetworkisfragiletothelossofsensornodes.
If the coverage score remains relatively stable, the network is
robust to the loss of sensor nodes.
VIII. OPTIMIZINGPLACEMENTSOFNEWSENSORNODES
Identifying the optimal placements for new sensor nodes
muststartfromtheinitialGCOOSsensorconfiguration.Given
the stochastic nature of the HYCOM RoI nodes, a Monte
Carlo simulation strategy determines the best locations for
new GCOOS sensor nodes. The goal is to identify a nodal
configuration that both distributes centrality and minimizes
edge distances.
A. Monte Carlo Simulation
AMonteCarlosimulationishelpfultoidentifytheprobabil-
ity of different outcomes in a non-deterministic environment
due to the intervention of random variables [8]. In the case
of this GSTBN, it is the HYCOM RoI node placements per
timestep that are random.
The Monte Carlo simulation begins by selecting a random
coordinate within the spatial domain of the GSTBN. Then
that coordinate is used to insert a new GCOOS sensor node
into the GSTBN and recompute all of the edges. The updated
edge list produces a new average temporal coverage score.
Thatnewcoveragescorecomparesagainstthecurrentoptimal
placement’s coverage score. If the new score is less than
the current optimal score, then that random coordinate is
savedatitsoptimalposition.Repeatingthisprocessasuitably
high number of times to exhaustively search the spatial space
identifies the best location, which maximizes coverage across
all timesteps in the testing dataset.
An advantage of the Monte Carlo approach is that it is
a distributed process at its core since each simulation is
independent of the others. To identify optimal positions for
Fig. 4. Sequence of Temporal Snapshots of the GSTBN with the initial
multiple sensors within the GSTBN, perform this process
GCOOSsensorconfiguration
sequentially, one node at a time.B. First New Sensor C. Second New Sensor
The Monte Carlo simulation with 1,000 trials. The Monte Carlo simulation with 1,000 trials.
longitude: -78.7403109976445 longitude: -85.81532374804107
latitude: 24.385624429875215 latitude: 22.561994782989117
coverage score: 160873.88100 coverage score: 147411.742470
Fig.5. SequenceofTemporalSnapshotsoftheGSTBNwiththesuggested Fig.6. SequenceofTemporalSnapshotsoftheGSTBNwiththesuggested
positionforanewsensorrepresentedasagreenstar positionfora2ndsensorrepresentedasayellowstarX. DISCUSSION
The results illustrate how this approach uses a bipartite
network model to capture the coverage performance between
persistent observers and observable stochastic events within
a spatial environment and successfully identify near-optimal
locations to expand the observer array.
As seen in the Results section, the coverage score sig-
nificantly decreases with the insertion of both the first and
second new nodes. Notice that the placement of each new
node maximizes its coverage across all times.
The results identified through this process would then
support any management decisions from the platform/station
operators/owners when they intend to add new observational
equipment.
Wecanexpandtheguidanceprovidedwithevenmoreinfor-
mation by performing community clustering on the observer
or the observable nodes. For example, cluster the GCOOS
platform nodes into different communities based on their
platform ownership status. Cluster the HYCOM RoI nodes
together in communities based on their observation type. The
GSTBN can model such constraints; however, these levels of
fine detail and consideration are omitted from the scope of
this paper.
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
This work was partly supported by the U.S. Department
of the Navy, Office of Naval Research (ONR), and Naval
Research Laboratory (NRL) under contracts N00173-20-2-
C007 and N00173-20-2-C007, respectively.
REFERENCES
[1] GCOOS Regional Association, “A Sustained, Integrated Ocean Ob-
serving System for the Gulf of Mexico (GCOOS): Infrastructure for
Decision-making“,2018
[2] GCOOSRegionalAssociation,“GulfofMexicoCoastalOceanObserv-
ingSystem(GCOOS):DataManagementSystemPlan“,2017
[3] McKinney, L.D., J.G. Shepherd, C.A. Wilson, W.T. Hogarth, J.
Chanton, S.A. Murawski, P.A. Sandifer, T. Sutton, D. Yoskowitz,
K. Wowk, T.M. O¨zgo¨kmen, S.B. Joye, and R. Caffey. 2021.
“The Gulf of Mexico: An overview. Oceanography“ 34(1):30–43,
https://doi.org/10.5670/oceanog.2021.115.
[4] Chassignet, E.P., Hurlburt, H.E., Smedstad, O.M., Halliwell, G.R.,
Hogan,P.J.,Wallcraft,A.J.,Baraille,R.,Bleck,R.,2007.“TheHYCOM
(HYbrid Coordinate Ocean Model) data assimilative system“. J. Mar.
Syst.65,60–83.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.jmarsys.2005.09.016
[5] National Academies of Sciences, Engineering, and Medicine. “Under-
standing and predicting the Gulf of Mexico loop current: critical gaps
andrecommendations“.NationalAcademiesPress,2018.
[6] Holmberg,“DataVisualizationtoEvaluateandFacilitateTargetedData
Acquisitions in Support of a Real-time Ocean Forecasting System“
(2014). University of New Orleans Theses and Dissertations. 1873.
https://scholarworks.uno.edu/td/1873
[7] Vincenzo Nicosia, John Tang, Cecilia Mascolo, Mirco Musolesi, Gio-
vanni Russo, and Vito Latora. 2013. “Graph Metrics for Temporal
Networks“.SpringerBerlinHeidelberg,Berlin,Heidelberg,15–40.
[8] Mooney, Christopher Z. “Monte Carlo Simulation“. Thousand Oaks,
Calif.:SagePublications,1997.
[9] J. A. Bondy and U. S. R. Murty, “Graph theory with applications“,
Citeseer,vol.290,1976.