Garment Suggestion Based on Comfort Extracted from
Physiological and Emotional Parameters
Hyo Jung (Julie) Chang, Department of Hospitality and Retail Management,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA, Mohammad Abu Nasir Rakib,
Department of Computer Science and Engineering, University of Texas at
Arlington, Arlington, Texas, USA, Md Kamrul Hasan Foysal, Department of
Electrical and Computer Engineering, Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas,
USA, and Jo Woon Chong, Department of Electrical and Computer Engineering,
Texas Tech University, Lubbock, Texas, USA
1. Introduction
Garment comfort is a complex term that is related to several factors including fit, fiber type, and
style, which could also be evaluated differently from a person to person (Zimniewska & Kozłowski, 2004).
Different types of fibers may affect the comfortability of the garments in a different way. In general,
clothing made from natural fibers, like cotton, provide more comfortability than clothing made from
synthetic fibers (Cook, 1984). Especially, natural fibers including cotton and linen are more breathable than
synthetic fibers, thus, wearers are more likely to feel comfortable while wearing the fabrics made from
these fibers (Aisyah & Tajuddin, 2014). Recent advancements in textile finishing showed scopes of
improving comfortability, however, synthetic fibers are still less comfortable because of lower moisture
absorbency, heat conductivity, and sticking out with the body in dry seasons, among others (El Nemr, 2012).
Along with aesthetic features, thermal comfort and breathability from a textile product would benefit the
wearer to maintain a healthy lifestyle. Furthermore, previous research demonstrated that polyester fibers
cause higher body temperature, more discomfort, and sweating during summer or high-temperature
environments (Kwon, et. al., 1998). Thus, based on the environmental condition, wearers' activities and
their emotional conditions, the overall physiological comfort of a person can be different.Especially, cotton products provide high breathable properties and moisture absorbency properties
(Cook, 1984), thus, it is important to determine whether these breathable and moisture absorbency
properties have an overall impact on the wearer's physiological responses to measure the comfort, such as
heart rate and respiration rate. Ciesielska et. al. (2009) showed both natural and man-made fiber-based
garments have an influence on the wearer’s physiological states such as cardiovascular and respiration rate
during physiological effort. Even though garments produced from natural fibers create more positive feeling
of the wearers, wool-based garments are not suitable after the works that require high physical activities
(Ciensielska, 2009). Synthetic fibers such as polyester do not provide as much moisture regains as cotton
and it generates static electricity, however, it is unknown whether these characteristics of natural and
synthetic fiber fabric have any impact on the wearer's emotional state.
Apart from the fabric and fiber types, a garment fit is one of the important factors that have an
impact on the physical comfort of a human body. This physical comfort is assumed to be related to the
emotional state of the wearers. Nowadays, consumers prefer to wear garments with various fit types, such
as loose fit, regular fit, or tight fit. However, no study as of today confirmed the effect of garment fit on the
wearer's physiological parameters, which are closely related to their health. Apart from the respiration rate
and heart rate, the garment’s surface smoothness and roughness could be another potential factor that might
influence wearers' comfortability (Ciensielska, 2009). For example, wool is itchy because of having scale
on its surface structure, so that the wearer may feel uncomfortable while worn (Hearle & Morton, 2008).
As a result, negative emotions may be induced for the wearer. It can be assumed that consumers may
experience emotionally connected if they find good hand-feel, accurate and desired to fit, and non-bulky
feeling while worn. On contrary, synthetic fibers are more likely to produce static electricity, which is
undesired by the wearers. Thus, the research question of this study was “Do the physiological and emotional
responses, as the measurements of the comfortability, of the wearers may vary based on the fabric,
comfortability, and fit types?” By monitoring heart rate and respiration rate in addition to the effect of fabric
types and fit on the wearer's emotion would disclose what fabric and fit type a person should consider intheir daily life. Thus, the objectives of this study are (1) to evaluate the effect of garment fitting and fabric
types on heart rate and breathing rate; (2) to determine which clothing can provide better heart and
respiration rates between garments made with natural and synthetic fabrics; and (3) to examine the
emotional responses toward each fabric type and garment fit.
2. Background of the study
2.1 Physiological responses to clothing
Previous studies showed mixed results about the effects of fabric types on the physiological comfort
of the wearer (Hassan, 2012; Dehghan et. al., 2014; Ciensielska, 2009). For example, Hassan et al. (2012)
found that polyester fabrics provide better physiological responses i.e., better cardiorespiratory performance
and fitness for the athletes. On other hand, Dehghan et. al., (2014) conducted a study on working-class people
to see the effect of fabric types on cardiological and physiological responses. The result showed there was
not any significant impact of fabric types on the physiological responses of the participants (Parvari et. al.,
2014). Additionally, respiration rate provides data about an individual’s health condition (Rolfe, 2019).
According to Nicolo et. al., (2020), respiration rate provides some crucial information about the human body,
such as cardiac situation and clinical deterioration. Furthermore, respiration rate is also an indicator that
provides information about cognitive load, emotional stress, and among others (Nicolo et. al., 2020).
Researchers widely use the respiration rate measurement technique, which is a non-invasive test that
indicates changes in oxygen levels in the blood as well as breathing difficulties (Cooper et. al., 2014).
Moreover, heart rate measurement has been studied to check the endurance of the different athletes and their
physical conditions (Gajda, 2020). The result emphasized the importance of continuous monitoring of heart
rate, which may improve the safety of the athletes.
2.2. Emotional responses to garments
Previously Kasambala et. al. (2016) showed inaccurate garment fit affects individuals’ emotional
responses from which individuals develop their personal values to achieve certain goals (Kasambala et. al.,
2016). Likewise, garment fit, and appearance represent an individual’s state of choice that communicatespersonal attitudes and values (Kaiser, 1998; Kim & Damhorst, 2010). Furthermore, Furthermore, people use
emotion as a way of communicating and maintaining social interaction. An emotional response is a part of
affective social communication (Penalp, 1999). People communicate emotion through the human body
including facial expressions, gestures, and body movements, where the garment type and fit play a significant
role in effectively communicating the desired emotion (Mura, 2008). Thus, the garment becomes another
mode of communication. Although the expressing emotion through garments is not uniform in people and
contains meaningful messages to the wearers and viewers in a different culture. As a result, people tend to
exhibit their personality, status, and identity by what they wear (Kasambala et. al., 2016). This emotional
expression through clothing may be different based on culture, gender, functionality, and age. For example,
Kasambala et al. (2016), conducted a study on South African women emphasizing the relation of emotion,
personal values, and garment fit. Their results showed how manufacturers are failing in addressing the right
fit and sizing of the garments for the females.
2.2 Garment fabric and comfort
In general, people tend to touch the garment product to evaluate the touch and quality of the fabric
before buying (Rahman, 2012). Thus, based on the feelings or emotional responses generated due to the
interaction from skin contact with garment items help determine whether the consumer would buy that
garment product. Furthermore, many investigators pointed out that emotional responses from consumers
play an important role in deciding what they buy (Lin, Akimobo, & Shigeo, 2008; Clore, Palmar, & Gratch,
2009). Consumers also experience an interaction with the body while wearing a clothing item. Therefore,
fits and surface roughness/smoothness of garment items can enhance the sensorial comfort, subsequently,
creates an emotional connection to the garment product (De Raeve, et al., 2018). For example, a soft or
smooth surface provides a pleasant experience while a rough or stiff surface provides a less pleasant
experience (Essick et. al., 1999). Furthermore, gender, skin contact, texture, fabric constructions, presence
of spandex, among others can influence the user experience (Essick, et. al., 2010; Rakib et. al., 2020).
However, garment items made from natural fibers i.e., cotton, flax, and silk, are more comfortable to thewearers than garments from synthetic fibers i.e., polyester, nylon, among others (Nemr, 2012). This is due
to natural fibers provide the features including amicable to the skin, breathability, higher moisture
absorbency, and good thermal conductivity, among others. On contrary, synthetic fibers do not possess
properties for which natural fibers are more favorable to the wearers (Annapoorani, 2018). The above-
mentioned properties also determine the comfortability of the wearers. However, because of technological
advancement, synthetic fibers are possible to modify and provide better properties likewise natural fibers
(Parvinzadeh, 2012).
2.3 Garment fit and comfort
Along with the fabric types (natural or synthetic), the garment fit also determines the comfortability.
As mentioned earlier, comfortability is the harmony of psychological, physical, and physiological states of
a human body (Raeve et. al., 2018). The comfortability of a human body is related to several factors including
skin contact, air and moisture permeability, fit, fabric handle properties, and among others (Hooper et. al.,
20150. Aesthetically, if a garment looks beautiful on a person, it indicates the well-fitting of that garment to
the wearer (Alexander et. al., 2005). Therefore, before wearing a garment, a person needs to decide which
garment (natural or synthetic) would provide more comfort along with positive emotional feelings. However,
there are not many studies conducted to examine the relationships among garment fit, emotional responses,
and comfortability (Wu, et. al, 2011).
Different consumers prefer different types of clothing fits i.e., tight fit, loose fit, slim fit, and among
others. The garment fit affects the consumer's physiological, emotional, and physical state of a human body.
Physiological comfort may be defined as the condition of the human body where a human can get sufficient
air, thermal, and moisture regulating ability, among others after wearing a garment (De Raeve et. al., 2018).
The fit can also affect the insulation property of garment products. Therefore, based on the season, clothing
fit and fabric types determine the thermal insulation and comfort of a human body (Wang, et. al., 2016). The
physiological comfort is influenced by several factors including style, fabric types, and the fit of the garments(Mert, et al., 2016). Also, it is probable that fabric types and fits could affect some physiological responses
i.e., respiration rate, heart rate, and body temperature of the wearer.
Therefore, as mentioned earlier, it is important for knowing how the fit and fabric type can help the
user maintain comfortability through fashion products. Furthermore, no previous studies disclosed the effect
of the garment fit on a wearer’s emotional response and physiological responses i.e., heart rate and respiration
rate. Therefore, this study is aiming to understand how fabric types, i.e., natural and synthetic products, and
garment fit types can affect a wearer's physiological responses, so that the wearers of those fashion products
will be aware of selecting a garment product to achieve good breathable features to themselves.
The comfort of the garment can be extracted from physiological parameters (Das & Alagirusamy,
2010). However, no existing fit detection method have measured the physiological responses to the
garment. Conventional fit detection approaches complete focus on body measurement and suggest clothing
based on only one parameter. As these solutions do not consider comfort and physiological indicators, they
do not provide accurate garment suggestion to the consumer. Emotional response to those garments is also
important indicator for comfort as positive emotions evoke when an individual feels comfortable when
wearing a certain garment. Thus, our proposed method incorporates physiological data (i.e., heart rate and
respiration rate) with emotional data to present the best garment fit to the consumer. For all these
physiological measurements, no external device is needed. Smartphone camera is used to detect heart rate
(Kwon, 2012) and respiration rate (Reyes, 2016) of the consumer.
3. Method
In aiming to provide a comprehensive understanding of how fit and comfortability are interrelated
and show if there is an overlap exists among the garment fitting, comfortability, and emotional state of the
wearers through the extraction of physiological data. Therefore, this study collected physiological data using
pulse oximeter and respiration sensors (Nexus 10 MK-II) and emotional data using a self-administered
questionnaire based on qualitative data. In our proposed method, we focused on two physiological
measurements as comfort parameters i.e., heart rate (HR) and respiration rate (RR). Numerous studies haverelied on heart rate (Lan et. al., 2020) and respiration rate (Song, 2011) as comfort parameters. Furthermore,
the quantitative survey method was used to measure the emotional responses to the fabric type and fit.
Several items were used to evaluate the emotional state and comfortability of the wearers. Additionally,
several open-ended questions were also included in the survey.
3.1 Physiological Parameter Research Design
Previously, research have shown strong correlation between physiological parameter and clothing
comfort. Especially, heart rate, respiration rate and skin conductance are a few parameters that have been
assessed to be closely correlated to comfort. In our study, we have taken physiological data (heart rate and
respiration rate) as comfort parameters to measure clothing comfort. A gold standard Nexus MK-10 device
has been used for acquiring ECG and respiration signal. The ECG and respiration signal were used to extract
the heart rate and respiration rate of the participants. Different noise reduction techniques were used to
reduce signal noise. The collected data were analyzed and processed using MATLAB.
In this study, we have focused on the following two aspects, namely,
1. Finding direct relationship between comfort parameter and fabric type and fit.
2. Providing garment suggestion based on acquired comfort parameter.
3.1.1. ECG signal acquisition
Electrocardiogram (ECG) reflects the electrical activity of heart. A typical ECG signal contains p wave,
QRS complex and T wave. Heart rate can easily be acquired from an ECG signal. An ECG machine contains
electrodes which measures external (skin) electrical activity of heart. The four extremity electrodes are left
arm, right arm, neutral, on the right leg, and foot, on the left leg. However, two electrodes on two arms and
a virtual neural can be used to get one lead ECG accurately. There is no difference in acquired data if the
electrodes are attached proximal or distal on the extremities. Figure 1 below shows (a) an ECG signal, and
(b) ECG signal acquisition process using NEXUS -10 MK-II device.(a) (b)
Figure 1. (a) A typical ECG signal, and (b) ECG signal acquisition using Nexus -10 MK-II device.
For finding the relationship of comfort parameter to fabric type and garment fit, we used gold standard
medical device Nexus- 10 MK -II to obtain heart rate and respiration rate from the subjects. Standard
electrode was used to obtain the signals from the subjects. Figure 2 shows the Nexus- 10 MK -II device and
data acquisition of one subject.
(a) (b)
Figure 2. (a) Nexus 10 MK-II device, and (b) Heart rate and Respiration rate acquisition
3.1.2 Heart rate calculation
From the acquired biomedical signal (ECG), the heart rate is extracted. First, noise reduction techniques are
applied, and the signal is preprocessed. Low pass filtering, moving average, detrending are some of the
techniques that are applied to process the signal. A peak finding algorithm is used to extract the R peaks of
the signal. The block diagram in figure 3 shows the heart rate acquisition workflow.Figure 3. ECG signal processing technique.
The signal processing and extracted signal peaks were demonstrated in the Figure 4.
(a) (b) (c)
Figure 4. (a) raw ECG signal, (b) processed denoised signal, and (c) final peak detected signal.
Heart rate is calculated using the following equation.
60
𝑅 = (1)
𝑡
𝑝−𝑝
where HR is the heart rate and 𝑡 is the peak to peak time difference
𝑝−𝑝
3.1.3. Respiration signal acquisition
For extraction of respiration signal, the same Nexus 10 MK II device is used. The respiration sensor
consists of a piezoelectric transducer which uses expansion and contraction of a piezoelectric band to obtain
the respiration signal of the user. Figure 5 below shows the respiration signal extraction method.
(a)(b)
Figure 5. (a) Respiration Transducer and (b) Experimental Set up to obtain respiration signal.
From the acquired biomedical signal (Respiration Singla), the breathing rate is extracted. First, noise
reduction techniques are applied, and the signal is preprocessed. Low pass filtering, moving average,
detrending are some of the techniques that are applied to process the signal. A peak finding algorithm is used
to extract the peaks of the signal. The block diagram in figure 6 shows the signal processing.
Figure 6. Respiration signal processing and respiration rate extraction technique.
The signal processing and extracted signal peaks were demonstrated in the Figure 7.
(a) (b) (c)I
Figure 7. (a) raw signal, (b) processed denoised signal, and (c) final peak detected signal
3.1.3 Respiration rate calculation
From the respiration signal, the respiration rate is acquired using equation 2.
60
𝑅𝑅 = , (2)
𝑡𝑝−𝑝
where RR is the respiration rate and 𝑡 is the peak to peak time difference.
𝑝−𝑝
3.2. Relationship between fabric type and comfort parameterStudies have shown direct and indirect relationship of fabric type to human comfort. The parameters used to
measure human comfort are heart rate, blood volume pulse, respiration rate and skin temperature. In our
study, we relied upon heart rate and respiration rate for comfort parameters.
Clothing fabric type has been the key issue of comfort for the consumers. Empirically, clothing type
based on the fabric was considered the key factor for choosing clothing. People have chosen cotton,
polyester, linen, and numerous other fabrics to make clothing’s. Studies have shown comparison in comfort
percipience based on fabric type. Mostly, the main two type of fabrics generally used are cotton and
polyester. In this study, we focused on these two fabrics to measure comfort of the subjects. Figure 8 below
shows the relation between fabric type and comfort parameter (for visual only).
Figure 8. Relationship parameter of comfort and fabric type
3.3 Relationship between clothing fitting and comfort parameter
The other issue which shapes our comfort is the fitting condition. Although, the fitting preference depends
upon personal preference, there is a baseline for fitting condition. In this study, we focused on fitting criteria
i.e., fitted and loose-fitting condition for the clothing to the subjects and extracted the correlation towards
them.
3.4. Finding direct relationship among comfort parameter, fabric type, and garment fit
The hypothesis we wanted to test was that there is no evidence of Difference in heart rate and respiration
rate between two fabric type, two fitting condition, namely, Cotton Tight-Fit, Cotton Loose-Fit, Polyester
Tight-Fit, and Polyester Loose-Fit. In order to select the garment for the users, we considered twotype of fabric and two types of fitting condition. This study initially thought to use 100% cotton
and 100% polyester tee-shirt. However, based on the availability and frequently purchase tee-shirt
types, the selected product specification is given in Table 1 below.
Table 1. Parameters for fabric selection
Fabric Type Fabric Construction Fitting Condition
Cotton- 90% cotton+10 % polyester Single Jersey Knitted Fabric Tight-fit
Cotton- 90% cotton+10 % polyester Single Jersey Knitted Fabric Loose fit
Polyester- 90% polyester + 10 % spandex Single Jersey Knitted Fabric Tight-fit
Polyester- 90% polyester + 10 % spandex Single Jersey Knitted Fabric Loose fit
The fabric type is obtained from the following Table 2.
Table 2. Relationship between Fabric types and comfort parameters according to literature.
Fabric Type Heart Rate Temperature Humidity Reference
Hydrophilic Cotton Low
(Liya et al.
- -
Moisture Management Cotton High
2007)
100% cotton Low High High
13.7% viscose 86.3% polyester High High High
(Parvari, Aghaei
30.2% cotton, 69.8% polyester Low High Low et al. 2015)
13.7% viscose 86.3% polyester High High Low
100% polyester (low moisture regain) High
(Kwon, Kato et
Wool + cotton (high moisture regain) Low 30C 50%
al. 1998)
100% cotton (moderate moisture regain) Low
100% cotton Low
(Li, Keighley et
65% polyester, 35% cotton Low - -
al. 1988)
100% polyester High
Experimental Clothing- Under Armor Low (Wickwire,
- - Bishop et al.
Cotton High 2007)
3.5. Providing garment suggestion based on acquired comfort parameter using smartphone app
In this paper, we propose a novel non-contact garment suggestion method to the online apparel customers.
The non-contact smartphone-based method uses video data acquired from customers end before purchaseand provides garment suggestion based on physiological comfort parameters. Current smartphone
technology is advanced in terms of camera specification. Therefore, it is possible to acquire heart rate and
respiration rate of a subject’s facial video using smartphone camera. In this specific study, we used
smartphone camera to obtain heart rate and respiration rate using smartphone and developed a model to
provide optimal garment suggestion to the customers. The proposed model is described in the following
section.
3.5.1 Video acquisition
Smartphone camera video is used to obtain imaging Photoplethysmogram (ippg) signal (Zhang et. Al.,
2008). In this study, we obtained subject’s heart rate from face video ippg signal. Smartphone camera obtains
video is rgb format, where R is for channel Red, G for Channel Green and B for channel Blue. Therefore,
each frame of the video is essentially an image of RGB format.
In the proposed algorithm, each frame is extracted from the face video to process and obtain the heart rate.
3.5.2 Heart Rate and Respiration Rate acquisition
Facial video has been used earlier to obtain ippg signal in order to extract heart rate and respiration rate
accurately (Sanyal & Nundy, 2018; Favilla, et. al., 2018). In our proposed technique, we incorporate this
method using smartphone camera for a more convenient user platform for online apparel customers. iPPg is
Photoplethysmogram signal obtained from image. The basig of Photoplethysmogram signal acquisition uses
a light source and a photodetector. The light source emits light to a tissue and the photodetector measures
the reflected light from the tissue. The reflected light is proportional to blood volume variations. Usual PPG
sensors use an infrared light emitting diode (IR-LED) or a green LED as the main light source. The green
light sensor is used for calculating the absorption of oxygen in oxygenated blood and deoxygenated blood
(Peng et. al., 2014; Tabei et. al., 2019). A photodetector is used to measure the intensity of reflected light
from the tissue. The blood volume changes can then be measured (calculated) based on the amount of the
detected light. iPPG works on the same principle to obtain the blood volume pulse. Figure 9 shows the ppg
signal extraction from fingertip.Figure 9. PPG signal extraction.
3.5.3. Proposed smartphone app for suggesting garment:
In our method, we developed a smartphone application to automatically obtain the facial video of the
customer in front of the smartphone front camera. The video obtained is converted into ippg signal and
subsequently heart rate and respiration rate (as shown in (Sanyal & Nundy, 2018)). Based on the heart rate,
respiration rate and other parameters (i.e., temperature, location) the user is suggested a fabric type suitable
for him/her. The block diagram in Figure 10 below shows the method.
Figure 10. Block diagram for proposed fabric and fit suggestion smartphone app.
Figure 11 below shows the process of obtaining physiological parameters and garment suggestion process.
c
(a) (b) (c)Figure 11. (a) video acquisition, (b) HR and RR extraction (ROIs represented by yellow boxes), and (c)
Garment fabric and fit Suggestion.
4. Results
4.1 Data Collection
For fabric type and fit for comfort parameter, 11 The subjects were recruited including 6 males
participants and 5 females following the Texas Tech institutional review board (IRB 2020-482). The clothing
condition were: 1) Polyester-Loose Fit, 2) Polyester-Tight Fit, 3) Cotton-Loose Fit, 4) Cotton-Tight Fit. The
subjects were asked to use the fitting room (Figure 12 (a)) to change the clothing. After arriving in the
experiment setting, the subjects were asked to relax for 10 minutes. The IRB approved consent form was
provided to them for approval. After the subjects were ready with their clothing, the Nexus MK-II was
utilized with the electrodes to capture their vital (i.e., heart and respiration signal). For all the subjects, large
size clothing was provided at first. The clothing (Single Jersey Knitted Fabric) was fitted using clips, as
shown in the following Figure 12 (b).
(a) (b)
Figure 12. (a) fitting room, and (b) Heart rate and Respiration rate acquisition using Nexus Mk-II.
4.2. Comfort parameter selection
The comfort of clothing has been measured by the physiological parameters previously [4].Physiological indicators such as heart rate is closely related with user’s comfort. For assessment
of comfort, heart rate and respiration rate are considered in our study.
4.2.1. Heart rate vs. fabric type and fit conditions
Extracted heart rate were used to define a relationship between heart rate and fabric type/ fitting
condition.
Table 3. Heart rate of subjects in different fabric and fitting of clothing.
PLF PTF CLF CTF
sub1 67.66 69.18 63.73 68.26
sub2 81.26 79.58 83.93 84.16
sub3 72.28 73.84 72.62 75.29
sub4 94.23 91.97 91.97 88.27
sub5 69.81 70.78 71.77 70.78
sub6 71.77 73.14 74.9 69.5
sub7 92.53 91.42 92.53 90.35
sub8 95.4 94.81 91.7 91.97
sub9 91.42 91.42 91.97 92.53
sub10 80.41 88.27 83.02 77.96
sub11 76.8 77.96 81.7 83.25
Mean 81.23 82.03 81.80 81.12
Std Dev 10.51 9.68 9.92 9.21
Variance 110.57 93.77 98.50 84.92
Figure 13 below shows the box whisker plot of the HR distribution of the subject.
Figure 13. box whisker plot of Heart rate and clothing criteria.The mean value for each of the clothing criteria doesn’t change the heart rate considerably. The
student t test for two sample assuming equal variance provides no significant difference for any of the criteria.
Table 4. statistical significance test for heart rate.
PLF PTF CLF CTF PLF CLF PTF CTF
Pearson Correlation 0.967475 0.948337 0.962062 0.896792
t stat -0.98097 0.71867 -0.65748 0.701843
P(T<=t) one-tail 0.174871 0.244398 0.262859 0.249393
PLF = Polyester Loose Fit, PTF= Polyester Tight Fit, CLF= Cotton Loose Fit, CTF= Cotton Tight Fit
4.2.2 Respiration rate vs. fabric type and fit conditions
Respiration rates from all the 11 subjects were extracted (See Table 5).
Table 5. Respiration data for subjects in different fabric and fit
PLF PTF CLF CTF
sub1 15.11 15.05 15.11 13.96
sub2 14.32 13.42 14.54 14.76
sub3 13.33 15.80 14.38 14.06
sub4 14.27 12.26 14.76 12.80
sub5 14.11 15.93 11.36 14.11
sub6 12.26 12.22 11.60 12.84
sub7 10.97 11.63 11.92 13.91
sub8 14.49 12.59 12.54 14.54
sub9 17.61 13.81 16.13 16.99
sub10 14.94 14.11 13.81 13.61
sub11 16.41 15.73 13.61 16.55
Mean 14.35 13.86 13.61 14.37
Std Dev 1.72 1.50 1.49 1.26
Variance 2.97 2.26 2.23 1.61
Extracted respiration rate at different fabric type did not show any significant difference. Table 6 shows the
data analysis for respiration signals acquired from 11 subjects.
Table 6. statistical significance test for respiration rate.
PLF PTF CLF CTF PLF CLF PTF CTF
Pearson Correlation 0.460583 0.402891 0.666184 0.370034898
t stat 0.659703 -1.22623 0.869098 -0.812780991
P(T<=t) one-tail 0.258485 0.117178 0.19782 0.212956761
PLF = Polyester Loose Fit, PTF= Polyester Tight Fit, CLF= Cotton Loose Fit, CTF= Cotton Tight Fit4.2.3. Assessment of physiological parameter and comfort
The result is consistent with other previous research (Andreen et. al., 1953; Gavin et. al., 2001;
Wingo & McMurry, 2017) in terms of physiological parameters. Although statistical analysis show
difference in polyester clothing and cotton clothing, the difference is not significant and needs more data to
validate. However, in case of extreme condition (high temperature, humidity, intense exercise) where heart
rate and respiration rate could change drastically and physiological comfort parameters are more dominant,
our model can predict the fabric type (De Sousa et. al., 2014; Li-ling & Xuan, 2010). Especially, exercise
and other extreme parameter (humidity and heat,) different type of fabric (i.e., cotton, wool, viscose) can be
suggested for user’s comfort (De Sousa et. al., 2014).
4.3 Emotional response
Along with quantitative approach of measuring heart rate and respiration rate, this study also
implemented a survey-based approach to examine the emotional responses, as another way to measure the
comfort. In this study, an online survey was conducted to get the consumer demographic and clothing fit
preference data. First, survey questions are to understand the clothing preference and knowledge about the
clothing of the participants, in addition to collect their demographic information. In the demographic survey,
participants were asked to provide their clothing fit and fabric type preference, the tendency of touching
clothes before buying and wearing the garment, as well as preference of fit over weather conditions, comfort,
and size. In addition, one open-ended question was asked to see why they prefer the specific fabric type.
Table ##. Demographic information of the participants of the study
Variables Category Responses
Gender Male 55%
Female 45%
Age Range 27-37
Mean age 29.5
Ethnicity Asian 90%
Caucasian 10%Education Graduate student
Fit preference (Top) Fitted 18%
Semi-fitted 64%
Loose fitted 18%
Fit preference (Bottom) Fitted 9%
Semi-fitted 82%
Loose fitted 9%
A total of 11 participants filled out the survey including the responses about four types of garments
used in this study (i.e., cotton-loose fit, cotton-tight fit, polyester-loose fit, polyester-tight fit). For this study,
participants were recruited from convenience samples. The detailed demographic information is given in the
table## . Regarding the fit preference, the result showed that most of the users preferred semi-fitted garments
followed by loosely fitted garments. In the demographic survey data, seven participants also mentioned the
priority of choosing a garment is for comfort. They also chose cotton fabrics that are more comfortable to
wear probably because it offers of more softness and breathability. On contrary, the style was predominant
to other three participants. Interestingly, these three participants also indicated their inclination toward
choosing a cotton fabric to wear. The responses from these participants show that they are aware of the
comfortability produced from the cotton fabrics. Moreover, one participant mentioned that she would like to
wear the garment made of the mix of both cotton and polyester fabrics. According to the participant, the
reason for this was that polyester will provide strength in the cloths and cotton will provide soft and
breathable features, which shows high-level knowledge about clothing fit and comfortability of the
participants. In regard to the question about the tendency of sensing the hand-feel of the fabrics before buying
and wearing, 10 out of 11 participants mentioned hand-feel of the fabrics help decide the comfortability of
the garment. Based on the participants' responses, weather conditions, size of the garment item, types of
fabrics, and style influence the decision of the participants' preference of ‘what to wear’.
Short survey resultsThis study also conducted a short survey after wearing cotton and polyester t-shirts by the
participants to evaluate their positive and negative emotions. The participants were asked to choose whether
they felt soft, comfortable, relaxed, which were considered as positive emotion after wearing a tee-shirt.
Items such as Stiff, itchy, annoyed, were considered as the negative feeling about the tee-shirt.
The detailed quantitative data of post-survey after the physiological study showed most of the users
are interested in loosely fitted garment regardless of the fabric type (either cotton or polyester) over tightly
fitted garment (see Table. ###). The participants preferred loosely fitted garment probably because
demography and culture played a vital role in the participant preference that they mostly are from Asia,
where loose fit is considered as a traditional part of the fashion (Franks, 2015; Molony, 2007; Tanner, cited
from website).
Also, interestingly, between two loosely fitted garments (i.e., cotton vs. polyester), polyester loose
fitted garment was more preferred to the participants, which is refuted to the survey responses of the
participants saying that they are more likely to wear 100% cotton because of the comfortability, softness, air
permeability, and better breathability. Participants also mentioned if they required strong fabric, they would
choose a polyester fabric. However, the emotional response data about fabric contradicted the responses of
the participants about the type of fabric they found to be comfortable. The probable reasons could be that the
study was conducted during summer, where humidity and controlled temperature in the lab environment
influenced the participant's decision. The thermal conductivity of polyester fiber is lower than that of cotton
fiber (Zhang and Wang, 2018). Therefore, participants might feel comfortable more with a polyester loosely
fitted garment over the cotton one because easy cool air was conducted through the wore polyester product
because of its lower heat conductivity. Furthermore, the moisture regain of the polyester was lower than the
cotton, thus, the polyester might be good to the wearers during the workout or in the sport’s relevant activities
(Hassan et. al., 2012).Figure 14. Emotional responses of the participants
5. Discussion
This study provided a comprehensive understanding of fabric and fit types of garments that can
provide physiological and emotional comfort while wearing those garments. As fit and comfort are important
factors affecting consumer’s clothing choice, the findings of this study contributed to textile and clothing
field by providing a unique way to measure both physiological and emotional parameters for comfort. For
the physiological responses, it did not show statistically significant difference in the different fabrics (i.e.,
cotton and polyester) and fit types (i.e., tight and loose) of the garment. This is probably because the
experiment was conducted in a lab setting with a controlled environment (e.g., temperature). However, a
small change in respiration and heart rate that might be statistically non-significant statistical could be life-
threatening where breathability and moisture absorbency of clothes play a vital role in determining comfort.
Although the differences of emotional responses based on the fabric type was not found, the differences were
found between the fit type (i.e., loose-fit vs. tight-fit). Since loose-fit garment allows more air circulation
and are thermally comfortable, and garments made from natural fibers such as cotton, flax, and hemp
products provide more breathability, for daily use, these would be more suitable for the users (Li-Ling and
Xuan, 2010). Our finding is in line with the previous research, where researchers showed that non-
hygroscopic garments are more prone to producing high heat rate from human body metabolism and sweatfrom the body (Ha et. al., 1995; Tokura et. al., 1987). From this, for resting and non-laborious works, we
recommend natural fiber-based garments and loose-fitted produce to provide more breathable advantages to
the human body. However, for laborious works where more sweats might generate, we recommend fabrics
that can dry faster, so the human body won’t be under risk of developing sweat dermatitis (Soni, et. al.,
2019). Furthermore, based on the types of work and physical activities, wearers may choose different types
of garments. For example, 100% polyester provides better moisture management for athletes where high
heat and sweat are released from the body. Thus, high moisture absorbency and low heat conductivity (such
as cotton and other natural fibers) might be harmful to the wearers (Hassan et. al., 2012). For general wearing
purposes, several factors wearer needs to consider before selecting any garment including weather, seasons,
amount of associated physical activities, and how long time that needs to be worn, among others.
Considering the emotional responses for comfort, the rough surface of the garment might create a
more negative feeling of wearing it. Most of the participants in our study mentioned their tendency to touch
the fabric to get the hand feel of the garment. Therefore, providing a better tactile experience to the garment
could be challenging, but necessary to arouse positive sensory emotions in the consumers. However,
excessive dryness in both skin and fabric surfaces might form static electricity as well (Hearle & Morton,
2008). Additional post-processing or treatment may require providing better hand feel comfort and
eliminating the possibility of static electricity formation. This also supports the previously conducted
research, which showed the necessity of fabric surface modification considering application areas (Sztandera
et. al., 2013). This result emphasizes providing information to the consumers regarding the tactile feel of the
fabric with currently available information would benefit the wearers.
Implications
The finding of this study highlighted the importance of clothing selection based on weather
conditions and types of work that wearers intend to do while wearing, so the wearers will get a better heart
and respiration rate. Nowadays the availability of different wearables allows for gathering information on
health data. Based on the outcomes of this study, different application software is possible to develop thatwould be linked with the weather data and health data. Subsequently, the app will generate information and
recommend the best clothes that fit the users. Furthermore, for the online shoppers, manufacturers may
include information about the fabric and fit types along with ‘when to wear’ information such as weather,
type of work, and breathability, among others. The current research finding provided a simplified way of
how emotional response data can be useful along with body data to generate generic clothing and health
information for the wearers. Further, a multi-disciplinary research approach can disclose more psychological
aspects of clothing fit and comfort for different ages, genders, and generations.
Limitations and future research direction
One of the limitations of this research is that it was conducted in a lab setting using convenient
samples consisting of only 10 people, however, in the future, researchers may recruit more participants from
different ethnicity, culture, and background. Moreover, different variables like lab environment, study time
and season, and during different works may provide different results. In the future, researchers can conduct
a qualitative approach to provide different fabrics feeling and the relation of the fabrics, heart rate, respiration
rate, skin irritation, and amount of sweat released from the body wearing those cloths, among others.
References
Alexander, M., Connell, L. J., & Presley, A. B. (2005). Clothing fit preferences of young female adult
consumers. International Journal of Clothing Science and Technology.
Andreen, J. H., Gibson, J. W., & Wetmore, O. C. (1953). Fabric evaluations based on physiological
measurements of comfort. Textile Research Journal, 23(1), 11-22.
Annapoorani, S. G. (2018). Sustainable Textile Fibers. In Sustainable Innovations in Textile Fibres (pp. 1-
30). Springer, Singapore.
Aisyah, G. S., & Tajuddin, R. M. (2014). Trends in natural fibre production and its future.
Apurba, D., & Alagirusamy, R. (2010). Science in Clothing Comfort. Woodhead Publishing Limited.Ciesielska-Wrobel, I., Mokwiński, M., & Orłowska-Majdak, M. (2009). Influence of different kind of
clothing material on selected cardiovascular, respiratory and psychomotor parameters during moderate
physical exercise. International Journal of Occupational Medicine and Environmental Health, 22(3), 215-
226.
Clore, G., Palmer, J., Gratch, J.: Affective guidance of intelligent agents: How emotion controls cognition.
Proceedings: Cognitive Systems Research 10, 21–30 (2009).
Cook, J. G. (1984). Handbook of textile fibres: man-made fibres. Elsevier.
Cooper, S. J. R., Cant, R. P., & Sparkes, L. M. (2014). Respiratory rate records: the repeated rate?. Journal
of clinical nursing, 23(9-10), 1236-1238.
Dehghan, H., Parvari, R., Habibi, E., & Maracy, M. R. (2014). Effect of fabric stuff of work clothing on
the physiological strain index at hot conditions in the climatic chamber. International Journal of
Environmental Health Engineering, 3(1), 14.
De Sousa, J., Cheatham, C., & Wittbrodt, M. (2014). The effects of a moisture-wicking fabric shirt on the
physiological and perceptual responses during acute exercise in the heat. Applied
ergonomics, 45(6), 1447-1453.
El Nemr, A. (2012). From natural to synthetic fibers. Textiles: types, uses and production methods. Nova
Science Publishers, New York, USA, pp. 1À152.
Essick, G.K., James, A., McGlone, F.P.: Psychophysical assessment of the affective components of non-
painful touch. NeuroReport 10, 2083–2087 (1999).
Essick, G.K., McGlone, F., Dancer, C., Fabricant, D., Ragin, Y., Phillips, N., Jones, T., Guest, S.:
Quantitative assessment of pleasant touch. Neuroscience & Biobehavioral Reviews 34(2), 192–203
(2010), Touch, Temperature, Pain/Itch and Pleasure.
Favilla, R., Zuccala, V. C., & Coppini, G. (2018). Heart rate and heart rate variability from single-channel
video and ICA integration of multiple signals. IEEE journal of biomedical and health
informatics, 23(6), 2398-2408.Foysal, K. H., Chang, H. J., Bruess, F., & Chong, J. W. (2021). SmartFit: Smartphone application for
garment fit detection. Electronics, 10(1), 97.
Gajda, R. (2020). Is continuous ECG recording on heart rate monitors the most expected function by
endurance athletes, coaches, and doctors?. Diagnostics, 10(11), 867.
Gavin, T. P., Babington, J. P., Harms, C. A., Ardelt, M. E., Tanner, D. A., & Stager, J. M. (2001). Clothing
fabric does not affect thermoregulation during exercise in moderate heat. Medicine and science in
sports and exercise, 33(12), 2124-2130.
Hearle, J. W., & Morton, W. E. (2008). Physical properties of textile fibres. Elsevier.
Hassan, M., Qashqary, K., Hassan, H. A., Shady, E., & Alansary, M. (2012). Influence of sportswear fabric
properties on the health and performance of athletes. Fibres & Textiles in Eastern Europe.
Kaiser, S. B. (1997). The social psychology of clothing: Symbolic appearances in context. Fairchild Books.
Kasambala, J., Kempen, E., & Pandarum, R. (2016). Determining female consumers’ perceptions of
garment fit, personal values and emotions when considering garment sizing. International Journal
of Consumer Studies, 40(2), 143-151.
Kim, J., & Damhorst, M. L. (2010). Effects of level of internet retailer’s service quality on perceived apparel
quality, perceived service quality, perceived value, satisfaction, and behavioral intentions toward
an internet retailer. Clothing and Textiles Research Journal, 28(1), 56-73.
Kwon, A., Kato, M., Kawamura, H., Yanai, Y., & Tokura, H. (1998). Physiological significance of
hydrophilic and hydrophobic textile materials during intermittent exercise in humans under the
influence of warm ambient temperature with and without wind. European journal of applied
physiology and occupational physiology, 78(6), 487-493.
Kumpikaite, E., Ragaisiene, A., & Barburski, M. (2010). Comparable analysis of the end-use properties of
woven fabrics with fancy yarns. Part I: Abrasion resistance and air permeability. Fibres & Textiles
in Eastern Europe, 18(3), 80.
Li-ling, Z., & Xuan, W. Wetting Balance of Fabric Thermal and Moisture.Lin, T., Akimobo, M., Shigeo, M.: Using Subjective and Physiological Measures to Evaluate Audience-
participating Movie Experience. In: AVI 2008, Napoli, Italy, pp. 28– 30 (2008).
Mert, E., Böhnisch, S., Psikuta, A., Bueno, M. A., & Rossi, R. M. (2016). Contribution of garment fit and
style to thermal comfort at the lower body. International journal of biometeorology, 60(12), 1995-
2004.
Apurba, D., & Alagirusamy, R. (2010). Science in clothing comfort. Woodhead Publishing Limited.
Mourad, M. M., Elshakankery, M. H., & Almetwally, A. A. (2012). Physical and stretch properties of
woven cotton fabrics containing different rates of spandex. Journal of American Science, 8(4), 567-
572.
Mura, G. (2008). Wearable technologies for emotion communication.
Nicolò, A., Massaroni, C., Schena, E., & Sacchetti, M. (2020). The importance of respiratory rate
monitoring: From healthcare to sport and exercise. Sensors, 20(21), 6396.
Oğulata, R. T., & Mavruz, S. (2010). Investigation of porosity and air permeability values of plain knitted
fabrics.
Parvinzadeh, M. (2012). Surface modification of synthetic fibers to improve performance: recent
approaches. Global J Phys Chem, 3(2).
Parvari, R. A., Aghaei, H. A., Dehghan, H., Khademi, A., Maracy, M. R., & Dehghan, S. F. (2015). The
effect of fabric type of common iranian working clothes on the induced cardiac and physiological
strain under heat stress. Archives of environmental & occupational health, 70(5), 272-278.
Peng, F., Wang, W., & Liu, H. (2014, October). Development of a reflective PPG signal sensor. In 2014
7th International Conference on Biomedical Engineering and Informatics (pp. 612-616). IEEE.
Raeve, A. D., Vasile, S., & Cools, J. (2018). Selected factors influencing wear comfort of clothing: case
studies. J Textile Eng Fashion Technol, 4(1), 66-71.
Rahman, O. (2012). The influence of visual and tactile inputs on denim jeans evaluation. International
Journal of Design, 6(1), 11-25.Rakib, M. A. N., Islam, S. R., & Islam, M. O. (2020). Effect of Elastane on Physical Properties of 1× 1 Knit
Rib Fabrics. Journal of Donghua University (English Edition).
Rolfe, S. (2019). The importance of respiratory rate monitoring. British Journal of Nursing, 28(8), 504-
508.
Sanyal, S., & Nundy, K. K. (2018). Algorithms for monitoring heart rate and respiratory rate from the video
of a user’s face. IEEE Journal of translational engineering in health and medicine, 6, 1-11.
Tabei, F., Zaman, R., Foysal, K. H., Kumar, R., Kim, Y., & Chong, J. W. (2019). A novel diversity method
for smartphone camera-based heart rhythm signals in the presence of motion and noise
artifacts. PloS one, 14(6), e0218248.
Wang, F., Shi, W., Lu, Y., Song, G., Rossi, R. M., & Anaheim, S. (2016). Effects of moisture content and
clothing fit on clothing apparent ‘wet’thermal insulation: a thermal manikin study. Textile research
journal, 86(1), 57-63.
Wingo, J. E., & McMurray, R. G. (2017). Cardiovascular and thermoregulatory responses to treadmill
running while wearing shirts with different fabric composition.
Wu, D., Wu, T. I., Singh, H., Padilla, S., Atkinson, D., Bianchi-Berthouze, N., ... & Baurley, S. (2011,
October). The affective experience of handling digital fabrics: tactile and visual cross-modal
effects. In International Conference on Affective Computing and Intelligent Interaction (pp. 427-
436). Springer, Berlin, Heidelberg.
Zimniewska, M., Kozlowski, R., & Rawluk, M. (2004). Natural vs. Man-Made Fibres-Physiological
Viewpoint. Journal of Natural Fibers, 1(2), 69-81.
Zhang, C., & Wang, F. (2020). Comfort management of fibrous materials. Handbook of Fibrous Materials,
857-887.