A Survey on Small-Scale Testbeds for Connected
and Automated Vehicles and Robot Swarms
Armin Mokhtarian1 , Jianye Xu1 , Patrick Scheffe1 , Maximilian Kloock1 , Simon Scha¨fer1 , Heeseung
Bang2 , Viet-Anh Le2 , Sangeet Ulhas3 , Student Members, IEEE,
Johannes Betz4 , Sean Wilson5 , Spring Berman3 , Liam Paull6 , Members, IEEE,
Amanda Prorok7 , Bassam Alrifaee8 , Senior Members, IEEE.
Abstract—Connected and automated vehicles and robot transition, sustainability, and power and resource management.
swarms hold transformative potential for enhancing safety,
IndexTerms—Small-ScaleTestbeds,ConnectedandAutomated
efficiency, and sustainability in the transportation and man-
Vehicles, Robot Swarms, Survey.
ufacturing sectors. Extensive testing and validation of these
technologies is crucial for their deployment in the real world.
While simulations are essential for initial testing, they often
havelimitationsincapturingthecomplexdynamicsofreal-world I. INTRODUCTION
interactions.Thislimitationunderscorestheimportanceofsmall-
scale testbeds. These testbeds provide a realistic, cost-effective, Connected and Automated Vehicles (CAVs) and Robot
andcontrolledenvironmentfortestingandvalidatingalgorithms,
Swarms (RSs) can significantly improve the safety, efficiency,
acting as an essential intermediary between simulation and full-
and sustainability of the transportation and manufacturing
scale experiments.
sectors.Yet,thedeploymentandintegrationofthesetechnolo-
Thisworkservestofacilitateresearchers’effortsinidentifying
existing small-scale testbeds suitable for their experiments and gies necessitate rigorous testing and validation to ensure they
provide insights for those who want to build their own. In perform well under varied real-world conditions. Although
addition, it delivers a comprehensive survey of the current simulations facilitate rapid testing and validation, they suffer
landscape of these testbeds. We derive 62 characteristics of
from limitations in replicating complex real-world conditions
testbeds based on the well-known sense-plan-act paradigm and
and uncertainties, rendering the results possibly unreliable. In
offer an online table comparing 22 small-scale testbeds based
on these characteristics. The online table is hosted on our contrast, full-scale experiments, though providing trustworthy
designatedpublicwebpagewww.cpm-remote.de/testbeds,andwe results, can be prohibitively expensive, time-consuming, and
invite testbed creators and developers to contribute to it. We difficult to reproduce. Small-scale testbeds aim to bridge the
closely examine nine testbeds in this paper, demonstrating how
gapbetweensimulationsandfull-scaleexperimentsbyprovid-
the derived characteristics can be used to present testbeds.
ingcost-effectiveandcontrolledenvironments.Thesetestbeds
Furthermore, we discuss three ongoing challenges concerning
small-scaletestbedsthatweidentified,i.e.,small-scaletofull-scale can simulate real-world scenarios with varying degrees of
complexity and realism for testing and validating algorithms
1EmbeddedSoftware(Informatik11),RWTHAachenUniversity,Germany. under different conditions.
{lastname}@embedded.rwth-aachen.de. Testbed affiliation: Throughoutthispaper,wewillusethetermtestbedtorefer
CPMLab.
to small-scale testbeds and the term CAV/RS to denote the
2Department of Mechanical Engineering, University of Delaware, USA.
{heeseung,vietale}@udel.edu.Testbedaffiliation:IDS3C. domain of CAVs and RSs. In addition, we will use the term
3School for Engineering of Matter, Transport and Energy, Arizona State agent to refer to a vehicle in CAVs or a robot in RSs.
University,USA.{sulhas, spring.berman}@asu.edu.Testbed
Surveys of small-scale testbeds for CAV/RS are essential
affiliation:co-creatorsofCHARTOPOLIS.
4Professorship of Autonomous Vehicle Systems, TUM School of for helping researchers understand the current landscape of
Engineering and Design, Technical University Munich, Germany; technologiesandmethodologiesinthisdomain.Thesesurveys
Munich Institute of Robotics and Machine Intelligence (MIRMI).
facilitate the sharing of knowledge and experiences, enabling
johannes.betz@tum.de.Testbedaffiliation:F1TENTH.
5Georgia Tech Research Institute (GTRI), School of Electrical researchers to build upon existing foundations and avoid
and Computer Engineering, Georgia Institute of Technology, USA. redundant efforts. However, existing survey papers often lack
sean.wilson@gtri.gatech.edu.Testbedaffiliation:Robotarium.
comprehensiveness regarding the characteristics of testbeds,
6DepartmentofComputerScienceandOperationsResearch,Universite´de
Montre´al,Canada.paulll@iro.umontreal.ca.Testbedaffiliation: primarily focusing on research areas and only certain char-
co-creatorofDuckietown. acteristics. For example, while [1] provides a comprehensive
7Department of Computer Science and Technology, University of Cam- overview of simulators, emulators, and testbeds for vehicular
bridge, UK. asp45@cam.ac.uk. Testbed affiliation: creator of Cam-
adhocnetworks,itlacksgranulardetailsonspecificcharacter-
bridgeMinicar.
8DepartmentofAerospaceEngineering,UniversityoftheBundeswehrMu- istics of testbeds, such as those related to physical properties
nich, Germany. bassam.alrifaee@unibw.de. Testbed affiliation: and hardware specifications. Moreover, they may capture a
creatorofCPMLab.
snapshot of the current landscape of existing testbeds at the
WeacknowledgethefinancialsupportforthisprojectbytheCollaborative time, but the state of the art is continually evolving. This
ResearchCenter/Transregio339oftheGermanResearchFoundation(DFG). deficiency hinders researchers’ abilities to make informed
decisions about which testbeds might best meet their specific
DOI:10.13140/RG.2.2.16176.74248©2024.ThisworkhasbeensubmittedtotheIEEERobotics&AutomationMagazineforpossiblepublication.Copyrightmaybetransferred
withoutnotice,afterwhichthisversionmaynolongerbeaccessible.
4202
guA
62
]OR.sc[
1v99141.8042:viXraFig. 1: Collage showcasing diverse testbeds in the realm of Connected and Automated Vehicles and Robot Swarms.
needs and objectives, or gain insights for building their own precision and range of actions an agent can perform, thereby
testbeds. impacting the effectiveness of its response to the planned
Recognizing these limitations, we identify a need for a strategies in dynamic environments.
new survey paper that comprehensively captures the latest
developments in small-scale testbeds and has a designated A. Contributions
website to update outdated information. This paper aims
This work serves to aid researchers, regardless of their
to offer a structured and up-to-date overview, detailing the
experience level in CAV/RS, in quickly identifying and se-
capabilities of various testbeds and assisting researchers in
lecting suitable testbeds that align with their experimental
selecting the most appropriate ones for their experiments, or
requirements.Italsoservesasaresourceforthoseconsidering
conveying insights for them to build their own testbeds.
building new testbeds by highlighting essential software and
Advancements in the CAV/RS domain are facilitated by hardware considerations and ongoing challenges with small-
testbeds that focus on particular use cases. Each testbed must scale testbeds. The contribution of this work is fourfold.
meet distinct requirements to support the development and • It derives 62 characteristics of small-scale testbeds based
testingoftheseusecaseseffectively.Adoptingthewell-known on the sense-plan-act paradigm.
sense-plan-act paradigm [2], we divide the functional compo- • It introduces a continuously updated online table on
nentsofthesetestbedsintosensing,planning,andacting,each a dedicated webpage1 [3] that compares 22 existing
necessitatingspecifictestingneeds.Further,wederivecharac- testbeds [4]–[25] using the derived characteristics.
teristics to describe whether and how a specific requirement • It details these characteristics through an in-depth explo-
is fulfilled. The significance of certain characteristics varies ration of nine selected testbeds [4]–[12].
depending on the researcher’s specific focus. For instance, • It discusses three identified ongoing challenges with
when considering sensing, information about the available small-scale testbeds, i.e., small-scale to full-scale transi-
sensorsisimportant,asitdescribesthehardwareavailablefor tion,sustainability,andpowerandresourcemanagement,
taskslikelocalizationandobjectidentification.Incontrast,for each illustrated with specific examples from the selected
aresearcherconcentratingonplanning,informationonsensors testbeds.
maybeirrelevant,aslongasthecurrentlocationofanagentis
This online table [3] allows ongoing contributions that keep
accessible.Inthiscase,insteadofsensors,acharacteristicsuch
the information on the testbeds up to date to benefit the
as agent count would serve as a more important factor, as it
research community working with small-scale testbeds for
impactsthecomplexityandscalabilityofplanningalgorithms.
CAV/RS.Inaddition,weinvitetestbedcreatorsanddevelopers
In terms of acting, characteristics like agent count are not as
important as actuator hardware, which directly influences the 1www.cpm-remote.de/testbeds
2to contribute to the online table. Furthermore, the online
table additionally includes and compares three commercially
available robots [26]–[28] that are widely adopted in building
RS testbeds. Figure 1 displays a collage of some testbeds
included in the online table. Figure 2 shows a screenshot of
the webpage hosting the online table.
B. Related Work
A recent review by Caleffi et al. [29] summarizes existing
literature on CAV testbeds. While it identifies trends, such as
the recent increase in publications and the predominant focus
on software, it does not conduct a comparative analysis. De-
spite various surveys that have categorized testbeds, a unified
and detailed comparative analysis remains absent, particularly
for recent developments. The most recent comparative paper
dates back to 2013 [30], in which the authors focus on RSs
and mainly describe two approaches to classify the testbeds.
The first approach is a classification by level of complexity,
distinguishing between (i) “non-integrated,” e.g., multi-robot
Fig.2:Ascreenshotofthepubliclyaccessibleonlinetable[3]
testbeds, (ii) “partially integrated,” e.g., multi-robot testbeds
that lists all the testbeds investigated in this study.
with sensor networks, and (iii) “highly integrated,” e.g., fed-
erated testbeds. In this context, integrated refers to the level
of coordination and combination among different components
currently contains 22 different testbeds. For the purposes
or subsystems within the testbed environment. The second
of our discussion in this paper, we selected nine testbeds
approach is a classification according to (i) range of sup-
to focus on in more detail: The Cyber-Physical Mobility
ported experiments (application-driven, functionality-driven
Lab (CPM Lab) [4], F1TENTH [5], the Robotarium [6],
and general-purpose), (ii) architecture flexibility, (iii) target
IDS3C [7], the Cambridge Minicar [8], Duckietown [9],
users of the testbed, (iv) proximity between testbed experi-
CHARTOPOLIS[10],AugmentedRealityforKilobots(ARK)
ments and the final application, and (v) use of the testbed
[11], and Kilogrid [12]. The selection of these testbeds is
in real deployments (such as industrial sites and urban envi-
basedontwofactors.Firstly,theco-authorspossesssubstantial
ronments). However, both approaches describe testbeds on a
familiarity with these testbeds, given their roles as developers
rather abstract level and do not adequately describe detailed
or creators of these testbeds. Secondly, these testbeds exhibit
characteristics.
diverse characteristics, which provide varied insights into the
Recent studies have started to address these shortcomings
sense-plan-actparadigm.Thisdiversityiscrucialforacompre-
by surveying the latest developments of small-scale agents.
hensive analysis of the paradigm across different contexts and
For instance, [31] provides a comprehensive survey on recent
applications. Note that we consider the online table a living
developments in autonomous driving with small-scale cars,
part of this paper. Therefore, the absence of other testbeds in
covering aspects such as widely used small-scale testbeds
the printed or digital version of the paper does not suggest
for CAVs, autonomous-driving tasks (e.g., localization, lane
they are of lesser importance than the selected ones. Rather,
keeping,andcollisionavoidance),andcommonlyusedsensors
the chosen testbeds are well-suited to illustrate the specific
with their application scenarios. We have noticed that recent
points and analyses discussed in this paper.
papers discussing small-scale testbeds often feature tables in
Among the 22 selected testbeds, only seven of them are
their related work section that compare testbeds. However,
RS testbeds, i.e., [6], [11], [12], [16], [18], [21], [25]. To
thesetablesvarysignificantlyinbothcoveredtestbedsandthe
balance this disproportion, we add three swarm robots to our
level of detail provided. For example, the tables in both [31]
online table [3]. Although they are not testbeds, they have
and[32]containinformationaboutsensors,computationunits,
already been widely used to develop RS testbeds and hold
agent dynamics, and simulation platforms. While the table in
great potential to develop new RS testbeds. These robots are
[32] additionally provides details on cost, V2X support, and
Khepera [26], [33], e-Puck [27], [34], and Kilobot [28], [35].
API support, the table in [31] includes information on the
We also list one of the NVIDIA robots, NVIDIA JetBot,
agent’s size, the software platform, and whether the testbed is
in the online table, which is widely used for CAV research
open-source or commercial.
and education. In the following sections, we discuss the
To address the redundancy observed in the literature and
characteristics derived from the sense-plan-act paradigm.
unify the fragmented information available, we aim to pro-
vide a relatively comprehensive, up-to-date online table that
compares existing testbeds for CAV/RS. To maintain the
II. CHARACTERISTICSOFTESTBEDS
relevance and accuracy of the information, we are committed In this section, we present and explore a subset of the 62
to regularly updating our online table [3]. The online table derivedcharacteristics,aimingtoofferanoverviewanddiscuss
3someofthekeycharacteristics.First,wewillintroducegeneral Computation models represent another vital aspect of the
characteristicsthatcannotbespecificallyassignedtothesense, software characteristic. Some testbeds employ deterministic
plan,oractdomains.Subsequently,wewilldelveintothechar- computation models such as Finite State Machines for soft-
acteristics that are unique to each of these domains, providing ware design, which involve predictable and reproducible out-
a more detailed examination of their specific attributes. For comes based on defined input conditions. While deterministic
an extensive list containing all 62 characteristics, please refer models are particularly suitable for experiments that require
to our online table [3]. Note that the characteristics are based precise and reliable results, probabilistic computation models
solely on objective information and are not intended to rank introduce randomness and uncertainty into the experiment
testbeds. outcomes, allowing researchers to explore scenarios where
stochastic factors play a significant role. Hybrid models com-
A. General Characteristics bine both deterministic and probabilistic approaches, provid-
Theprimarydesignobjectiveformosttestbedsistosupport ing a balance between predictability and stochasticity in the
users in testing algorithms within a small-scale, controlled experimental outcomes.
environment. Despite the diversity in the specific purposes 3) Documentation: The documentation characteristic of a
of individual testbeds, commonalities exist among them. This testbed refers to the availability and quality of accompanying
sectionaimstooutlinethegeneralcharacteristicsbyhighlight- documentationthatdescribesthetestbed’sfeatures,functional-
ing these shared features. ities,usageguidelines,andotherrelevantinformation.Itplays
1) Focus: The focus characteristic encapsulates a short, a critical role in the selection of a testbed, as it significantly
high-level description of a testbed. Typically included in the impactstheuser’sabilitytounderstand,utilize,andeffectively
introduction to the testbed, it describes the specific use cases conduct experiments within the given environment.
thatthetestbedisdesignedtoaddress.Thisdescriptionserves
4) Accessibility: Theaccessibilityofatestbedreferstothe
as a foundational overview, providing a quick insight into
ease with which interested parties can access and utilize the
the primary objectives of the testbed. In the context of our
facility for conducting experiments. This subsection explores
exploration, we leverage this characteristic to explain the
different strategies employed to make testbeds accessible.
use cases investigated, the methodologies employed, and the
Some testbeds provide open-source blueprints that docu-
insights garnered from the experiments conducted within the
ment their design, construction processes, component spec-
testbed. This enables an understanding of testbeds’ overarch-
ifications, and operational procedures in detail, enabling re-
ingpurpose.Furthermore,testbedscanconcentrateonspecific
production of their setups. Additionally, some testbeds of-
problems within an area of focus. For example, within the
fer a ready-to-use setup for purchase, which includes all
focus on multi-agent coordination, specific attention could
necessary hardware and software, allowing users to quickly
be given to traffic management, communication, and human-
begin experiments without the need for extensive technical
autonomy interactions.
expertise or complex construction. Such testbeds streamline
2) Software: Thediversityinsoftwarelanguages,architec-
the experimentation process, particularly for researchers who
tures, frameworks, and computation models across different
maynothavethenecessaryexpertiseorresourcestobuildtheir
testbeds reflects the versatility of the testbeds.
owntestbedfromscratch.Therefore,bothopen-sourcesharing
Different testbeds may utilize various software components
and ready-to-use options significantly broaden the testbed’s
depending on factors such as the targeted application domain,
accessibility to a diverse range of researchers.
the availability of libraries and tools, and the preferences of
To accommodate various user needs, testbeds may offer
the researchers involved. For instance, some testbeds may use
walk-in and remote-access options. Walk-in access allows
Python, a widely adopted language known for its simplicity
userstophysicallyengagewiththetestbed,fosteringdirectin-
and extensive scientific computing libraries. Others may use
teractionandhands-onexperiments.Incontrast,remote-access
languagessuchasC++forperformanceoptimizationorMAT-
capabilities enable users to control and monitor experiments
LAB for domain-specific functionalities.
from any location via web-based interfaces or specialized
Another dimension of the software characteristic is the se-
software,makingthetestbedaccessibletoresearcherswhoare
lection of a software architecture. The architecture determines
geographicallydistantorfacemobilityconstraints.Inaddition,
howthesoftwarecomponentsareorganizedandcommunicate
remote access represents a cost-effective method for utilizing
with each other. Examples include service-oriented architec-
testbed resources. Therefore, both walk-in and remote-access
tures,client-serverarchitectures,peer-to-peerarchitecturesand
options enhance the accessibility of testbeds, ensuring the
event-drivenarchitectures.Thechoiceofsoftwarearchitecture
efficient utilization of testbed resources and expanding the
impactsfactorslikescalability,fault-tolerance,modularity,and
potential user base.
interoperability within the testbed.
Frameworks also contribute to the software characteristic 5) Scenario: A scenario refers to a specific set of condi-
of testbeds. Frameworks provide reusable software compo- tions,events,andinteractions thatareimplementedwithinthe
nents, libraries, and tools that simplify the implementation of testbed. Scenarios often involve the deployment of different
software. Testbeds can leverage existing frameworks tailored maps and the presence of diverse actors (e.g., pedestrians,
for specific purposes, for example, simulation frameworks, obstacles, etc.), each contributing to the complexity and re-
Internet of Things (IoT) frameworks, or machine learning alism of the experimental setup. The choice of scenarios
frameworks. enables researchers to address specific research questions.
4Therefore, the selection of a scenario directly correlates with environmental sensing. These sensory inputs are used within
the researchers’ focus. the plan domain to enable effective planning.
Inadditiontotheabove-mentionedcharacteristics,thereare
other detailed general characteristics of each testbed in our
online table [3], such as the main references related to the C. Plan-Driven Characteristics
testbed, the acquisition cost (if commercially available), and
The plan domain plays a crucial role in enabling CAV/RS
the number of search results in Google Scholar using specific
togenerateappropriateactionsbasedontheinformationgath-
keywords that include the testbed name.
ered from the environment. This section focuses on deriving
characteristics related to the plan domain that can be used to
B. Sense-Driven Characteristics evaluate and compare testbeds.
1) Testbed Architecture: The testbed architecture refers to
In the sense-plan-act paradigm, the sense domain primarily
the overall design and structure of the experimental setup.
focuses on environmental sensing and collection of relevant
It encompasses the physical layout, the presence of specific
data via sensors. The key characteristics defining this domain
infrastructure elements, and the integration of hardware and
are outlined as follows.
software components. When evaluating a testbed for the plan
1) Sensors: Sensors form the foundation of perceiving the
domain, researchers should consider whether the architecture
environment in a testbed. Different sensors, such as cameras,
supports the execution and evaluation of planning algorithms
LiDAR, radar, and ultrasonic sensors, provide distinct infor-
and strategies effectively. For reproducible experiments, a
mationaboutthesurroundingobjectsandtheirproperties.The
deterministic timing of the testbed components is required,
availability and quality of sensors in a testbed greatly affect
i.e., the clocks of all computing and sensing devices have to
the richness and accuracy of the perceptual data collected.
be synchronized.
Researchers can evaluate the sensor suite and its capabilities
2) Distributed Computation: In many real-world scenar-
to determine whether the testbed adequately supports their
ios, CAV/RS operate in distributed environments, where the
sensing needs.
processes are spread out across multiple nodes. Assessing the
2) Positioning System: Many applications benefit from
capability of a testbed to handle distributed computation is
havingaccurateandreliablepositioninginformation.Atestbed
essential, as it determines whether the testbed can efficiently
couldincludeanaccuratepositioningsystemsuchasanindoor
managecoordinationandcommunicationamongagentsduring
motion capture system, which is capable of precisely tracking
the planning phase.
the positions and orientations of agents.
3) Accuracy: The testbed’s sensors supply perceptual in- 3) Computation Unit: Computation units are tasked with
formation. The accuracy of this information is an aspect to processing sensor data and executing complex algorithms,
consider. It relates to how closely the sensed data represents makingthemintegralcomponentsintestbeds.Theyareessen-
the actual state of the environment. Researchers should con- tial due to their role in handling real-time planning processes,
sidertheaccuracyofindividualsensorsandtheoverallsensing ensuring operational efficiency and reliability in dynamic
system to assess whether the testbed meets their specific environments. Additionally, the adaptability of computation
accuracy requirements. units to new software and technologies is crucial for future-
4) Traffic Management Infrastructure: Traffic manage- proofingtestbeds.Thus,computationunitsshouldbecarefully
ment infrastructure includes elements such as road networks, considered when selecting or developing testbeds.
traffic signs, traffic lights, and other components that simulate 4) Computation Schemes: The computation scheme refers
real-world traffic infrastructure. A testbed with a comprehen- to the methodology or algorithms employed for planning
sive traffic management infrastructure enables researchers to within the testbed. Distributed planning algorithms follow
study and evaluate the performance of their algorithms and different computation schemes, e.g., sequential, parallel, and
systems in realistic traffic conditions. hybridcomputations.Hybridcomputationsinvolveacombina-
5) Surroundings: The environmental surroundings of a tionofsequentialandparallelprocessingmethodstooptimize
testbed contribute to its suitability for experiments. The char- planning within a testbed.
acteristics of the surroundings, such as urban, suburban, or 5) Human-Robot Interaction: In many real-world scenar-
rural settings, can influence the complexity of the testbed. ios, CAV/RS coexist and interact with humans in shared en-
For instance, an urban testbed might offer challenges related vironments. Evaluating the testbed’s characteristics related to
to high-density traffic, while a suburban testbed could have human-robotinteractionisessentialforassessingitssuitability
different obstacles and road conditions. for scenarios involving mixed traffic. Characteristics such as
Other sense-driven characteristics in addition to the ones the availability of realistic human models, capabilities for
described above are available in our online table [3]. We also simulating human behaviors, or an interface for humans to
expand on several characteristics to provide in-depth informa- interact with the testbed are important considerations.
tion.Forinstance,wedistinguishbetweenon-agentandglobal 6) Different Kinds of Agents: Assessing the ability of a
sensors, offering a more comprehensive understanding of the testbed to accommodate heterogeneous agents is vital when
sensor suite employed within a testbed. studyingCAV/RS.Differenttypesofagentsmayhavedistinct
Thedetailedexplorationofsense-drivencharacteristicspro- sensing and acting capabilities, leading to diverse planning
videsasolidfoundationforassessingatestbed’scapabilitiesin requirements. A testbed should support the integration of
5TABLE I: Main research areas of the 22 testbeds.
various agent models, allowing researchers to evaluate plan-
ning algorithms for scenarios involving agents with different
capabilities, such as cars and trucks.
7) Agent Count: The number of agents in a testbed is
an important characteristic, particularly in scenarios involving
transportation or traffic management. Evaluating the agent
count characteristic involves understanding the testbed’s ca-
CPMLab[4] ✓ ✓
pacity to manage multiple agents concurrently, the scalability
F1TENTH[5] ✓ ✓ ✓
of planning algorithms with increasing agent count, and the
Robotarium[6] ✓ ✓
impact on the planning system’s performance as the number
of agents increases. IDS3C[7] ✓ ✓
CambridgeMinicar[8] ✓ ✓
Duckietown[9] ✓ ✓
D. Act-Driven Characteristics
CHARTOPOLIS[10] ✓ ✓ ✓
Thissubsectionaggregatesinformationrelatedtotranslating
ARK[11] ✓ ✓
aplanintoaction,whichinCAV/RSapplicationsoftenentails
Kilogrid[12] ✓ ✓
trajectory following by agents. In a hierarchical architecture
such as the sense-plan-act paradigm, planning is a separate CambridgeRoboMaster[13] ✓ ✓
layer from trajectory following. An agent model links the two Go-CHART[14] ✓ ✓
layers by representing constraints on the agent dynamics. CRS[15] ✓ ✓
1) Dynamics: Modeling the system dynamics is a funda- Pheeno[16] ✓ ✓
mentalstepinclassicalcontroldesign.Whenplanningrespects MiniCity[17] ✓ ✓
theconstraintsontheagentdynamics,moreaccuratetrajectory SAMS[18] ✓
followingispossible.Iftheagentmodelsignificantlydeviates
CPSLab[19] ✓
from the actual agent dynamics, a theoretically collision-free
MCCT[20] ✓
trajectory could lead to a collision when executed. Hence, it
UPBOT[21] ✓
is crucial to test the trajectory planning model through exper-
iments with real agents. Many CAV/RS agents can be cate- ORCA[22] ✓ ✓
gorizedasdifferential-driveorAckermann-steering,depending MiniatureAutonomy[23] ✓ ✓
ontheirsteeringgeometry.Modelsfordifferential-driveagents ICAT[24] ✓ ✓
includethepoint-massmodelwithdouble-integratordynamics ETLMT[25] ✓ ✓
and the unicycle model, which separates control inputs for
translational and rotational velocity [6], [18]. Models for
Ackermann-steeringagentsincludethepoint-massmodelwith our online table includes information about the batteries used
double-integrator dynamics, the kinematic bicycle model, and on each agent, including the battery runtime and the battery-
the kinetic bicycle model. An overview of agent models is to-agent weight ratio.
given in [36]. Depending on the model choice, different agent
parameters must be known. Generally speaking, the limits on III. OVERVIEWOFTESTBEDS
an agent’s speed and acceleration affect the constraints on its Through this paper, we aim to provide researchers with an
longitudinaldynamics,andthelimitsonitssteeringangleand understanding of the current landscape of CAV/RS testbeds.
steering rate affect the constraints on its lateral dynamics. By examining the sense-plan-act paradigm characteristics,
2) Geometry: The models for agent dynamics given above we gain deeper insights into the capabilities, strengths, and
describe the motion of an agent’s center of gravity. The potential areas of advancement of each testbed. As discussed
occupied area of an agent is distributed around this center in Section I-A, we select nine out of 22 testbeds and will
of gravity. In order to ensure collision-free plans, we need examinethemindepthinthissection.Inaddition,weprovide
to guarantee that no occupied areas intersect. The agent’s TableItohelpreadersquicklyidentifythemainresearchareas
geometry is needed to compute its occupied area. ofall22testbeds.Wecategorizethemintofiveareas:planning
3) Battery: Batteries are important components to supply andcontrol,computervision,collectivebehavior,autonomous
energy for agents, and they contribute significantly to the racing, and human-robot interaction.
total agent weight. A suitable battery selection is essential In the following, we use the selected testbeds to illustrate
to maintain a balance between battery runtime and agent how the derived characteristics can be used to describe a
mobility, particularly for compact or agile agents. However, testbed effectively. The selected testbeds are: the Cyber-
the selection should be aligned with the particular uses of Physical Mobility Lab (CPM Lab) [4], F1TENTH [5], the
the testbed. For example, while testbeds for education may Robotarium[6],IDS3C[7],theCambridgeMinicar[8],Duck-
demand a relatively long runtime with one full charge of ietown [9], CHARTOPOLIS [10], ARK [11], and Kilogrid
agentsifmanyeducationalactivitiestakeplaceonthetestbed, [12]. Figures 3 to 11 show these testbeds, respectively. To
testbeds for racing should prioritize a low ratio of battery ensure transparency, we provide the affiliations of all authors
weighttoagentweightoveralongbatteryruntime.Therefore, to the selected testbeds at the application part of this paper.
6
dnagninnalP
lortnoC
retupmoC
noisiV
evitcelloC roivaheB
suomonotuA
gnicaR
toboR-namuH
noitcaretnIFig. 3: Cyber-Physical Mobility Lab, originally developed at
Fig.4:RobotariumtestbedatGeorgiaInstituteofTechnology
RWTH Aachen University, now moved to University of the
[6].
Bundeswehr Munich [4].
Fig. 5: Information and Decision Science Lab Scaled Smart Fig. 6: Cambridge Minicar testbed at the Prorok Lab at
City (IDS3C) at Cornell University [7]. Cambridge University [8].
A. General Information Specifically, the Robotarium provides a remotely accessible
swarm robotics research testbed. It gives users the flexibility
Thissectiondiscussesthespecificapplicationofthegeneral
to test a variety of multi-robot algorithms and addresses the
characteristics derived in the previous section, i.e., focus,
concernofsafetywithformalmethodstoavoiddamagetothe
software, documentation, accessibility, and scenario, to char-
agents. Kilobot [28], [35] is a small robot designed to study
acterize the nine testbeds.
1) Focus: The Cambridge Minicar, the IDS3C, the collective behaviors of large-scale autonomous swarms.
CHARTOPOLIS, and the CPM Lab are designed for It is made with low-cost parts and mostly assembled by an
multi-agent planning and control of CAVs. In addition, they automated process, enabling mass production. While cost-
can also be used to investigate interactions between CAVs effective, Kilobots are only equipped with a minimal set of
and human-driven vehicles. For example, two driving modes sensors and actuators, which limits the range of tasks they
are being developed for CHARTOPOLIS, as they were for its can perform. Two testbeds have been developed that enhance
smaller predecessor described in [14]: one in which a vehicle the Kilobots’ capabilities with virtual sensors and actuators
navigates autonomously, and one in which it is remotely using augmented reality. One of these testbeds, the Kilogrid
driven by a human participant. In contrast, testbeds such [12],[37],isamodularandscalablevirtualizationenvironment
as Duckietown and F1TENTH primarily focus on sensing. designed for the study of collective behaviors in swarm
Duckietown implements a miniature-city-scale environment robotics. The other testbed, ARK [11], also uses augmented
for exploring camera-based localization, navigation, and reality to enhance Kilobots with virtual sensors and actuators;
coordination, while F1TENTH operates on a larger scale it is more cost-effective and can be assembled more quickly
(1/10) and employs a LiDAR sensor. than the Kilogrid. Moreover, while the Kilogrid operates on
While the aforementioned testbeds target CAVs, the Robo- discretecellmodules,ARKtracksrobotsincontinuousspace,
tarium,ARK,andKilogridaredesignedforRSsandfacilitate which favors more precision tasks. Additionally, ARK has
the study of distributed algorithms in swarm robotics, a been applied to another type of agent called the e-Puck [27],
field focused on the coordinated behavior and interactions of whichisawidely-usedrobotdesignedoriginallyforeducation
multiple autonomous agents operating as a collective system. in engineering.
7Fig. 8: Duckietown testbed, originally developed at Mas-
Fig. 7: An exemplar F1TENTH agent built at the University
sachusetts Institute of Technology [9].
of Pennsylvania [5].
Fig. 9: CHARTOPOLIS testbed at Arizona State University Fig. 10: Augmented Reality for Kilobots (ARK) testbed at
[10]. University of Sheffield [11].
intelligent transportation systems. Both Kilobots and e-Pucks
havealsobeenadoptedintouniversitycoursestoteachswarm
intelligence. In terms of competitions, F1TENTH is used for
autonomous racing competitions that challenge participants
to avoid crashes and minimize lap times [43]. Duckietown
hoststheAIDrivingOlympics,asemi-annualcompetitionthat
focuses on machine learning and artificial intelligence [44].
The CPM Lab introduced the annual CPM Olympics [45],
whichenablesuserstoremotelyaccesschallengingreal-world
CAV scenarios deployed on the testbed.
2) Software: Some testbeds are built upon common
open-source software architectures. For instance, IDS3C and
Fig. 11: Kilogrid testbed at Free University of Brussels [12]. F1TENTHemploytheRobotOperatingSystem(ROS)andthe
CPM LabutilizestheDataDistributionService(DDS).Ducki-
etownhasdevelopedacontainerizedarchitecture,inwhichthe
Although most of the testbeds are primarily utilized for re- systemisdividedintosmaller,isolatedunitscalledcontainers.
searchpurposes,somearealsointegratedintoeducationalset- EachcontainerleveragesROSandisresponsibleforaspecific
tingsandemployedforcompetitions.Inparticular,F1TENTH part of the main functionalities. The Robotarium follows a
hasbeenutilizedinuniversitycoursesfocusedonautonomous comparable approach, where the architecture consists of three
vehicles [38], Duckietown offers an online open course on main groups: simulation-based components, testbed interface
AI and robotics [39], and the CPM Academy [40]–[42] components, and coordinating server applications. Similarly,
allows users to learn about and address specific problems in CHARTOPOLIS uses a modified Donkey Car [46] library or
8the ROS library based on the application requirements. The contributing to the diverse complexity of these simulators.
Kilogrid software architecture is centered on an application IDS3C has introduced a Unity-based simulator known as IDS
called KiloGUI, which enables users to configure, program, 3D City [47], which allows users to rapidly iterate their
and manage Kilogrid modules and the agents. Key function- control algorithms and experiments before deploying them
alities include uploading and running programs, logging data, to IDS3C. The Robotarium provides a simulator compatible
and setting up the operational environment through the GUI. with both MATLAB and Python interfaces. CHARTOPOLIS
Additionally, the software includes a dispatcher component employsamapintheCARLA[48]simulationenvironmentto
that handles communication between the modules and Kilo- mimicthetestbedinsimulation.Additionally,Duckietownand
GUI. The software of the ARK testbed is centered around the F1TENTH have developed simulators built upon the OpenAI
Base Control Software (BCS), which coordinates agents in Gym framework [49], [50]. Notably, F1TENTH expands its
augmented reality setups. It processes images from multiple simulation capabilities by providing a simulator integrated
cameras to construct a unified arena view, tracks the positions within the ROS Gazebo environment [5]. These simulators
and states of individual agents, and manages communication empower users to implement and evaluate their algorithms
via infrared signals. The BCS employs multi-threading and within meticulously controlled virtual environments.
utilizesGPUprocessingtomaintainoperationalefficiencyand An alternative approach to enhancing testbed accessibility
managereal-timetasks.Thesoftwarealsofeaturesauserinter- has been adopted by Duckietown, aiming to make the setup
face for setting up and monitoring experiments. Additionally, more affordable and easily replicable. In the case of Ducki-
it enables the creation of virtual environments that expand etown, users have the option to purchase ready-to-use setups,
the experimental capabilities by simulating different sensory reducingthebarrierstoentryandfacilitatingbroaderadoption.
inputs.Concerningthesupportedprogramminglanguages,the Although many of the testbeds are not commercially avail-
selected testbeds utilize some widely-used options, such as able, the majority of them are open-source, except for IDS3C
C/C++, Python, and/or MATLAB. and the CHARTOPOLIS. Therefore, users can build most of
3) Documentation: The majority of the testbeds provide them on their own. We also detail the acquisition costs in
users with comprehensive manuals and access to source code. our online table [3]. For example, the Kilogrid consists of a
F1TENTHandtheCPM Laboffercompleteopen-sourcecode gridofmodules,whichcanbeprogrammedbyuserstodefine
that facilitates the reconstruction and comprehension of the complex functionalities. A single module costs approximately
testbed’s architecture. Conversely, the Robotarium and the $80,while200modulesaccommodatesupto100agents[37].
CambridgeMinicaroffercodethatisspecificallydesignedfor In comparison, ARK costs approximately $700 as a whole
simulating simple examples. Furthermore, F1TENTH and the [37]. Note that the acquisition cost of the agents (Kilobots) is
CPM Lab furnish a construction manual detailing the process the same for both testbeds.
of building vehicles and environments. Duckietown offers an 5) Scenario: IDS3C primarily focuses on urban driving
operation manual describing its appearance specifications and scenarios such as intersections, roundabouts, merging road-
assembly instructions, as well as code documentation, bench- ways, and corridors [51], [52]. It is also equipped with driver
marksofasetofitscompetitionscalledAIDrivingOlympics, emulation stations (remote vehicle operation), which enables
and instructions for developing new educational exercises, theexplorationandstudyofhumandrivingbehaviorsandtheir
among other things. The Kilogrid provides documentation interaction with CAVs. The Cambridge Minicar testbed spe-
containing the basic information required to get started with cializesinprovidingamulti-lanefreewayscenario.Incontrast
the Kilogrid system. ARK provides an open-source tool with to these, F1TENTH, Duckietown, and the Robotarium offer
full documentation to manage and edit all components of the userstheabilitytocustomizemapsandscenariosaccordingto
system. their preferences. The map of the CPM Lab features an eight-
4) Accessibility: Each testbed offers varying degrees of lane intersection and a loop-shaped highway with multiple
accessibility. The Robotarium and the CPM Lab enable users merge-in and -outs, offering a range of challenging traffic
to remotely interact with the testbeds through the internet. In conditions. The CPM Lab also allows users to customize the
addition, the CPM Lab has seamlessly integrated its entire map to suit their needs, provides real-world scenarios for
interface, including a simulation environment, within a web a competition, and supports another benchmark framework
application. Although the Robotarium necessitates a local calledCommonRoad[36].TheIDS3CandDuckietownenable
installation for development purposes, its interface can still users to validate traffic management algorithms, as they are
be accessed through a web application. equipped with stop and yield signs to simulate realistic traffic
To facilitate the utilization of some testbeds, simulators conditions.
havebeendevelopedfortheIDS3C,Duckietown,Robotarium, While the above scenarios require physical hardware, the
F1TENTH, and CPM Lab. The simulators provide users with Kilogrid and ARK testbeds introduce a virtual environment
the opportunity to test their algorithms without the inherent with virtual sensors and actuators for the Kilobot agents,
risks associated with hardware experimentation. The simu- enabling various virtual scenarios such as virtual pheromone
lators have varying levels of complexity. For example, the trails, gradient sensing, and foraging.
CPM Lab includes digital twin representations of the testbed,
B. Sense-based Information
which are virtual replicas that mimic the behavior and char-
acteristics of the physical system they represent. Moreover, Testbeds often vary in their approaches to sensing and lo-
there is a substantial variation in the technologies employed, calization. Localization can be accomplished through onboard
9agent sensors or sensors embedded in the environment. A trackagentposes.WhiletheIDS3CandtheRobotariumusea
notable characteristic of most of the investigated testbeds is Viconcamerasystem,theCambridgeMinicartestbedemploys
that they combine both methods. an OptiTrack camera system. These cameras capture the
1) Sensors: The Duckietown testbed exemplifies agent- agents’ locations at high refresh rates, enabling accurate real-
centric localization in which the agents rely on an array of timelocalization.TheARKtestbedalsoemploysacentralized
onboard sensors, including a Hall effect sensor (odometer), a system using four overhead cameras to track the real-time
front-facing camera, a time-of-flight sensor, and an Inertial location and state of each Kilobot.
Measurement Unit (IMU). These sensors collect data on In addition to the primary global positioning system,
the agent’s movement, the surrounding environment, and the CPM Lab integrates a secondary system based on a sensitive
agent’s position relative to that environment, allowing each surface layer with pressure sensors [54]. This approach pro-
agent to estimate its position and independently navigate vides an alternative tracking method by detecting the pressure
within the testbed. In addition, the Duckietown “Autolab” distribution when agents move over it, potentially enhancing
provides a low-cost external camera-based localization infras- theaccuracyandreliabilityoflocalizationthroughsensordata
tructure [53]. fusion.
Similarly, agents in CHARTOPOLIS use onboard cameras TheKilogridtestbedutilizesadistributedarrayofmodules,
for self-localization, and the testbed includes an overhead each capable of bidirectional infrared communication, to de-
OptiTrack camera system for enhanced vision-based tracking termine the positions of Kilobots based on their proximity to
ofagents.However,itiscurrentlynotfullyintegrated,leaving individual modules.
room for future upgrades. In contrast, the F1TENTH testbed 3) Accuracy: Both the IDS3C and the Robotarium, which
employs a different sensing modality, using a LiDAR sensor utilize the Vicon system, report localization errors below
mountedoneachagent.LiDARenablestheagentstoconstruct 1mm. The Cambridge Minicar testbed, which uses the Opti-
a detailed 3D map of their surroundings and precisely deter- Track system, reports an even higher degree of accuracy, with
mine their location within this map, providing a high level of localization errors below 0.2mm. These values indicate that
environmental awareness and localization accuracy. global positioning systems based on high-precision cameras
However,notallthetestbedsrelyprimarilyonagent-centric can achieve extremely high localization accuracy, providing a
localization.Othertestbeds,suchastheIDS3CandCPM Lab, reliable foundation for complex navigation tasks.
demonstrateagloballycoordinatedapproach.Whiletheagents The camera-based global positioning system in the
in these testbeds are equipped with sensors such as an IMU CPM Lab, while not as precise as the Vicon or OptiTrack
and an odometer, these only play a supplementary role in systems, still provides an acceptable level of accuracy for a
localization.Aglobalpositioningsystemprovidestheprimary significantly lower cost. With the reported localization error
means of localization, with further details covered in the under 3cm, the CPM Lab’s system can adequately support a
subsequent section. broad range of autonomous navigation tasks.
Unlike the physical sensors used in other testbeds, the Conversely, for testbeds that primarily use agent-centric lo-
Kilogrid and ARK testbeds use virtual sensors to create calization,suchasDuckietownandF1TENTH,thelocalization
a virtual sensing environment. The Kilogrid incorporates a accuracy can vary significantly based on the quality of the
network of interconnected modules that each function as a sensor data, the sophistication of the user’s algorithm, and the
computing node, providing the Kilobots with the ability to algorithm’s ability to handle uncertainties and noise.
interact with virtual elements that are not present in their 4) TrafficManagement: DuckietownandCHARTOPOLIS
physical environment. The ARK testbed employs a system of provide the incorporation of traffic management systems,
overhead cameras and a modified overhead emitter to create a which include traffic signs and traffic lights. These systems
virtual sensing environment. This system tracks the real-time regulate and manage agent movement within the testbed,
locationandstateofeachKilobotandcommunicateslocation- thereby creating dynamic and interactive environments. The
and-state-based information directly to the agents. The setups inclusion of traffic management systems allows these testbeds
of both testbeds enable the Kilobots to sense and interact to simulate real-world urban traffic conditions, providing a
with virtual elements such as gradients, reference points, or platform for testing and developing algorithms for traffic
pheromone trails, which are otherwise intangible. By provid- rule compliance, intersection management, and multi-agent
ing a virtual layer of interaction, they allow researchers to coordination.
conductcomplexexperimentsthatextendbeyondthephysical The F1TENTH, IDS3C, and CPM Lab testbeds take this
capabilities of the Kilobots. concept further by introducing moving obstacles such as
2) Positioning System: CPM Lab is an example case of pedestrians into the environment. These obstacles present the
using a global positioning system for localization. It employs agents with more unpredictable driving scenarios, necessi-
a ceiling-mounted Basler camera that detects LEDs mounted tating more complex planning capabilities. The inclusion of
oneachagent,wherethreeLEDsindicatetheagent’sposeand moving obstacles thus presents a platform for researching and
afourthblinksataspecificfrequencytouniquelyidentifyeach testing dynamic obstacle avoidance algorithms.
agent. This LED-based system serves as the primary method 5) Surroundings: The IDS3C, Duckietown, and
for localizing the agents within the CPM Lab environment. CHARTOPOLIS testbeds present structured environments
Similar to CPM Lab, the IDS3C, Robotarium, and Cam- that mimic real-world settings. The surroundings in these
bridge Minicar testbeds use high-precision camera systems to testbeds consist of scenery (e.g., trees, grass) and buildings,
10adding layers of complexity and realism to the navigational In contrast, testbeds such as IDS3C that do not utilize a
challenges. These additions allow the testbeds to simulate distributedcomputationapproachmaycentralizetheircompu-
various urban scenarios, thereby enabling comprehensive tations, which can offer a different set of advantages such as
testing of navigation algorithms under diverse and complex global system coherence and simplified data management.
conditions. Besides physical surroundings, the ARK testbed 3) Computation Unit: In the CPM Lab, the Intel NUC
provides virtual tasks such as foraging within its virtual computation units are located offboard to keep the weights
environments, as demonstrated in [55], [56] with hundreds of the agents low. In contrast, F1TENTH operates at a larger
of agents. In addition to foraging, the Kilogrid testbed scale (1/10), which allows it to carry more substantial hard-
demonstrates in [37] the virtual task of plant watering. ware components. Specifically, it employs a Jetson TX2, an
advanced computation unit that provides significant compu-
tational power, integrated directly onto the agent. Similarly,
C. Plan-based Information
CHARTOPOLIS uses a modified JetRacer Pro AI robotic car
Aswedelvedeeper,itisessentialtounderstandthefounda- astheagent,whichemploystheJetsonNanoasacomputation
tionalarchitecturesandcomputationalframeworksthatenable unit. Further, while the Kilogrid mainly uses onboard com-
these testbeds to function effectively. This section begins by putation, the ARK testbed additionally incorporates a GPU-
exploringthediversearchitecturesthatunderpinthesetestbeds. enhancedbasestationtoprocessdataandcontrollargeswarms
1) Testbed Architecture: Multi-layered architectures have in a centralized manner. In the Robotarium, a central server
been widely used in small-scale testbeds, such as IDS3C, executes code and sends velocity control inputs to agents for
CHARTOPOLIS, Robotarium, and CPM Lab. For example, onboardvelocitytracking.Thechoiceofhardwarecomponents
the architecture of the CPM Lab features three layers (high-, forthesetestbedsreflectsthecarefulbalancebetweenthescale
mid-, and low-layer) and a middleware. The high-level layer oftheagents,thecomputationalrequirementsofthetasks,and
is situated on the computational units, playing a vital role the physical constraints imposed by the hardware.
in planning. The mid-level and low-level layers, responsible 4) ComputationSchemes: TheCPM Labprovidessupport
for controlling the agents’ actuators, are deployed on the forarangeofcomputationschemes,allowingparallel,sequen-
agents. A unique aspect of this architecture is the usage tial, and hybrid computations. This flexibility accommodates
of middleware that ensures deterministic and reproducible various task requirements and optimizes system performance
experiments. Communication is enabled through a DDS that byenablingthesimultaneousprocessingoftasksorsequential
operates via WLAN. execution as per the task dependencies [57]. Duckietown also
In contrast, Duckietown employs a unique communication accommodates a variety of computation schemes through its
strategy among its agents. Rather than using conventional API, supporting both parallel and sequential computations.
wireless communication, it utilizes onboard LEDs that are Moreover, it facilitates both onboard and offboard computa-
detected by other agents. This method presents an alternative tion,furtherbroadeningthescopeofitscomputationstrategies.
avenue for exploring agent communication strategies, demon- An edge computing station in CHARTOPOLIS is used to
strating the adaptability and breadth of potential designs for extend the testbed’s computational capabilities beyond the
testbed architecture. computation onboard the agents when needed for tasks such
TheKilogridtestbedconsistsofthreeparts:asetofKilogrid as platooning and Vehicle-to-Infrastructure (V2I) communica-
modules,adispatcher(interfacingagridofconnectedmodules tion.F1TENTHandKilogridprimarilyfocusononboardcom-
with a remote workstation), and the KiloGUI application (al- putation, potentially constraining their computation schemes
lowing users to load and execute controllers both for Kilogrid to those suited for real-time, agent-based processing. ARK
modulesandKilobots).TheARKtestbedalsoconsistsofthree supports both centralized and distributed computation [11].
parts: a base control software, a modified overhead controller 5) Human-robot Interaction: The IDS3C, Cambridge
forcommunication,andseveraloverheadcamerasfortracking. Minicar, CHARTOPOLIS, and CPM Lab testbeds offer capa-
2) Distributed Computation: Most testbeds adopt a dis- bilities to incorporate humans in the loop. Human interaction
tributed approach to computational tasks. This methodology with these platforms is implemented in various ways, each
provides the advantage of computational load balancing, er- with its own set of limitations. The specific methodologies
ror resilience, and localized planning capabilities, enabling a and constraints depend on factors such as the overall system
higher degree of autonomy for individual agents. design, the complexity of tasks, and the degree of human
TheCPM Lab’sdistributedapproachisrealizedbyincorpo- involvement required. For example, the CPM Lab [58] and
rating an Intel NUC for each agent; notably, the Intel NUCs CHARTOPOLISofferahuman-drivenvehiclecontrolledman-
are not onboard, but rather serve as external computational uallywithasteeringwheelandpedalswhileacamerastreams
units. This design effectively delegates computational tasks first-person-view images from the vehicle.
to each agent’s dedicated unit, thereby facilitating parallel 6) Different Kinds of Agents: While some testbeds like
processing and real-time planning. Similarly, Duckietown, CPM Lab use homogenous agents, others support heteroge-
F1TENTH, CHARTOPOLIS, and Kilogrid use a distributed neous agents. For example, the Robotarium supports different
computation approach, where each agent relies on its own agentswithsimilarspecifications,andDuckietownandIDS3C
computational power. This allows for greater autonomy and both include drones in their testbed environments, thereby
real-timeplanningonaper-agentbasis,enhancingthesystem’s introducing an aerial dimension. Notably, ARK has been
capacity to respond to dynamic changes in the environment. recently extended to a new testbed called Multi-ARK (M-
11ARK) to enable the study of multiple, possibly heterogeneous IV. ADDITIONALCONSIDERATIONS
RSs, e.g., aerial swarms interacting with ground swarms [59].
Recall that the derived 62 characteristics from the sense-
7) Agent Count: The CPM Lab, IDS3C, Robotarium,
plan-act paradigm are primarily objective, aiming to offer
and Cambridge Minicar testbeds offer up to 20 agents for
unbiased information on the existing small-scale testbeds.
experimentation. This sizable fleet enables the exploration
However, during our investigation, we identified several as-
of complex interactions and emergent behaviors in multi-
pects not covered by these characteristics. For example, the
agent scenarios. In contrast, the agent count in Duckietown,
agent dynamics in small-scale testbeds often lack the realism
F1TENTH, Kilogrid, and ARK can be varied based on the
of full-scale deployments, which is hard to describe with an
specific scenario. The flexible count in these testbeds allows
objectivecharacteristic.Anotheraspectthatisdifficulttoquan-
for a customizable experimental setup, offering scalability
tifyobjectivelyisthesustainabilityoftestbeddevelopmentand
based on the demands of the study being conducted.
operation.Manyofthesemissingaspectsarecoveredbythree
ongoingchallengesthatwehaveidentified:small-scaletofull-
D. Act-based Information scale transition (Section IV-A), sustainability (Section IV-B),
and power and resource management (Section IV-C). We
In this section, we explore the act-based characteristics of
will discuss these challenges in this section, illustrated with
the testbeds, including agent dynamics and power consump-
concrete examples from the selected testbeds. In addition, in
tion. These factors are crucial in determining how effectively
Section IV-D, we will explore another aspect overlooked by
agents can identify actions that align with planned trajectories
the sense-plan-act paradigm: communication.
and execute them.
1) Dynamics: The agents in the testbeds surveyed in this
article are either differentially-driven, such as the Duckiebots
A. Small-Scale to Full-Scale Transition
(Duckietown) and the GRITSBots (Robotarium), or have an
Ackermann steering geometry, such as the µCars (CPM Lab) Transitioning from small-scale testbeds to full-scale real-
andtheF1TENTHagents.ForagentswithAckermannsteering world deployments presents several significant challenges
geometry, there are many common models which differ in that need to be addressed to ensure the successful scaling
accuracy and complexity. In this overview, we consider the of technologies developed in controlled environments. Here,
parametersforthepoint-massmodelandthekinematicsingle- we explore these challenges in depth, discussing potential
track model, which is based on geometric parameters of an strategies for overcoming them and ensuring robust, scalable
agent. It captures the nonlinearity of the agent’s motion while solutions.
being simple to parameterize. The parameters for the point- 1) Localization Challenges: Small-scale testbeds are typi-
mass model, the nonholonomic differential-drive model, and cally situated indoors, and localization algorithms sometimes
the kinematic single-track model of the presented testbeds are rely on global positioning systems that may not be directly
listed in the online table [3]. transferable to outdoor, full-scale environments. Examples are
Optingforlowcost,theKilobotagents(KilogridandARK) theindoorpositionsystemsusedintheCPM Lab[60]andthe
use two sealed coin-shaped vibration motors for locomotion. overhead camera system used in ARK.
Since the motors are independently controllable, the agents 2) Sensing System Adaptation: Sensing algorithms devel-
move in a differential-drive manner. oped in small-scale testbeds benefit from controlled lighting
2) Battery: Unsurprisingly,duetotheconvenienceofelec- conditions and often depend on clear visual markers or well-
trical batteries, the agents of all testbeds investigated in this defined road markings. In real-world deployments, sensing
article use them as an energy source. Among these nine systems must adapt to diverse, unpredictable lighting condi-
testbeds, the agents of the Kilogrid and ARK testbeds have tions and handle scenarios where road markings are obscured
the longest runtime—three to ten hours in the active mode by wear or environmental conditions such as snow or rain.
and three months in the sleep mode—while maintaining a Developing robust sensing systems requires the integration of
low ratio of battery weight to agent weight. The agents in the more adaptive, context-aware algorithms capable of function-
CPM Labalsoachieveasubstantialruntimeofuptofivehours ing reliably under varied environmental conditions.
with a battery-to-agent weight ratio of one third. Importantly, 3) Dynamic and Uncertainties Modeling: Small-scale
the battery selection for a testbed depends on the intended testbeds often use agents with dynamics that do not fully cap-
objectiveofthetestbed.Forexample,testbedsforautonomous ture the complexities encountered in full-scale deployments,
racing like F1TENTH usually prioritize the battery-to-agent such as varied payloads, tire wear, and suspension settings.
weight ratio over runtime. The battery runtime in F1TENTH This discrepancy raises questions about whether the planning
is typically less than one hour, which is sufficient to finish a and control algorithms developed in small-scale testbeds can
competition, while the battery-to-agent weight ratio is usually be seamlessly applied in full-scale experiments. Additionally,
less than 20%. The agents in some testbeds may have a lower full-scale agents must contend with environmental uncertain-
battery runtime, but with a simplified charging process. For ties such as road gradients, diverse road textures, and adverse
instance, although the agents in the Robotarium only have a weatherconditionsthatcanimpactdrivingbehavior,including
battery runtime of 40 minutes, they can automatically move hydroplaning or decreased stability on uneven roads. More-
to charging stations when their battery level is low, without over, uncertain events like traffic incidents, police pullovers,
human intervention. and breakage are rarely considered in small-scale testbeds.
12Enhancingagentdynamicsandincorporatingreal-worlduncer- associatedwithtransportation(i.e.,travelingtootherlabs)and
taintiestoaccuratelyreflectthesecomplexitiesmaybecrucial physical resource duplication.
for the successful translation of driving technologies from 2) Software Sustainability: Using open standards and
small-scale to full-scale. Although testbeds for autonomous open-sourcesoftwarereducescosts,promotesinteroperability,
racing, such as the F1TENTH testbed, address some aspects and fosters innovation through community collaboration. This
of this challenge, significant research is still required. approach not only enhances the sustainability of the software
4) Integration of Diverse Traffic Components: All of the itself, but also encourages global participation and knowledge
small-scale testbeds we have investigated lack the diversity sharing.
of real-world traffic environments that include elements like Moreover, using effective power management measures,
human-driven vehicles, pedestrians, and cyclists. Although which we discuss next, can also contribute to a testbed’s
some testbeds like IDS3C, the Cambridge Minicar, CHAR- sustainability by increasing the lifetime of the agents.
TOPOLIS, and the CPM Lab model human-robot interac-
tion, they suffer from limited fidelity compared with such
C. Power and Resource Management
interactions in the real world. Moreover, scaling up requires
the integration of more complex dynamic models of traffic Small-scale testbeds often incorporate agents that have
behavior that capture the full spectrum of interactions and the limited onboard energy capacity. Efficient management of
unpredictable nature of human elements in the traffic system. power is essential to maximize the agents’ operational time.
We also refer interested readers to a study of small-scale This is particularly important for testbeds that are used very
to full-scale transition in the CAV domain [61], which dis- frequently,whererechargingorreplacingbatteriesoftenisim-
cusses the transition challenge in terms of four aspects: vehi- practical.Inadditiontopowerlimitations,small-scaletestbeds
cle, communication, automation, and environment. Moreover, may face constraints in computational and communication
CHARTOPOLIS testbed studies bridging the simulation-to- resources. Effective management ensures that these resources
reality gap using domain adaption and domain randomization are reasonably allocated and used. In addition, by optimizing
techniques in [62]. the use of available resources, the need for additional or more
powerful hardware can be reduced, thus lowering the overall
hardware expense for building a testbed.
B. Sustainability
Simple battery protection measures are used in some
Building sustainable testbeds for CAV/RS is crucial, yet testbeds. For instance, the CPM Lab testbed prevents agents’
most testbeds are primarily focused on algorithm develop- batteries from over-discharging, and F1TENTH uses a power
ment without a targeted approach towards sustainability. The management board to ensure stable voltage for the compu-
sustainability of small-scale testbeds concerns the capacity tation unit and peripherals of the agent. The Robotarium
to develop and operate them in ways that are economically testbedemploysanefficientpowermanagementsystemandQi
viable, environmentally sound, and socially responsible. We inductive chargers that allow agents to charge autonomously.
will discuss how to increase testbed sustainability from both This setup minimizes human intervention and maximizes
hardware and software perspectives. operationaluptime,reflectingasustainableapproachtopower
1) Hardware Sustainability: A comprehensive needs as- management in small-scale testbeds. Additionally, it ensures
sessment is critical. For instance, determining the scale of that agents are always ready for new tasks, which is vital for
the testbed should align with its intended scope. For example, high-throughput research and educational environments. For
usingordevelopingadvancedsensingalgorithmsmaydemand safety, wireless inductive chargers should be preferred over
a larger scale to accommodate extensive sensor arrays, as conductive rail charging, as the latter may encounter short
illustrated by the larger scale used in F1TENTH (1/10) than circuits,whichmayleadtoseriousaccidents[63].Thisispar-
inCPM Lab(1/18).Inaddition,choosingamodulardesignis ticularlyrelevanttotestbedsthataredesignedtobefrequently
vital for enhancing the lifetime and adaptability of testbeds. used (e.g., educational testbeds), where conductive charging
This allows components to be easily upgraded or replaced, hasthepotentialtoharmvisitorswhomayaccidentallybridge
which reduces waste and enables the integration of new the charging leads [63].
technologies without requiring complete system overhauls. Although battery protection measures extend a battery’s
Additionally, using rechargeable and swappable batteries can lifetime,agingoccurscontinuously.Forexample,althoughthe
significantly increase the lifetime of the agents. Further, regu- CPM Lab employs a battery protection measure, the battery
lar maintenance extends the lifetime of hardware components runtime drops more than 50% in three years. Therefore, when
and ensures that they operate efficiently. building a new testbed, we recommend designing batteries to
In addition, integrating real and simulated environments be swappable (rather than fixed-mounted), which would also
through mixed reality, as demonstrated in the ARK testbed increase the sustainability of the testbed.
[11], reduces dependence on physical hardware, optimizing Additionally, it is essential to implement resource man-
resourceusageandeasingmaintenancedemands.Furthermore, agement measures to make full use of the limited power
the M-ARK testbed [59], an extension of ARK, networks resource. For example, the Duckietown testbed employs two
multiple testbeds across different locations, which holds great fundamentalstrategiesforefficientusageofitsresources.The
potential to promote distributed resource utilization and re- first one is event-based computation, which uses an event-
mote collaboration. This mitigates the environmental impacts driven architecture to reduce the computational load by pro-
13cessing only necessary data changes rather than running con- of collective behaviors of RSs based on local information,
tinuous checks, thereby conserving computational resources effectivelyavoidingthenetworksaturationthatmayoccurwith
and power. The second one is mode-driven sensing, which broader-rangeradios.Insteadofusinginfraredcommunication
further optimizes resource usage: sensing tasks are selectively or radio-based communication, the agents in the Robotarium
activated depending on the agent’s current mode, which again testbed communicate via WiFi with a bandwidth of up to 54
ensures that the computational resources are used only when Mbit/s, leading to a theoretical upper limit on the number of
necessary. Another example is the Kilobot agents’ use of a agents of 18,000, given a typical bandwidth requirement of 3
power control scheme to manage their operational states with kB/speragent.AlthoughuncertaintiessuchasWiFicollisions
alow-powersleepmodewherethebatteryremainsconnected, will impair the agents’ bandwidth, operating hundreds of
instead of using a physical on/off switch. In this mode, the agents in practice is feasible [6].
agent minimizes power consumption and periodically checks Whiledifferentcommunicationhardwareandprotocolshave
for a wake-up message from an overhead controller. This their strengths and limitations, the selection depends on the
approach allows the agent to stay on standby for over three specific requirements of the testbed, such as the number
months on a single charge. Agents can display their battery of agents, the environmental conditions, and the required
status using colored LEDs, which helps operators assess the communication bandwidth.
charge level and manage operations effectively.
E. Limitations of Our Study
D. Communication
Our online table [3] includes 22 testbeds and four agents,
Communication is vital for CAVs and RSs, as they may
featuring 62 derived characteristics based on the sense-plan-
heavily rely on communication for coordination. In dynamic
act paradigm. However, this paradigm has several limitations.
environments, the ability to share and receive data in real
First, it is unsuitable for describing testbeds that employ
time allows agents to react to changes in their environment
end-to-end methods, where neural networks integrate the tra-
effectively. This includes avoiding collisions with obstacles,
ditional sense-plan-act steps into a single process. Second,
cooperating with other agents, or responding to system in-
this paradigm does not adequately cover communication, as
structions. Effective communication protocols are vital for
it mainly focuses on the domains of sensing, planning, and
scalability. As the number of agents in the testbed increases,
acting.Wehavemitigatedthisshortcomingbydiscussingcom-
the communication framework must efficiently handle the
munication in Section IV-D. Third, the online table does not
increaseddatatrafficwithoutlossofperformanceorincreased
encompassallthecharacteristicsoftestbeds.Eachtestbedmay
latency.Forexample,theARKtestbedmodifiesthetraditional
have unique characteristics that are not applicable to others.
overhead controller system by implementing an enhanced
Including all these characteristics would result in an overly
infrared communication design, using a network of mini-
extensive table with many “Not applicable” or “Information
overhead controllers for efficient, scalable messaging in large
not found” entries. Therefore, we balanced commonality and
RSs. It provides complete communication coverage of the
coverage when deriving the characteristics.
testbed and uses additional lighting to mitigate the problem
Additionally,beyondthethreechallengesthatwediscussed
ofshadows,thusdecreasingcommunicationuncertainties.The
in this section, there are other ongoing challenges with de-
Kilogrid testbed further enhances communication capabilities
veloping small-scale testbeds for CAV/RS that are out of the
by including a bidirectional communication channel between
scope of this article, such as cybersecurity [64] and ethical
agents and a remote workstation through a grid of computing
issues [10], [65].
nodes.Eachgridmodulecanindependentlycommunicatewith
agents via infrared messages, enabling decentralized, more
scalable communication. Consequently, Kilogrid’s communi-
V. CONCLUSIONS
cation bandwidth is 15 times higher than ARK’s (144 bit/s This survey provided a detailed overview of small-scale
versus 9.6 bit/s) [37]. CAV/RStestbeds,withtheaimofhelpingresearchersinthese
In testbeds where components for planning are not onboard fields to select or build the most suitable testbed for their
the agents, such as the Robotarium and CPM Lab, these experiments and to identify potential research focus areas.
components must communicate plans to the agents, raising We structured the survey according to characteristics derived
concernsaboutcommunicationdelays.Forinstance,CPM Lab from potential use cases and research topics within the sense-
uses Intel NUCs as components for planning, which utilize plan-act paradigm. Through an extensive investigation of 22
WLAN for communication. The effect of communication testbeds, we evaluated 62 characteristics and made the results
delays is mitigated by using a modular, hierarchical archi- of this analysis available in our online table [3]. We invited
tecture with synchronized network components and a logical the testbed creators to assist in the initial process of gathering
execution time approach, as described in [57]. informationandupdatingthecontentofthisonlinetable.This
In [34], the authors presented a custom module for local collaborative approach ensures that the survey maintains its
radiocommunicationdesignedforthee-Puckagents[27].This relevanceandremainsuptodatewiththelatestdevelopments.
moduleallowstheagentstoexchangeinformationlocallywith The ongoing maintenance allows researchers to access the
asoftware-controlledadjustabletransmissionpowertomanage most recent information.
effective communication ranges. This capability limits com- In addition, this article can serve as a guide for those
munication in confined spaces and enables the demonstration interested in creating a new testbed. The characteristics and
14overview of the testbeds presented in this survey can help [15] A.Carron,S.Bodmer,L.Vogel,R.Zurbrgg,D.Helm,R.Rickenbach,
identify potential gaps and areas for improvement. As supple- S. Muntwiler, J. Sieber, and M. N. Zeilinger, “Chronos and CRS:
Design of a miniature car-like robot and a software framework for
ments, we discussed three ongoing challenges that we iden-
singleandmulti-agentroboticsandcontrol,”in2023IEEEInternational
tified with small-scale testbeds, i.e., small-scale to full-scale ConferenceonRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA),May2023,pp.1371–
transition,sustainability,andpowerandresourcemanagement. 1378.
[16] S. Wilson, R. Gameros, M. Sheely, M. Lin, K. Dover, R. Gevorkyan,
Overall, this article provides a resource for researchers and
M. Haberland, A. Bertozzi, and S. Berman, “Pheeno, A Versatile
developers in the fields of connected and automated vehicles SwarmRoboticResearchandEducationPlatform,”IEEERoboticsand
and robot swarms, enabling them to make informed decisions AutomationLetters,vol.1,no.2,pp.884–891,Jul.2016.
[17] N. Buckman, A. Hansen, S. Karaman, and D. Rus, “Evaluating Au-
when selecting or constructing a testbed and supporting the
tonomousUrbanPerceptionandPlanningina1/10thScaleMiniCity,”
advancement of testbed technologies by identifying ongoing Sensors,vol.22,no.18,p.6793,Sep.2022.
challenges. [18] A.Schwab,L.-M.Reichelt,P.Welz,andJ.Lunze,“ExperimentalEvalu-
ationofanAdaptiveCruiseControlandCooperativeMergingConcept,”
in 2020 IEEE Conference on Control Technology and Applications
(CCTA). Montreal,QC,Canada:IEEE,Aug.2020,pp.318–325.
REFERENCES [19] S.Graham,G.Baliga,andP.Kumar,“Abstractions,Architecture,Mech-
anisms,andaMiddlewareforNetworkedControl,”IEEETransactions
onAutomaticControl,vol.54,no.7,pp.1490–1503,Jul.2009.
[1] S.BabuandA.RajKumarP,“Acomprehensivesurveyonsimulators, [20] J.Dong,Q.Xu,J.Wang,C.Yang,M.Cai,C.Chen,Y.Liu,J.Wang,and
emulators,andtestbedsforvanets,”InternationalJournalofCommuni- K. Li, “Mixed Cloud Control Testbed: Validating Vehicle-Road-Cloud
cationSystems,vol.35,no.8,p.e5123,2022. Integration via Mixed Digital Twin,” IEEE Transactions on Intelligent
[2] R.Brooks,“Arobustlayeredcontrolsystemforamobilerobot,”IEEE Vehicles,vol.8,no.4,pp.2723–2736,Apr.2023.
journalonroboticsandautomation,vol.2,no.1,pp.14–23,1986. [21] Crenshaw, Tanya L. and Beyer, Steven, “UPBOT: a testbed for cyber-
[3] Armin Mokhtarian, Jianye Xu, Patrick Scheffe, Maximilian Kloock, physical systems,” in CSET’10: Proceedings of the 3rd international
Simon Schfer, Heeseung Bang, Viet-Anh Le, Sangeet Ulhas, Johannes conference on Cyber security experimentation and test. USENIX
Betz, Sean Wilson, Spring Berman, Liam Paull, Amanda Prorok, Association,2010,pp.1–8.
Bassam Alrifaee, “A Survey on Small-scale Testbeds,” www.cpm- [22] A. Liniger, A. Domahidi, and M. Morari, “Optimization-based au-
remote.de/testbeds,2024. tonomousracingof1:43scaleRCcars,”OptimalControlApplications
[4] M.Kloock,P.Scheffe,J.Maczijewski,A.Kampmann,A.Mokhtarian, andMethods,vol.36,no.5,pp.628–647,2015.
S. Kowalewski, and B. Alrifaee, “Cyber-Physical Mobility Lab: An [23] T.Tiedemann,L.Schwalb,M.Kasten,R.Grotkasten,andS.Pareigis,
Open-Source Platform for Networked and Autonomous Vehicles,” in “Miniature Autonomy as Means to Find New Approaches in Reliable
2021EuropeanControlConference(ECC),Jun.2021,pp.1937–1944. Autonomous Driving AI Method Design,” Frontiers in Neurorobotics,
[5] M. O’Kelly, H. Zheng, D. Karthik, and R. Mangharam, “F1TENTH: vol.16,p.846355,Jul.2022.
An Open-source Evaluation Environment for Continuous Control and [24] Z.Tian,W.He,B.Tian,R.Zhong,E.Foorginejad,andW.Shi,“Icat:
ReinforcementLearning,”ProceedingsofMachineLearningResearch, An indoor connected and autonomous testbed for vehicle computing,”
vol.123,pp.77–89,Apr.2020. arXivpreprintarXiv:2402.17933,2024.
[25] N. Michael, J. Fink, and V. Kumar, “Experimental testbed for large
[6] D. Pickem, P. Glotfelter, L. Wang, M. Mote, A. Ames, E. Feron, and
multirobotteams,”IEEErobotics&automationmagazine,vol.15,no.1,
M. Egerstedt, “The robotarium: A remotely accessible swarm robotics
research testbed,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on Robotics pp.53–61,2008.
andAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,2017,pp.1699–1706. [26] F.Mondada,E.Franzi,andP.Ienne,“Mobilerobotminiaturisation:A
tool for investigation in control algorithms,” in Experimental Robotics
[7] A.Stager,L.Bhan,A.Malikopoulos,andL.Zhao,“AScaledSmartCity
III: The 3rd International Symposium, Kyoto, Japan, October 28–30,
for Experimental Validation of Connected and Automated Vehicles,”
1993. Springer,1994,pp.501–513.
IFAC-PapersOnLine,vol.51,no.9,pp.130–135,Jan.2018.
[27] F. Mondada, M. Bonani, X. Raemy, J. Pugh, C. Cianci, A. Klaptocz,
[8] N. Hyldmar, Y. He, and A. Prorok, “A Fleet of Miniature Cars for
S. Magnenat, J.-C. Zufferey, D. Floreano, and A. Martinoli, “The e-
ExperimentsinCooperativeDriving,”in2019InternationalConference
puck, a robot designed for education in engineering,” in Proceedings
onRoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,May2019,pp.3238–3244.
of the 9th conference on autonomous robot systems and competitions,
[9] L. Paull, J. Tani, H. Ahn, J. Alonso-Mora, L. Carlone, M. Cap, Y. F.
vol.1,no.1. IPCB:InstitutoPolite´cnicodeCasteloBranco,2009,pp.
Chen,C.Choi,J.Dusek,Y.Fang,D.Hoehener,S.-Y.Liu,M.Novitzky,
59–65.
I. F. Okuyama, J. Pazis, G. Rosman, V. Varricchio, H.-C. Wang,
[28] M.Rubenstein,C.Ahler,andR.Nagpal,“Kilobot:Alowcostscalable
D. Yershov, H. Zhao, M. Benjamin, C. Carr, M. Zuber, S. Karaman,
robot system for collective behaviors,” in 2012 IEEE international
E.Frazzoli,D.DelVecchio,D.Rus,J.How,J.Leonard,andA.Censi,
conferenceonroboticsandautomation. IEEE,2012,pp.3293–3298.
“Duckietown:Anopen,inexpensiveandflexibleplatformforautonomy
[29] F.Caleffi,L.d.S.Rodrigues,J.d.S.Stamboroski,B.V.Rorig,M.M.
education and research,” in 2017 IEEE International Conference on
C. d. Santos, V. Zuchetto, and . B. Raguzzoni, “A systematic review
RoboticsandAutomation(ICRA). IEEE,May2017,pp.1497–1504.
of hardware technologies for small-scale self-driving cars,” Cieˆncia e
[10] S.S.Ulhas,A.Ravichander,K.A.Johnson,T.P.Pavlic,L.Gharavi,and Natura,vol.45,no.esp.1,pp.84071–84071,Oct.2023.
S.Berman,“CHARTOPOLIS:ASmall-ScaleLabor-art-oryforResearch [30] A. Jimnez-Gonzlez, J. R. Martinez-de Dios, and A. Ollero, “Testbeds
andReflectiononAutonomousVehicles,Human-RobotInteraction,and for ubiquitous robotics: A survey,” Robotics and Autonomous Systems
Sociotechnical Imaginaries,” Workshop on Miniature Robot Platforms Magazine,vol.61,no.12,pp.1487–1501,Dec.2013.
for Full Scale Autonomous Vehicle Research, IEEE/RSJ Intl. Conf. on
[31] D.Li,P.Auerbach,andO.Okhrin,“Towardsautonomousdrivingwith
IntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),2022. small-scale cars: A survey of recent development,” arXiv:2404.06229,
[11] A. Reina, A. J. Cope, E. Nikolaidis, J. A. R. Marshall, and C. Sabo, 2024.
“Ark:Augmentedrealityforkilobots,”IEEERoboticsandAutomation [32] T. Samak, C. Samak, S. Kandhasamy, V. Krovi, and M. Xie, “Auto-
Letters,vol.2,no.3,pp.1755–1761,2017. DRIVE:AComprehensive,FlexibleandIntegratedDigitalTwinEcosys-
[12] A. Antoun, G. Valentini, E. Hocquard, B. Wiandt, V. Trianni, and temforAutonomousDrivingResearch&Education,”Multidisciplinary
M. Dorigo, “Kilogrid: A modular virtualization environment for the DigitalPublishingInstitute,vol.12,no.3,p.77,Jun.2023.
kilobotrobot,”in2016IEEE/RSJInternationalConferenceonIntelligent [33] J. M. Soares, I. Navarro, and A. Martinoli, “The khepera iv mobile
RobotsandSystems(IROS). IEEE,2016,pp.3809–3814. robot: Performance evaluation, sensory data and software toolbox,” in
[13] J. Blumenkamp, A. Shankar, M. Bettini, J. Bird, and A. Prorok, “The Robot2015:SecondIberianRoboticsConference:AdvancesinRobotics,
cambridge robomaster: An agile multi-robot research platform,” arXiv Volume1. Springer,2016,pp.767–781.
preprintarXiv:2405.02198,2024. [34] C. M. Cianci, X. Raemy, J. Pugh, and A. Martinoli, “Communication
[14] S. Kannapiran and S. Berman, “Go-CHART: A miniature remotely inaswarmofminiaturerobots:Thee-puckasaneducationaltoolfor
accessibleself-drivingcarrobot,”in2020IEEE/RSJInternationalCon- swarm robotics,” in Swarm Robotics: Second International Workshop,
ference on Intelligent Robots and Systems (IROS). IEEE, Oct. 2020, SAB2006,Rome,Italy,September30-October1,2006,RevisedSelected
pp.2265–2272. Papers2. Springer,2007,pp.103–115.
15[35] M. Rubenstein, A. Cornejo, and R. Nagpal, “Programmable self- [58] P.ScheffeandB.Alrifaee,“Ascaledexperimentplatformtostudyin-
assemblyinathousand-robotswarm,”Science,vol.345,no.6198,pp. teractionsbetweenhumansandcavs,”in2023IEEEIntelligentVehicles
795–799,2014. Symposium(IV). IEEE,2023,pp.1–6.
[36] M.Althoff,M.Koschi,andS.Manzinger,“CommonRoad:Composable [59] L. Feola, A. Reina, M. S. Talamali, and V. Trianni, “Multi-swarm
benchmarks for motion planning on roads,” in 2017 IEEE Intelligent interactionthroughaugmentedrealityforkilobots,”IEEERoboticsand
VehiclesSymposium(IV),LosAngeles,CA,USA,Jun.2017,pp.719– AutomationLetters,2023.
726. [60] M. Kloock, P. Scheffe, I. Tu¨lleners, J. Maczijewski, S. Kowalewski,
[37] G.Valentini,A.Antoun,M.Trabattoni,B.Wiandt,Y.Tamura,E.Hoc- andB.Alrifaee,“Vision-basedreal-timeindoorpositioningsystemfor
quard, V. Trianni, and M. Dorigo, “Kilogrid: a novel experimental multiple vehicles,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, vol. 53, no. 2, pp. 15446–
environment for the kilobot robot,” Swarm Intelligence, vol. 12, pp. 15453,2020.
245–266,2018. [61] S. Scha¨fer and B. Alrifaee, “From Small-Scale to Full-Scale: Towards
[38] J. Betz, H. Zheng, Z. Zang, F. Sauerbeck, K. Walas, V. Dimitrov, TransferabilityofSmall-ScaleCAVTestbeds,”Feb.2024,ResearchGate
M. Behl, R. Zheng, J. Biswas, V. Krovi et al., “Teaching autonomous preprint.
systems hands-on: Leveraging modular small-scale hardware in the [62] S.S.Ulhas,S.Kannapiran,andS.Berman,“Gan-baseddomainadap-
roboticsclassroom,”arXiv:2209.11181,2022. tationforcreatingdigitaltwinsofsmall-scaledrivingtestbeds:Oppor-
[39] Duckietown Foundation, “Duckietown MOOC,” tunities and challenges,” in 2024 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium
https://www.duckietown.org/mooc,2023. (IV). IEEE,2024,pp.137–143.
[40] A. Mokhtarian, L. Hegerath, and B. Alrifaee, “CPM Academy: A Re- [63] S. Wilson, P. Glotfelter, L. Wang, S. Mayya, G. Notomista, M. Mote,
motePlatformforTeachingCurrentTopicsinConnectedandAutomated and M. Egerstedt, “The robotarium: Globally impactful opportunities,
Vehicles,” in 2023 62nd IEEE Conference on Decision and Control challenges,andlessonslearnedinremote-access,distributedcontrolof
(CDC),Dec.2023,pp.8894–8900,iSSN:2576-2370. multirobot systems,” IEEE Control Systems Magazine, vol. 40, no. 1,
[41] A. Mokhtarian, P. Scheffe, S. Kowalewski, and B. Alrifaee, “Remote pp.26–44,2020.
Teaching with the Cyber-Physical Mobility Lab,” IFAC-PapersOnLine, [64] F.Pascale,E.A.Adinolfi,S.Coppola,andE.Santonicola,“Cybersecu-
vol.55,no.17,pp.386–391,2022. rityinautomotive:Anintrusiondetectionsysteminconnectedvehicles,”
[42] P. Scheffe, J. Maczijewski, M. Kloock, A. Kampmann, A. Derks,
Electronics,vol.10,no.15,p.1765,2021.
S.Kowalewski,andB.Alrifaee,“NetworkedandAutonomousModel- [65] P.Lin,K.Abney,andG.A.Bekey,Robotethics:theethicalandsocial
scale Vehicles for Experiments in Research and Education,” IFAC- implicationsofrobotics. MITpress,2014.
PapersOnLine,vol.53,no.2,pp.17332–17337,2020.
[43] F1TENTH,“RacingCompetition,”https://f1tenth.org/race.html,2023.
[44] Duckietown Foundation, “AI Driving Olympics,”
https://www.duckietown.org/research/ai-driving-olympics,2023.
[45] A. Mokhtarian, S. Scha¨fer, and B. Alrifaee, “CPM Olympics: Devel-
opment of scenarios for benchmarking in networked and autonomous
driving,” in 2022 IEEE Intelligent Vehicles Symposium (IV), 2022, pp.
9–15.
[46] “Donkeycar: a python self driving library,”
https://github.com/autorope/donkeycar,2017,GitHub.
[47] R.M.Zayas,L.E.Beaver,B.Chalaki,H.Bang,andA.A.Malikopoulos,
“Adigitalsmartcityforemergingmobilitysystems,”in20222ndAnnual
International Conference on Digital Twins and Parallel Intelligence
(DTPI). IEEE,2022,pp.1–6.
[48] A. Dosovitskiy, G. Ros, F. Codevilla, A. Lopez, and V. Koltun,
“CARLA:Anopenurbandrivingsimulator,”inProceedingsofthe1st
AnnualConferenceonRobotLearning,2017,pp.1–16.
[49] M. Chevalier-Boisvert, F. Golemo, Y. Cao, B. Mehta, and
L. Paull, “Duckietown environments for OpenAI Gym,”
https://github.com/duckietown/gym-duckietown,2018,GitHub.
[50] “TheF1TENTHGym,”https://github.com/f1tenth/f1tenth gym,GitHub.
[51] B. Chalaki, L. E. Beaver, and A. A. Malikopoulos, “Experimental
validation of a real-time optimal controller for coordination of CAVs
in a multi-lane roundabout,” in 2020 31st IEEE Intelligent Vehicles
Symposium(IV),2020,pp.504–509.
[52] L.E.Beaver,B.Chalaki,A.M.Mahbub,L.Zhao,R.Zayas,andA.A.
Malikopoulos, “Demonstration of a Time-Efficient Mobility System
Using a Scaled Smart City,” Vehicle System Dynamics, vol. 58, no. 5,
pp.787–804,2020.
[53] J.Tani,A.F.Daniele,G.Bernasconi,A.Camus,A.Petrov,A.Courch-
esne,B.Mehta,R.Suri,T.Zaluska,M.R.Walter,E.Frazzoli,L.Paull,
andA.Censi,“Integratedbenchmarkinganddesignforreproducibleand
accessibleevaluationofroboticagents,”in2020IEEE/RSJInternational
ConferenceonIntelligentRobotsandSystems(IROS),2020,pp.6229–
6236.
[54] S.Scha¨fer,H.Steidl,S.Kowalewski,andB.Alrifaee,“Investigatinga
pressuresensitivesurfacelayerforvehiclelocalization,”in2023IEEE
IntelligentVehiclesSymposium(IV). IEEE,2023,pp.1–6.
[55] A. Font Llenas, M. S. Talamali, X. Xu, J. A. Marshall, and A. Reina,
“Quality-sensitiveforagingbyarobotswarmthroughvirtualpheromone
trails,” in Swarm Intelligence: 11th International Conference, ANTS
2018, Rome, Italy, October 29–31, 2018, Proceedings 11. Springer,
2018,pp.135–149.
[56] M.S.Talamali,T.Bose,M.Haire,X.Xu,J.A.Marshall,andA.Reina,
“Sophisticated collective foraging with minimalist agents: A swarm
roboticstest,”SwarmIntelligence,vol.14,no.1,pp.25–56,2020.
[57] M. Kloock, P. Scheffe, O. Greß, and B. Alrifaee, “An architecture for
experimentsinconnectedandautomatedvehicles,”IEEEOpenJournal
ofIntelligentTransportationSystems,vol.4,pp.175–186,2023.
16