Context-Aware Agent-based Model for Smart Long
Distance Transport System
Muhammad Raeesa, Afzal Ahmeda
aMirpur University of Science and Technology, Mirpur, AJK, Pakistan
Abstract
Long-distancetransportplaysavitalroleintheeconomicgrowthofcountries.
However, there is a lack of systems being developed for monitoring and sup-
port of long-route vehicles (LRV). Sustainable and context-aware transport
systems with modern technologies are needed. We model for long-distance
vehicle transportation monitoring and support systems in a multi-agent envi-
ronment. Our model incorporates the distance vehicle transport mechanism
through agent-based modeling (ABM). This model constitutes the design
protocol of ABM called Overview, Design and Details (ODD). This model
constitutes that every category of agents is offering information as a ser-
vice. Hence, a federation of services through protocol for the communication
between sensors and software components is desired. Such integration of ser-
vices supports monitoring and tracking of vehicles on the route. The model
simulations provide useful results for the integration of services based on
smart objects.
Keywords: Vehicular Networks, Long-Distance Transport, Service
Federation
1. Introduction
The smart transport sector positively impacts the economy which is vi-
tal for growth, social welfare, and development [1]. Thus, detecting changes
and forecasting future freight flows and freight transport demand is a task of
great importance [2]. Long-distance freight transfer booms the economy and
generates a wide range of employment for common people and business op-
portunities for investors [1]. However, in third-world countries like Pakistan
where there are not many systems that are developed for the tracking or
4202
peS
4
]AM.sc[
1v43420.9042:viXramonitoring of long distance vehicles, this transportation medium is not very
productive [3]. Thus, harming the economy due to long delays in the trans-
portation of goods. Some of the common problems faced by long-distance
vehicles range from small breakdowns to stolen goods or vehicles. Other
effects like weather, lack of knowledge about the rest areas, fuel stations,
vehicle service areas, road police or ambulance services for any emergency
are lacking due to minimum or no communication with the vehicle owner
company and other help services. The problems also extend to local public
authorities causing blockage on roads on the local, regional, or national level
to mega economic issue of not reaching goods from one part to another.
Therefore, a need arises for a sustainable transport system incorporated
with modern technologies that is capable of fulfilling the transport needs of
society. At the same time, there is a need to hinder the negative effects of
long-distance transportation. By incorporating various types of technologies
currently available and other infrastructural measures, it is often possible to
influence how these actions are selected and executed. There has been a lot
of research done on the scheduling and routing of the long-distance vehicle.
We propose a model for long-distance vehicle transportation. Our model
incorporates the distance vehicle transport mechanism through agent-based
modeling. We checked our model to the basic design protocol of ABM called
Overview, Design, and Details (ODD). As we assume that every category of
agents is offering information as a service we need a service-oriented protocol
for the communication between sensors and software components for mon-
itoring and tracking of vehicles on the route for better transportation. For
the service protocol, we incorporate concepts of the Internet of Things and
Mobile ad-hoc networks [3]. Our proposed model incorporates the different
services offered by each entity.
This section presented the introduction of our work. The remainder of
this paper is organized as follows: In Section 2, we briefly describe some
background studies for a better understanding of used concepts. Section
3 illustrates our ODD agent-based model. Section 4 describes a relevant
scenario as we have made scenario-based validation. We conclude our paper
in section 5.
2. Background
Technology plays an important role in tracking and monitoring long-
distance transportation. The term used for intelligent and connected devices
2is called Internet of Things. The Internet of Things (IoT) [1] has attracted
the attention of both academia and industry. The European Commission
has already predicted that by 2030, there will be more than 250 billion de-
vices connected to the Internet [4]. IoT has the concept of being connected
to people and things anytime, anyplace, with anything and anyone, ideally
using any path/network and any service [2].
The concept of offering Everything-as-a-Service (XaaS) [5] is a category
of models introduced with cloud computing. Vehicular systems with agent-
based modeling have different applications of tracking and autonomy [6],
however, this case relates to tracking and management. Agent-based mod-
eling (ABM) is used to model systems that are comprised of individual,
autonomous, interacting “agents”. ABM thus follows a bottom-up approach
to understanding real-world systems [7]. A lot of work has been done on the
tracking and monitoring of long-distance vehicles using real-time and pas-
sive systems. In [8] a low-cost vehicle monitoring system is presented. Work
states that the shipping industry has developed many tracking and monitor-
ing systems first to determine where each vehicle was at any time. While in
the modeling perspective, there are many models predicted for long-distance
vehicletransport. Recently, alsoseveralagents-basedfreighttransportanaly-
sis models have been suggested, e.g., INTERLOG [9] and TAPAS [10], which
belong to the class of micro-level models, where individual entities are rep-
resented and the relations between entities are typically studied over time.
In [11] a running intermodal transport service was used as a case study. The
performance of the inter-modal transport service was compared against a
potential road transport service for a set of mode choice variables, including
price, transit time, reliability, and flexibility.
3. LRV Monitoring and Support Modeling
Agent-based modeling has been itself grown into a vast field so it is dif-
ficult to keep all of the model’s characteristics. Many descriptions of Agent-
Based Modelings presented in the literature are not complete, which makes
it impossible to replicate and re-implement the model. However, replication
is key to science, and models should be reproduced. Also, the agent-based
modeling descriptions are a lengthy mixture of words of factual description
and these include long justifications, discussions, and explanations of many
kinds. We have to read a lot about the model to understand even if the
model itself is quite simple. The way to describe ABMs should be easy to
3understand yet it should describe a complete model. A known way to deal
with such kind of problems is standardization. It is much easier to know and
understand written material if the information is presented in a standardized
way and we know the order of textual information. So a consistent protocol
that is effective for Agent-Based Modeling becomes useful and it makes it
easiertounderstandandwritemodels. Aroot-causeanalysiscanalsoprovide
an effective strategy to understand what to build in models [12]. To bring
the benefits of standardization to ABMs, scientists have developed the ODD
protocol for describing ABMs [13]. “ODD” stands for “Overview, Design
Concepts, and Details”: the protocol starts with three elements that provide
anoverviewofwhatthemodelisaboutandhowitisdesigned, followedbyan
element of design concepts that depict the ABM’s essential characteristics,
and it ends with three elements that provide the details necessary to make
the description complete.
Figure 1: Conceptual Diagram of LRV Monitoring and Support Model.
3.1. Agents
After the analysis of the literature and problem domain, we identified
agents that are involved in the interaction. Several agents were identified to
model are shown in figure 1 and their interaction is shown in figure 2.
• Vehicle (trucks)
• Fuel station
• Rest Area
4Figure 2: Conceptual Diagram of Agents Interaction.
• Rescue/Medical Van
• Police Van
• Service Area
• Vehicle owner/manager company
• Origin agent (freight sender, shipment agent)
• Terminal agent (freight receiver)
OriginAgents: Originagentsaretheagentsthatarethesupplier/sender
of goods. These are generated at the beginning of transport by booking with
a transport company.
Origin agents: are the agents that are the supplier/sender of goods.
These are generated at the beginning of transport by booking with a trans-
port company.
Owner company/Transport company: Owner/transport company is
the central agent in the context as it is responsible for monitoring of vehicle.
In case of any issue with the vehicle, the transport company interacts with
the police vans present near the vehicle signal or in case of signal loss. These
agents store all the information about vehicle movements.
Vehicle: Vehicle agents are the actual trucks containing the goods. They
interact with all other agents which help make a successful transport. The
5term we refer to connected as “connected smart objects”. Smart objects
interact with each other throughout the journey and provide better decision-
making for vehicles and other agents.
All other agents are helping agents in case of emergency or need. Inter-
action with a help service agent is assumed to be generalized for any kind of
service at this point of modeling. As we make our model more concrete we
will define the specific help service and its interaction with other agents.
3.2. Behavioral modeling using ODD model
3.2.1. Overview
Purpose: The purpose of the model is to design the movement of long-
distance vehicle transportation, their interactions with the other helping
agents, and find out the behaviors of agents over time. Under what cir-
cumstances does the vehicle need to contact police services, rescue services,
rest areas, fuel stations, or any other agents? By understanding the need for
any kind of service needed by a vehicle we can predict the time to reach des-
tinations during any trip. We can efficiently provide information to vehicles
in need of any kind of emergencies as well as the road and weather conditions
to avoid any breakdowns. By gathering the data after applying the model
we can predict why a vehicle takes more time to cover a distance. How often
a vehicle needs interaction with other agents, and how these interactions will
take place?
Entities, state variables and scales: The model has several kinds
of entities including vehicles (trucks), shipper and receiver agents, help and
control services, fuel stations, and rest areas. Each entity has some basic
attributes to model for observing their behavior. To model the entities, we
need to model roads and agents. Geographical road forms the patch areas.
This can be read on a square grid for testing purposes. For a real system,
this is obtained as the location of any agent on the ground. Each location has
two variables longitude and latitude. Agents are described by which position
they are in. The vehicle has variables like speed, fuel capacity, reliability,
travel time, load carrying, travel direction, vehicle category, etc. Police vans
have variable coverage in which those can operate, it may be free or already
engagedwithsomeotheragent. Sameasfortherescueservices. Fuelstations
may indicate the level of fuel they have and their locations. Rest areas must
be divided category-wise as well as the services they offer.
Process overview and scheduling: There are multiple processes in
the model, the basic process is the movement of the vehicle (trucks) from
6one point to another. Interaction with other agents like police, service ar-
eas, ambulances, or any other service also forms a new process. However,
interaction with other vehicles is somewhat important because there is no
interaction with other vehicles. So, several processes are formed during ve-
hicle transportation while interacting with other agents. Scheduling is also
an important aspect of interaction processes in case of unavailability of an
agent service. There is a need to schedule the vehicle requests for services if
an agent instance is not available temporarily or permanently.
3.2.2. Design concept
Emergence: The concept of emergence has been given connotations of
being unexplainable in principle, but with ABMs, we are focusing on just
the opposite: can our model system look and behave like the real one? The
concepts that emerge from the model are not simply the sum of individual
characteristics. Whether between any given two points same type of vehicle
takes different times at the same load. The variability in the behavior of
individuals makes some property to emerge from the model. The model’s
primary value is trip duration. Trip duration is counted as time taken from
the starting point to the ending point.
n m
(cid:88)(cid:88)
TotalTime(actual) = ∆T
i,j
i=0 j=1
Where total time is calculated as sum of time during each checkpoint
up to n-number of checkpoint. During the trip number of checkpoints is
defined for continuous monitoring of vehicle time. Typical actual/observed
time duration between two checkpoints is defined as:
(cid:40)
T [j]−T [i] if i < j
cp cp
∆T(actual) =
undefined otherwise
Tcp[j] is the time observed at a current checkpoint, and Tcp[i] is the
time observed at a previous checkpoint. This observation is compared to
average the time between two checkpoints and the number of parameters are
updated depending on the total time consumed T and Dt by vehicle. If a
vehicleisbehindtheschedule,routeminimizationisupdatedforvehiclessuch
as taking short rest periods and increasing average speed within acceptable
limits. Important secondary values are reliability improvement, threats faced
and breakdown.
7Observation: ABM can produce many kinds of dynamics [3]. What
we can learn depends upon what we observe from it. We need to observe
each entity; and what individuals are doing at each time. So in our model,
we observe each entity to know what they are doing at any time. These
observations form a result that predicts the outcome of a specific process.
Adaptive behavior: The agents in this model adapt themselves during
the trip. For example, if the weather forecast is bad for a specific area, the
agent may rest early and take a longer trip later when the situation is better
for traveling. Adaptive behavior is most needed in agent-based modeling and
model entities must adapt to the best available solution at any given time.
Sensing: Sensing is an integral part of the agent-based models [6]. Ve-
hicle agents with the help of the onboard unit should sense their current
location and time to reach their next checkpoint. It is assumed that on on-
board unit will calculate the time to reach till next checkpoint. Certain help
services offer their services to vehicles during the trip to get better obser-
vations. By accessing the location of the vehicle, the location of the next
checkpoint, and the average speed for the current area the time to reach the
next checkpoint is calculated.
Dv[j]
Time-to-reach-checkpoint =
AS[i,j]
Where Dv j is the distance between the vehicle’s current position v and
checkpoint j. ASi j is the average speed of the vehicle between checkpoint i
and checkpoint j.
Prediction: Prediction is fundamental to decision-making. Prediction
plays an important role in the evolution of our model. This cannot be done
by the vehicle itself, rather it can be analyzed over time by the management
company to help in better prediction of tours for a specific route. We can
predict why a vehicle extra time in an area. We can predict the behavior of
breakdowns while observing a vehicle and area’s breakdowns. With this kind
of knowledge, we can make better decision-making and predictions. Let s be
a sensor then the super choice will be
S = sup{s ,s ,s ,...,s }
s 1 2 3 n
Nearest Criteria choice will be
N = Nr(s ,s ,s ,...,s )
s 1 2 3 n
8whereas, the best choice will be
(cid:16) (cid:92) (cid:17)
B = Aggr B N
s s s
Interaction: This model includes interaction with other agents like po-
lice vans, ambulances, and service areas in case of emergency. The vehicle
must transmit a signal to the management company, police station, service
area, or medical help in case of vehicle damage, some emergency, or threat.
The vehicle must be contacted by the owner’s company for further investiga-
tion. The other agents like police vans and ambulances must also be notified
about the nature of the incident.
Stochasticity: Variability in the movement of the vehicle is too complex
to represent. We may not be sure why a vehicle is taking longer time than
expected in a certain area. The movement of agents cannot be the same
for each trip within a specific area. This variability is represented by the
reliability of the moving vehicle. The higher the reliability the higher the
chances that the vehicle moves as per expectations through that area.
3.2.3. Model Details
Initialization: For initialization of the model we need to initialize the
landscape upon which the vehicle has to travel. The initial population can
be set in any range. We can increase or decrease the population. Initial
parameters like vehicle reliability and service availability are set at the start.
Input: The model does not need any time series data.
Sub models: Models divided into further sub-models. A vehicle can use
alternative paths during travel. The available services may not be available
when needed also makes a sub-model that needs to be addressed.
Police Service Model: We break down the model into a set of sub-
models, the interaction of a vehicle with the police vans forms a sub-model.
Police vans are the agents that provide help services in case of danger of
theft or accident during the trip. Each police van agent can communicate
with vehicles within their predefined area and mark their service availability
or unavailability. Figure 3 shows the simple service provision model for the
interaction between a police van and vehicle agents. Police vans are the
agents that are placed on the long-distance roads for the help of vehicles in
case of emergency. Police vans are limited to cover a specific area assigned
to them to offer services. Vehicles generate requests for the help service in
an area. If the van does not have a pending request to process, it will mark
9itself as the available agent to offer its services. If the police van is already
engaged with another assignment, it will check whether the new request is
in the way to the current request the van is handling van can provide service
in a way. If the new request is not in the current direction of the van it is to
be marked engaged and the request is transferred to other vans. When the
provision of service ends, the van will mark itself available for service.
Figure 3: Police Van Service provision Sub-model.
Fuel Station: Vehicle agents can interact with the fuel stations on the
roadduringthetrip. Fuelstationscanmarktheavailabilityoffueltovehicles
as well as prices and services available at stations. Vehicles calculate the
distance the reach the fuel stations and based on the current fuel level, the
driver can assess whether to choose a station or travel to the next station for
some more offered benefits as suits best.
Service Areas/Medical Services: Vehicleagentscaninteractwiththe
service areas on the road during the trip in case of any fault in the vehicle.
Agents may also seek medical help from the provided medical facilities on
the road during the trip. Service area or medical services agents ask to offer
help on-station or off-station depending upon the severity of the fault in a
vehicle or need of medical assistance respectively.
Shipment manager: Interaction with the shipment manager is very
10important in our model. In case of any service needed or unavailability
of service, the vehicle interacts with the shipment manager to seek help.
Shipment managers can also interact with the help service agent depending
on the location of the vehicle and the type of request. Shipment managers
can communicate with the help services so that they can better predict the
actions needed to be taken by vehicle for on-time delivery.
Help Services: Road conditions, weather situations, and traffic warn-
ings play important roles in the successful completion of a trip. Sensing are
reading these signals from provided sensors is very important for correct pre-
diction of action to be taken. Monitoring For monitoring purposes, we use
the onboard units that must be installed on the vehicles to gather all the
data about vehicle movements.
Use of the Internet of Things: This model uses the recent trend of
connected things to make an automated model of this process [6]. Internet
of Things changing the way how things should be done. So we present a sce-
nario of long-distance vehicle transport [3]. In this scenario, we say a vehicle
has to transport freight for a longer distance (say 2000 Km). The vehicle
starts from the origin agent, by starting we mean the transport agent has in-
formation about the vehicle over a while so that he can predict the expected
time to reach to destination. The expected arrival time is communicated to
the vehicle and terminal agent. As the vehicle moves through the expected
arrival time is updated upon every checkpoint/stop in the central server as
travel history for future decisions. The weather and road situations are com-
municated to vehicles from time to time. In case of a signal lost from the
vehicle, an alarm is generated at the transport agent’s end and also on the
police van present near the last signal received, so that the police vans are
directed to check the related issue. In case of a medical emergency vehicle
can generate an alarm to know about medical help available and ambulance
services may be directed to the vehicle. Vehicles may also get knowledge
of next rest points, service areas, and fuel stations to get a better view of
their travel. Vehicle history is maintained during the whole journey; proper
analysis of data can report the abnormalities to overcome bad encounters.
We may be able to know why a particular vehicle takes more time in an
area while other vehicles don’t. why does one vehicle have more breakdowns
than others? What is the vehicle’s average time to reach destinations? With
this kind of knowledge, we can make better decision-making and predictions.
Identifying such questions and digging deep to extract relevant answers is an
essential technique [12] which we may explore in the future in this context.
11Protocols: While taking everything as a service Interoperability is one
of the major challenges in achieving the vision of the Internet of Things. The
Semantic Gateway as Service provides a mechanism to integrate popular IoT
application protocols to co-exist in a single gateway system. This protocol
allows many of Internet of Things devices to connect with other web services.
A study of different system web services is also needed.
4. Scenario
Let’s consider the scenario of the China–Pakistan Economic Corridor of
length 2;442 kilometers. After the completion of this corridor, China will use
it for trading rather than South China Sea route. If a loaded truck moves
from Gawadar to Kashgar at an average speed of 50km/hour non-stop then,
it will take 48:84 hours means 2:04 days. It’s impossible for a human to
remain in a vehicle for such a long time. Normally, a truck driver requires 3
times meals a day and also some refreshments after every 3 to 4hours. Also,
the truck will require refueling after a certain distance and we suppose it 5
times during this route. Now, we calculate this time to reach the destination.
We consider every meal break of at least 30 minutes and refreshment break
of 15 minutes and a fueling time of 15 minutes. Now, let’s calculate this time
TotalTime = 2 : 04×(3×0.5)+2 : 04×(6×0.25)+5×0.25+48 : 84
TotalTime = 56 : 21 hours
TotalTime = 2 : 34 days
So, after calculating this time by the model the company owning the fleet
and the ultimate customer can expect when the truck will reach. Secondly,
the truck driver can face any problem during this move. In case of any
problem, he will inform the nearest police van directly, considering all the
services are interconnected. In case the nearest police van is busy then in this
scenario the system decides to convey the message to the second nearest van
or wait for this to continue. So, this whole scenario is depicted in the model.
Also,incaseofanaccident,theambulanceshouldbeinformed. Andthemost
suitable ambulance should be assigned the duty. In case of any mechanical
problem, the mobile workshop should be informed. The same best workshop
be selected based on the criteria. Also, the driver should be informed about
12the next filling station distance. Similarly, the driver should have the facility
to check the next restaurant. The deals on the restaurant and rates of the
restaurant should also be visible to the driver with the distance from the
current position.
5. Conclusion
Long-distance transport has both negative and positive effects on our
economy and society. Monitoring and modeling long-distance transport has
been found very interesting field by researchers. We have proposed a model
here that uses the agent-based modeling approach to model this system as
a multi-agent system. We have done some background study on how agent-
based modeling works. Literature review shows that agent-based modeling
approaches have been used to model transport systems lately. We propose
our model and map with ABM protocol of Overview, Design concept, and
Details (ODD). However, proper implementation of the model is still needed
to be done. We propose the use of everything as a service concept, precisely
sensing as a service where every agent provides services to others and uses
the services of others. Service interoperability protocols have been studied.
For services to connect between the Internet of Things and web services the
Sematic Gateway as Service architecture has been found useful. The study
of the most suitable protocol has been important work to focus on in the
future.
References
[1] D.-L. Yang, F. Liu, Y.-D. Liang, A survey of the internet of things, in:
1st International Conference on E-Business Intelligence (ICEBI 2010),
Atlantis Press, 2010, pp. 524–532.
[2] O. Vermesan, P. Friess, P. Guillemin, S. Gusmeroli, H. Sundmaeker,
A. Bassi, I. S. Jubert, M. Mazura, M. Harrison, M. Eisenhauer, et al.,
Internet of things strategic research roadmap, in: Internet of things-
global technological and societal trends from smart environments and
spaces to green ICT, River Publishers, 2022, pp. 9–52.
[3] M. Raees, T. A. Khan, K. Mustafa Abbasi, A. Ahmed, S. Fazilat,
I. Ahmed, Context-aware services using manets for long-distance vehic-
ular systems: A cognitive agent-based model, Scientific Programming
2021 (1) (2021) 8835859.
13[4] H. Sundmaeker, P. Guillemin, P. Friess, S. Woelffl´e, et al., Vision and
challenges for realising the internet of things, Cluster of European re-
search projects on the internet of things, European Commision 3 (3)
(2010) 34–36.
[5] P. Banerjee, R. Friedrich, C. Bash, P. Goldsack, B. Huberman, J. Man-
ley, C. Patel, P. Ranganathan, A. Veitch, Everything as a service: Pow-
ering the new information economy, Computer 44 (3) (2011) 36–43.
[6] F. Riaz, S. I. Shah, M. Raees, I. Shafi, A. Iqbal, Lateral pre-crash sens-
ing and avoidance in emotion enabled cognitive agent based vehicle-2-
vehicle communication system, International Journal of Communication
Networks and Information Security 5 (2) (2013) 127.
[7] C. Macal, M. North, Introductory tutorial: Agent-based modeling and
simulation, in: Proceedings of the winter simulation conference 2014,
IEEE, 2014, pp. 6–20.
[8] D. S. Jog, S. Deotale, S. Chaudhari, D. Singh, Monitoring parameters
of vehicle using wireless communication, International Research Journal
of Engineering and Technology (IRJET) 3 (05) (2016).
[9] G.Liedtke, Principlesofmicro-behaviorcommoditytransportmodeling,
Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Transportation Review
45 (5) (2009) 795–809.
[10] J. Holmgren, P. Davidsson, J. A. Persson, L. Ramstedt, Tapas: A multi-
agent-based model for simulation of transport chains, Simulation Mod-
elling Practice and Theory 23 (2012) 1–18.
[11] V. Reis, Analysis of mode choice variables in short-distance intermodal
freight transport using an agent-based model, Transportation research
part A: Policy and practice 61 (2014) 100–120.
[12] M. Raees, Study of software quality improvement through reliability
metrics models and root cause analysis program, International Journal
of Computer Engineering and Information Technology 12 (6) (2020) 42–
47.
[13] S. F. Railsback, V. Grimm, Agent-based and individual-based modeling:
a practical introduction, Princeton university press, 2019.
14