Free Energy in a Circumplex Model of Emotion
Candice Pattisapu1∗, Tim Verbelen1∗, Riddhi J. Pitliya1,2, Alex B. Kiefer1,3,
and Mahault Albarracin1,4
1 VERSES Research Lab, Los Angeles, California, 90016, USA
2 Department of Experimental Psychology, University of Oxford, Oxford, UK
3 Department of Philosophy, Monash University, Melbourne, VIC, Australia
4 Department of Computer Science, Université du Québec à Montréal, Montréal,
Canada
candice.pattisapu@gmail.com
Abstract. Previousactiveinferenceaccountsofemotiontranslatefluc-
tuationsinfreeenergytoasenseofemotion,mainlyfocusingonvalence.
However, in affective science, emotions are often represented as multi-
dimensional. In this paper, we propose to adopt a Circumplex Model of
emotion by mapping emotions into a two-dimensional spectrum of va-
lenceandarousal.Weshowhowonecanderiveavalenceandarousalsig-
nalfromanagent’sexpectedfreeenergy,relatingarousaltotheentropy
of posterior beliefs and valence to utility less expected utility. Under
this formulation, we simulate artificial agents engaged in a search task.
We show that the manipulation of priors and object presence results in
commonsense variability in emotional states.
Keywords: activeinference·emotionalinference·circumplexmodelof
emotion
1 Introduction
Emotionsareinternalstatesthatinfluencebehaviorandcognition[1].Acompre-
hensive account of intelligence requires a theory of emotion and its relationship
tohigher-levelcognitiveprocesses,whichisthemainaimofthispaper.Webegin
by briefly reviewing foundational accounts in psychological and active inference
literature.
1.1 Psychological Accounts of Human Emotion
Two approaches to the taxonomy of emotions polarize scholarship on emotions.
One class of theories, of which Ekman’s basic emotions model is the most main-
stream [2], views emotions as discrete states. Here, it is proposed that a small
set of emotion categories are the building blocks for more complex emotional
states. On this account, anger, joy, disgust, fear, sadness, and surprise are core
categoricalelementsofhumanemotionallife.Imagingstudiescitedinsupportof
* These authors contributed equally to this work
4202
luJ
2
]IA.sc[
1v47420.7042:viXra2 C. Pattisapu et al.
thisviewassociatediscreteemotionswithvariousbrainstructures.Forexample,
fear has been correlated with activity in the amygdala [3].
In contrast, dimensional approaches aim to characterize emotions in terms
of their relative locations in a continuous emotional state space (though these
emotions may be discretized for practical applications). The most compelling
dimensional approaches are premised on the Circumplex Model [4], which char-
acterizes emotions as mental states organized along orthogonal dimensions of
valence and arousal.
Fromthedimensionalview,therearefluidboundariesbetweenemotions.For
example, when valence remains low and arousal diminishes, anger transitions to
displeasure. Imaging studies associate arousal with the amygdala and valence
with the orbitofrontal cortex [3]. This localization of valence and arousal dove-
tails with their functional roles: Arousal amounts to sensitivity to sensations,
whereas valence involves appraisal of those sensations relative to the goals of
an agent. Thus, the arousal-valence distinction maps onto the independently
motivated distinction between low-level sensation and cognitive monitoring.
Approachestocharacterizingemotionsasdiscretecitetheevolutionaryplau-
sibility of their theories [5]. Additionally, there is cross-cultural evidence sup-
portingtheexistenceofbasicemotions[6].However,thereisalackofconsensus
about which basic emotion categories exist, a debate that may be attributed
to a lack of agreement on criteria about what a discrete emotion is in the first
place [7]. Indeed, discrete models have a difficult time explaining “edge cases”
thatarenaturallyaccommodatedonadimensionalview,suchasthefindingthat
fear-based arousal may be interpreted as attraction [8]. Discrete emotions can
be represented within a Circumplex model as attractor states in a continuous
landscape. In addition, dimensional models are preferrable because they focus
explicitlyonthegranularityofemotionalstatespace,and,moreover,aretheex-
planandum of most active inference formulations of emotion. For these reasons,
we embrace dimensional models in what follows.
1.2 Previous Active Inference Formulations of Emotions
In this section, we summarize existing research that has treated certain aspects
of emotion within the active inference framework. While these models address
elements such as valence, they do not provide comprehensive accounts. Notably,
the dimension of arousal has been largely overlooked. Our formulation aims to
address this gap by integrating both valence and arousal into a more compre-
hensive model of emotions under active inference.
Joffily and Coricelli [9] cast valence as the interaction between the first- and
second-order time derivatives of free energy, serving as an indicator of emo-
tional well-being. In their framework, emotional valence provides feedback on
an agent’s learning process. A rapid decrease in free energy, indicating increas-
ingly accurate predictions, is associated with happiness and suggests that the
agent should update its models more quickly by increasing the learning rate.
Conversely, negative valence suggests that a slower learning rate is appropriate.Free Energy in a Circumplex Model of Emotion 3
This adaptive mechanism regulates the rate of evidence accumulation to opti-
mizelearning.Inone-armedbandittasksimulations,agentsthatusedemotional
valence to adjust their learning rates better estimated statistical regularities in
more volatile environments. There was a rapid increase and subsequent decline
in negative emotional states in the presence of volatility, and agent performance
was enhanced by leveraging this positive and negative valence.
Hesp et al. [10] proposed a hierarchical active inference model of emotional
valence. In their approach, valence is defined as changes in the expected pre-
cision of the action model, which they term “affective charge”. Here, precision
refers to confidence in the agent’s predictions and actions, which may be re-
garded as an internal estimate of model fitness. Lower-level state factors, such
assensoryinputs,areusedtoinformhigher-levelvalencerepresentations(“beliefs
aboutbeliefs”),whichinturninfluencetheprecisionofpotentialactionpolicies.
Simulation studies using a T-maze paradigm showed that positive valence led
to riskier behavior, interpreted as increased confidence in action. When the re-
ward location was changed, resulting in negative valence, the agent displayed
more conservative exploration, indicating a shift in the confidence and model
adjustment. While the models proposed by Joffily and Coricelli [9] and Hesp et
al.[10]focusprimarilyonvalence,weareinspiredbytheiraccountsandpropose
a more comprehensive approach that also incorporates arousal to fully capture
the emergence and dynamics of emotional inference.
It is worth mentioning that Smith et al. [11] also explored emotional state
inference under active inference. In this work, a combination of exteroceptive
(external sensory), proprioceptive (body position), and interoceptive (internal
sensory) observations are used to infer emotional states, given a hierarchical
model in which valence and arousal are presupposed as part of the lower-level
observation space. The focus in this work is on the learning of explicit, con-
sciouslyaccessiblediscreterepresentationsofemotionalstates,basedonexplicit
feedback supplied by a teacher/experimenter, rather than on the factors that
constitute emotional states themselves and the ways in which these states mod-
ulate behavior. Therefore, this work does not directly inform our approach.
The aim of this paper is rather to provide a comprehensive account of emo-
tional states themselves, formalizing the Circumplex Model of emotion by map-
ping both arousal and valence to aspects of free energy minimization within the
active inference framework. We proceed as follows: In Section 2, we motivate
mappings of valence and arousal to specific terms within the free energy func-
tionalsofactiveinference,andwedemonstrateatransformationoftheresulting
valence and arousal dimensions of emotion into the space proposed by the Cir-
cumplex Model. In Section 3, we describe the setup of our simulation study, in
which an artificial agent is tasked with finding an object in various scenarios.
In Section 4, we present the results of our simulations, and in Section 5, we
discusstheirimplicationsforunderstandingandformalizingemotionalinference
and behavior.4 C. Pattisapu et al.
2 From Free Energy to a Circumplex Model of Emotion
The Circumplex Model of emotion organises emotional states along two dimen-
sions: valence and arousal. We hypothesize that both dimensions can be derived
from an active inference agent’s free energy levels.
2.1 Active Inference
Active inference casts perception and action as Bayesian inference [12], where
an agent entertains a generative model of its environment and perceives and
acts in order to minimize free energy, as defined below, with respect to this
model. In general, such an agent’s generative model can be written as the joint
probabilitydistributionoverstatessandobservationso.Minimizingfreeenergy,
then, entails finding the approximate posterior distribution Q(s|o):
min F =D [Q(s|o)||P(s|o)]− logP(o)
KL
Q(s|o) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
posteriorapproximation logevidence
=−E [logP(o,s)]−H[Q(s|o)]
Q(s|o)
(1)
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
energy entropy
=D [Q(s|o))||P(s)]−E [logP(o|s)]
KL Q(s|o)
(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
complexity accuracy
Effectively, by minimizing free energy, an agent aims to find the model that
maximizesaccuracywithminimalcomplexity,whichiseffectivelymaximizing(a
lower bound) on the model (log) evidence.
To interact with the environment, an agent in addition also needs to select
a sequence of actions or policy π to execute. In active inference, agents select
policies that minimize expected free energy G:
P(π)=σ(−G(π)), with
T
G(π)= (cid:88) E (cid:2) D [Q(s |o ,π)||Q(s |π)](cid:3) −E (cid:2) logP(o |C)(cid:3)
Q(oτ|π) KL τ τ τ Q(oτ|π) τ
τ=t+1(cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125) (cid:124) (cid:123)(cid:122) (cid:125)
(negative)informationgain expectedutility
(2)
Here, σ denotes the softmax function, and the expected free energy balances
information gain with a prior preference distribution over future outcomes or
utility, encoded in C.
2.2 From Free Energy to Valence
WedepartfromtheapproachofJoffilyandCoricelli[9],whocollapsefeaturesof
valenceandarousalwhendifferentiatingemotionalstatesbyexclusivelycomput-
ing valence from variational free energy and its time derivatives. In addition, we
proposeasimplenon-hierarchicalapproachtovalencewhich,unliketheaccountFree Energy in a Circumplex Model of Emotion 5
in Hesp et al. [10], does not directly invoke policy selection. Instead, we derive a
straightforward, psychologically interpretable description of valence in terms of
the difference between the utility of observations given preferred ones and the
prior expected utility. More formally,
Valence(V)=Utility (U)−ExpectedUtility (EU),
with utility of an observed observation o at time step t given by:
t
U =logP(o |C)
t
and expected utility:
EU =E (cid:2) logP(o |C)]
Q(ot|st−1,π) t
This formulation tracks the positive and negative experiences humans have
whentheydoanddonotencounterwhattheyprefertoobserve.Theconsequence
isthatpositivevalenceisassociatedwitha“betterthanexpected” outcome.Such
a specification of positive valence corresponds to the role of dopamine signaling
in the brain, which is known to encode reward prediction errors [13].
2.3 From Free Energy to Arousal
Empirical evidence links arousal to uncertainty vis-a-vis “increases in amygdala
activity [14] which can be considered a learning signal [15]” (cited in Feldman-
Barrett[16]).Allostasisreferstoaninternalstateofanorganismwhichoptimally
predicts incoming messages in an effort to maintain homeostasis in a dynamic
environment. To achieve a homeostatic state, an active agent needs to move to-
wardsanallostaticone,whichamountstoupdatingmodelparameterstoreduce
the uncertainty of its posterior beliefs [17]. The empirical relationship between
arousal, the amygdala, uncertainty, and the imperative to update model pa-
rameters to achieve allostasis motivates casting the entropy H of a posterior
distribution as an index of arousal in a dimensional model of emotion. More
formally, arousal (A) becomes:
A=E (cid:2) −logQ(s|o)(cid:3) =H[Q(s|o)] (3)
Q(s|o)
Our interpretation of H as arousal implies that posterior uncertainty is not
valenced. This is in line with Feldman-Barrett’s claim that arousal, associated
with activity of the amygdala, is not inherently ’emotional’ but is rather a sig-
nal of uncertainty [16]. This interpretation is further motivated by the fact that
there is no simple equivalence between ‘emotional’ and ‘valenced’ in Circum-
plexmodels,andinthatmodelparadigmaticemotionsinvolvebothvalenceand
arousal.6 C. Pattisapu et al.
Fig.1:Free Energy Transformed Circumplex Model.Distancetooriginis
emotional“intensity” anddegreeonthecirclemapstodifferentemotionalstates.
In this case, we simulated an agent that stayed in a “calm” state throughout the
entire trajectory.
2.4 Transformation to an Active Inference Emotional State Space
To ground valence and arousal in a Circumplex Model, we transform the Carte-
sian coordinates (V, A) into the following polar coordinates.
(cid:112)
r =radius= V2+A2
A
θ =angle=tan−1( )
V
After this transformation, we can represent agents’ emotional states in a cir-
cle,spacingemotionsbybothdegreeanddistancefromorigin,i.e.,distancefrom
neutral. The horizontal axis represents the valence dimension, ranging from sad
(negative valence) on the left to happy (positive valence) on the right, while the
verticalaxisrepresentsdegreeofarousal,rangingfromhigharousal/uncertainty
(top)tolowarousal/certainty(bottom).Thedistancefromoriginrepresentsthe
“intensity” of the emotion (degree of affective response). The co-occurrence of
valence and arousal results in the varying degrees on the circle with different
emotion labels [18]. The cited emotion labels are standardly associated with
these orientations on Circumplex models.
Figure 1 shows an example plot of the Circumplex Model in question. The
blue trajectory describes the search sequence of a simulated agent who wants to
findanarbitraryobjectandhasapreciseprioronwheretofindit.Theresulting
behaviorisanagentthatfindstheshortestpathtotheexpectedobjectlocation
andpromptlylocatestheobjectattimestep2.Theassociatedstateis“calm” for
the whole trajectory. In the next section, we will describe the simulated model
in more detail, and we will will illustrate more diverse scenarios with differing
resultant emotional states.Free Energy in a Circumplex Model of Emotion 7
2
0
1 4
3 5
7
6
8 10
9
11
12
(a)
(b)
Fig.2: Illustration of the graph environment and the agent’s factor
graph. (a) Agents are located on a connected graph of locations and need to
find an object that might be present at one of the locations. (b) A factor graph
representstheagent’sgenerativemodel.Twolatentstatefactorsthatmodelthe
agent’s location and the object’s location, respectively, give rise to two sensory
modalities through a likelihood factor: the agent’s location (A ) and whether
1
the object is visible (A ). The agent’s location can change conditioned on move
2
actions (B ), whereas the object is kept static in our experiments (B =I).
1 2
3 Search Agent Simulation
Imagine yourself having lost your wallet. Likely, you will immediately start
searching for it. Depending on your recent memory and/or habitual behavior,
youmightormightnothaveagoodideaonwheretofindit.Goingthroughthis
process, and depending on its outcome, you will experience distinct emotional
states. These are exactly the kinds of scenarios that we aim to simulate in the
following experiments.
3.1 Generative Model
Weequipouragentwiththegenerativemodelrepresentedbythefactorgraphin
Figure 2. The agent has two state factors, one for tracking its own location, and
oneformaintainingabeliefontheobject’slocation.Wemodeltheenvironment
asaconnectedgraphoflocationstheagentcanvisit(Fig.2a).Ateachtimestep,
the agent can select a location to visit, but it will only transition to the next
location if this is connected to its current location. These transition dynamics
are encoded in B . The agent assumes the object is static and therefore the
1
object’s transition tensor is the identity matrix, i.e. B =I. The agent has two
28 C. Pattisapu et al.
Fig.3: Simulation of Scenario 3. Grayscale shows the agent’s belief about
theobject’slocation,whereasredx’splotthegroundtruthobjectlocation.The
agent’s own location is marked with a blue dot. In this case, the agent first has
incorrect precise prior beliefs on the object location, then they do not see the
object there, and they start searching other locations until it is found.
observation modalities. It can sense its current location A = I, and whether
1
the object is visible here or not with a probability p, i.e. Aoij = p if i = j and
2
o = visible. In our experiments p = 0.95, so the agent has high confidence in
seeing the object when at the correct location.
3.2 Design
The agent always starts at location 0 in the graph and has a preference for the
outcome “object visible”. We simulate 5 different scenarios, varying whether the
object is actually present in the environment, as well as the agent’s priors. We
settheagent’spriorbeliefsontheinitialstateabouttheobject’slocation,which
can either be uniform (i.e. no idea where the object is) or precise (i.e. remem-
bering where the object is). In the case of a precise prior, this can be correct
Scenario Object Presence Location Prior
1 Present Uniform
2 Present Correct
3 Present Incorrect
4 Absent Maybe Here
5 Absent Definitely Here
Table1:Overview of search agent scenarios given levels of object pres-
ence and agent location priors. Scenario 1: Agent has uniform prior beliefs
overobjectlocation.Scenario2:Agenthasacorrectpriorbeliefoverobjectloca-
tion. Scenario 3: Agent has an incorrect prior belief on object location. Scenario
4: Agent has a state dim "object not here" and object is not present. Scenario
5: Agent has a state "object must be somewhere" and object is not present.Free Energy in a Circumplex Model of Emotion 9
(i.e. the object is actually there), or not (the object is actually somewhere else,
or absent). We can also equip the agent’s generative model with an additional
‘object location‘ state dimension, which represents the object being absent by
mappingtoaninvisibleoutcomeatalllocations.Thiscanbeinterpretedaspro-
vidingapriorbeliefthattheobjectmightnotbepresent(versusthattheobject
must be present somewhere). Table 1 summarizes the combinations considered
per scenario.
Figure 3 shows the agent’s actions and beliefs over time for a given scenario
(Scenario 3). The belief about the object’s presence at each location is plotted
in grayscale, where black represents a belief of 1, indicating high certainty that
theobjectisthere,andwhiterepresentsabeliefof0,correspondinglyindicating
high certainty that the object is not there.
4 Results
Foreachofthe5simulationscenarios,wederivedthevalenceandarousalvalues
from the agent’s free energy, and logged the associated emotions. In general, we
found that agents were alert while searching for the object, while being happy
whenfindingtheobject.Irrespectiveofwhethertheobjectwasfound,theagents
in all scenarios finished in a low arousal and neutral valence state, relative to
their initial emotional state. This may demonstrate their capacity for emotional
regulation, or at least an inherent resistance to falling into an inescapable cycle
of negative emotions. Table 2 summarizes the trajectory of the agent in each
scenario through emotional state space. We will now more completely detail the
exact trajectories using the Circumplex Model as reference.
4.1 Object Location Priors and Emotional State
In the cases where the object is present and the agent ultimately locates it
(Scenarios 1-3), we find that the agent begins from a calm state only when it
haspreciseobjectlocationpriors,irrespectiveofwhetherthosepriorsultimately
provecorrect.Inotherwords,precisepriorsarebeliefsheldwithhighconfidence,
resultinginastateofeasewithlowarousalandneutralvalenceintheabsenceof
countervailing evidence. Moreover, when the precise priors are correct (Scenario
Scenario Description
1 Alert => Calm
2 Calm => Calmer
3 Calm => Angry => Decreasingly alert => Relaxed => Calm
4 Alert => Calm
5 Alert => Anger <=> Depression
Table 2: Narrative of agent trajectory through emotional state space
per scenario.10 C. Pattisapu et al.
(a) Scenario 1 (b) Scenario 3
Fig.4: Impact of Priors on Emotional State. In Scenario 1 (left), the agent
begins alert, with uniform priors. In Scenario 3 (right), the agent begins some-
where between a calm and neutral state, but they immediately become angry
upon not finding the object at the location given by their prior.
2,showninFigure1),theagentiscalmduringtheentiretrajectory,asitpredicts
that it will find the object soon from the start.
Highly valenced and aroused states are triggered only subsequent to prior
assumptions being violated, which can happen either when the priors are uni-
form or incorrect (Fig. 4). For instance, in Scenario 3, the violation of precise
priorsmadetheagentangry,ahighlynegativelyvalencedandpositivelyaroused
state. Subsequent to experiencing anger, when the object is located, the agent
experiences a nearly 180-degree mood change into a relaxed state characterized
byhighlypositivevalenceandlowarousal.InScenario1,inwhichthepriorsare
uniform (i.e. Fig., 4a), the agent begins in an alert state. Interestingly, agents
locatingtheobjectafterbeginningwithuniformpriorswerenotasrelaxedwhen
they found it as those who began with precise priors.
4.2 Missing objects and Emotional State
In Scenarios 4 and 5, we simulate a search agent who will never find the object
as it is not present in the environment. We conducted these simulations to see
whether and how the agent conducts emotional regulation. In Scenario 4, in
addition to a dimension for every location, the agent’s state factor has a ‘not
here‘bin.Invokingthisfactormeansthattheagentexpectsnottoseetheobject
at any of the locations it can visit. In Scenario 5, the agent does not have this
dimension, hence it has a structural prior that the object should always be at
one of the locations. This has some interesting consequences for the emotional
statestheagentvisits,asillustratedinthecontrastbetweenthecircumplexplots
in Figure 5.Free Energy in a Circumplex Model of Emotion 11
(a) Scenario 4 (b) Scenario 5
Fig.5:Impact of object presence on Emotional State.InScenario4(left),
theagentbeginsinthealertstate,with“maybehere” priors.InScenario5(right),
the agent also begins alert, with “definitely here” priors. In Scenario 4 the agent
ultimately accepts that there is no object to find and becomes calm, whereas
in Scenario 5 the agent cycles between anger and depression when searching all
locations and still not finding the object.
While both agents begin in the alert state, the agent in Scenario 4 (with
“maybe here” priors) spends less time in highly negatively valenced states and
ends in a state of much lower arousal upon failing to find the object. A psycho-
logical interpretation of this result is that the agent becomes successively more
resigned and less interested in finding the object as time progresses, as it knows
there is a possibility that the object is simply not around. In that case, not
finding the object furnishes evidence.
By contrast, the agent in Scenario 5 (with “definitely here” priors) spends
more time in highly negatively valenced states and ends in a state of higher
arousal upon failing to find the object. Interestingly, both anger and depression
inthisagentspikeatlatertimesteps(26outof43and20outof40,respectively),
indicating that there is a pull towards neutral arousal that is resisted when the
agentisconvincedthattheobjectmustbesomewhere.Whilethisagentbecomes
transientlymorecalmasitssearcheliminatespossibilities,providingfalsehopeof
finding the object, it ultimately cannot accept an “object not present” outcome,
and it is in a more highly aroused state, i.e., less at peace, when the simulation
terminates.
5 Discussion
In this paper, we derived a Circumplex Model of emotion by associating both
valence and arousal with the parameters of free energy. Simulation studies pro-
vided evidence that our model enables the sound ascription of anthropomorphic12 C. Pattisapu et al.
emotional state trajectories to a simulated agent performing basic search tasks.
These simulations further demonstrate that the inclusion of arousal as well as
valence dimensions facilitates the commonsense understanding of emotion, even
in simple scenarios.
First, comparing Scenarios 1 (uniform prior) and 3 (incorrect prior), upon
finding the object, both agents enter equivalently positively valenced states,
but the agent in Scenario 3 finishes considerably less aroused. The emotional
trajectory of the agent in Scenario 3, involving a mood swing from a highly
negatively valenced state (anger) to a region of neutral valence, could not be
described in terms of valence alone.
Second,theagentinScenario3becamesuccessivelylessarousedbeforefind-
ing the object. A description of emotional state in terms of valence alone would
notcapturethefactthatafterhavingapriorexpectationviolated,anagentmay
return to a state of alertness, which dwindles to resignation as time progresses.
Third, Scenario 5, in which an agent’s object presence prior is incorrect,
is telling. It shows that on our theory, successful regulation of emotion is not
inevitableforanyactiveinferenceagent,butratherdependsonthefundamental
soundness of one’s model of the world. Rigid priors that cannot change in the
faceofevidencemayputsuccessfulallostasis,andthusoptimalhomeostasisand
acorrespondinglycalmemotionalstatemeasuredintermsofarousalorentropy,
out of reach.
This work faces a couple of key limitations. One is that the scenarios are
simple and the range of emotion evidenced is correspondingly narrow. Another
is that our findings are not benchmarked against human data. Instead, we rely
onfacevaliditytomakesenseoftheattributionofemotionalstatestosimulated
agents.Atargetforfutureexperimentalworkistomeasurehowemotionimpacts
behaviorininferenceandlearning,ratherthanmerelycharacterizingit,following
past work on emotional inference (e.g., [9]).
Other future research will explore the temporal dimension of emotion and
emotional state attribution. Joffily and Coricelli [9], for example, distinguish
betweenfactiveandepistemicemotions,i.e.,beliefsthatastateofaffairsobtains,
yielding an emotion such as disappointment, versus uncertain beliefs, yielding
an emotion such as hope. This distinction may be naturally accounted for in
terms of an agent’s past or current and anticipated emotional experiences.
Additionally, although we normalized the arousal component when trans-
forming to polar coordinates, the raw radius of the polar coordinates may cor-
respond to the intensity of an emotion. In line with our proposed model, some
research suggests that the intensity of emotion is distinct from arousal [19]. An
account of emotional intensity may have implications for other cognitive pro-
cesses, such as event segmentation in an anthropomorphic account of episodic
memory in simulated agents, as more intense emotional experiences are more
likely to be encoded and recalled [20].
Futureworkmayexploreemotionsamongsimulatedagentsinsocialcontexts.
For example, finely-grained emotional inference of an agent’s own emotions, as
wellaspossessionofatheoryofmind,areprerequisitesforempathy.BecauseourFree Energy in a Circumplex Model of Emotion 13
account leverages the arousal/valence distinction to define a granular emotional
state space, it may serve as a foundation for simulating empathy in multi-agent
scenarios.
References
1. J.Martínez-MirandaandA.Aldea,“Emotionsinhumanandartificialintelligence,”
Computers in Human Behavior, vol. 21, p. 323–341, Mar. 2005.
2. P. Ekman and D. Cordaro, “What is meant by calling emotions basic,” Emotion
Review, vol. 3, p. 364–370, Sept. 2011.
3. K.A.Lindquist,T.D.Wager,H.Kober,E.Bliss-Moreau,andL.F.Barrett,“The
brain basis of emotion: A meta-analytic review,” Behavioral and Brain Sciences,
vol. 35, p. 121–143, May 2012.
4. J. A. Russell, “A circumplex model of affect.,” Journal of Personality and Social
Psychology, vol. 39, p. 1161–1178, Dec. 1980.
5. R. Plutchik, Emotion, a Psychoevolutionary Synthesis. Harper & Row, 1980.
6. J.A.Russell,“Cultureandthecategorizationofemotions.,” PsychologicalBulletin,
vol. 110, no. 3, p. 426–450, 1991.
7. A.Ortony,“Areall“basicemotions” emotions?aproblemforthe(basic)emotions
construct,” Perspectives on Psychological Science, vol. 17, p. 41–61, July 2021.
8. D. Dutton and A. Aron, “Some evidence for heightened sexual attraction under
conditions of high anxiety,” Journal of personality and social psychology, vol. 30,
pp. 510–7, 10 1974.
9. M. Joffily and G. Coricelli, “Emotional valence and the free-energy principle,”
PLOS Computational Biology, vol. 9, pp. 1–14, 06 2013.
10. C. Hesp, R. Smith, T. Parr, M. Allen, K. J. Friston, and M. J. D. Ramstead,
“Deeply felt affect: The emergence of valence in deep active inference,” Neural
Computation, vol. 33, p. 398–446, Feb. 2021.
11. R. Smith, T. Parr, and K. J. Friston, “Simulating emotions: An active inference
model of emotional state inference and emotion concept learning,” Frontiers in
Psychology, vol. 10, Dec. 2019.
12. T.Parr,G.Pezzulo,andK.J.Friston,ActiveInference:TheFreeEnergyPrinciple
in Mind, Brain, and Behavior. The MIT Press, 03 2022.
13. W.Schultz,“Dopaminerewardpredictionerrorcoding,” DialoguesinClinicalNeu-
roscience, vol. 18, p. 23–32, Mar. 2016.
14. C.D.Wilson-Mendenhall,L.F.Barrett,andL.W.Barsalou,“Neuralevidencethat
human emotions share core affective properties,” Psychological Science, vol. 24,
p. 947–956, Apr. 2013.
15. S.S.Y.LiandG.P.McNally,“Theconditionsthatpromotefearlearning:Predic-
tionerrorandpavlovianfearconditioning,” NeurobiologyofLearningandMemory,
vol. 108, p. 14–21, Feb. 2014.
16. L. F. Barrett, “The theory of constructed emotion: an active inference account
of interoception and categorization,” Social Cognitive and Affective Neuroscience,
p. nsw154, Oct. 2016.
17. A.W.Corcoran,G.Pezzulo,andJ.Hohwy,“Fromallostaticagentstocounterfac-
tualcognisers:activeinference,biologicalregulation,andtheoriginsofcognition,”
Biology & Philosophy, vol. 35, Apr. 2020.
18. J. Posner, J. A. Russell, and B. S. Peterson, “The circumplex model of affect:
Anintegrativeapproachtoaffectiveneuroscience,cognitivedevelopment,andpsy-
chopathology,” Development and Psychopathology, vol. 17, Sept. 2005.14 C. Pattisapu et al.
19. G. Raz, A. Touroutoglou, C. Wilson-Mendenhall, G. Gilam, T. Lin, T. Gonen,
Y. Jacob, S. Atzil, R. Admon, M. Bleich-Cohen, A. Maron-Katz, T. Hendler, and
L. F. Barrett, “Functional connectivity dynamics during film viewing reveal com-
mon networksfor different emotional experiences,” Cognitive, Affective, & Behav-
ioral Neuroscience, vol. 16, p. 709–723, May 2016.
20. K. KaYan, H. Ginting, and C. Cakrangadinata, “It is fear, not disgust, that en-
hancesmemory:Experimentalstudyonstudentsinbandung,” ANIMAIndonesian
Psychological Journal, vol. 31, p. 77–83, Jan. 2016.