The Equality Maturity Model: an actionable tool to
advance gender balance in leadership and
participation roles
Paloma Díaz Paula Alexandra Silva Katja Tuma
Department of Computer Science and DEI/CISUC Department of Computer Science
Engineering Universidade de Coimbra Vrije Universiteit Amsterdam
Universidad Carlos III Coimbra, Portugal Amsterdam, Netherlands
Leganés, Spain paulasilva@dei.uc.pt k.tuma@vu.nl
pdp@inf.uc3m.es 0000-0003-1573-7446 0000-0001-7189-2817
0000-0002-9493-7739
Abstract— The underrepresentation of women in Computer As stated in [5], without specific interventions the lack of
Science and Engineering is a pervasive issue, impacting the equality between men and women, not only in terms of
enrolment and graduation rates of female students as well as the representation but also of leadership and salary, will not be
presence of women in leadership positions in academia and solved in this century.
industry. The European Network For Gender Balance in
Informatics (EUGAIN) COST action seeks to share data, The European Network For Gender Balance in
experiences, best practices, and lessons from failures, and to Informatics (EUGAIN) COST action1 is a step forward in
provide actionable tools that may contribute to the advancement this direction as it aims at providing data, experience on best
of gender balance in the field. This paper summarises results from practices and failures, and actionable tools for advancing
the Ph.D./Postdoc to Professor workgroup that were gathered in gender balance in computer science. In particular,
two booklets of best practices. Specifically, we introduce the workgroup 3 (WG3) is devoted to dealing with the path
Equality Maturity Model (EMM), a conceptual tool aimed at from the Ph.D./Postdoc to Professor, trying to provide
supporting organisations in measuring how they are doing useful resources to increase the leadership and participation
concerning equality and identifying potential areas of of women in academia and also in professorship and
improvement and that was inspired by both booklets. leadership positions. In this paper, we introduce one of the
actionable tools devised in this workgroup, the Equality
Keywords—STEM, Gender, Informatics, Equity, Diversity
Maturity Model (EMM, henceforth), a conceptual tool
I. INTRODUCTION
aimed at helping organisations measure how they are
currently doing concerning equality and identifying
The lack of women in Computer Science and
potential areas of improvement.
Engineering is a pervasive issue, impacting the enrolment
and graduation rates of female students as well as the In the next section, we review the related work that
presence of women in leadership positions both in academia inspired the EMM. Section III provides context for this
and industry. As the She Figures 2021 report shows, women work describing the main goals of the EUGAIN COST
are underrepresented in STEM fields, and this situation is Network and, more specifically, the outcomes of WG3 -
even more severe in the Information and Communication From Ph.D./Postdoc to Professor. Then we describe the
(ICT) disciplines with only 20.4% of women graduating current version of EMM, which is still under development,
with an ICT bachelor [1]. The gap between women and men and, finally, we draw initial conclusions and future
is also evident in research and leadership positions [1]. directions to improve the model and assess it.
Cultural and organizational biases, the so-called second- II. . RELATED WORK
generation discrimination, as well as problems like the
The gender gap in the workforce and leadership
leaking pipeline, the glass ceiling, the sticky floor, and the
positions has already been identified as a problem in many
glass cliff, among others, have been extensively studied in
academic and research institutions not only because it
the literature [2, 3]. The creation of Diversity, Inclusion, and
suggests a lack of equity in hiring and promoting women,
Equity (DEI) committees and gender equality plans is being
but also because diversity increases creativity, profitability,
pushed everywhere, from institutions to professional
and performance [6, 7]. However, these benefits strongly
organisations such as IEEE or ACM. The European Union
depend on the existence of a supportive organizational
even made Gender Equality plans mandatory for institutions
culture [8] aimed at valuing diversity and not accepting it as
participating in H2020 calls. However, dealing with gender
a buzzword or a legal imposition. Organizational change
underrepresentation may not be only a question of
requires commitment from the governing boards as well as
generating documents or creating ad-hoc committees, nor of
acknowledging whether and how the current situation can
changing women by applying the Henry Higgins effect [4],
be changed.
but of promoting changes in the organisational cultures and
society to make people aware that diversity and gender The EMM aims to provide an actionable tool to think
equality are valuable assets in a sustainable and fair society. about the gender equality policies, strategies, and actions
1 eugain.euthat are currently implemented and the improvements that capability of the workforce” [9]. In this case, best practices
could be applied to make progress through the EMM. and measures are identified for related processes such as
Inspired by the Capability Maturity Model Integration staffing, communication and coordination, work
(CMMI®) that is applied in software engineering [8], the environment, performance management, training and
EMM is a conceptual tool designed to assist organisations development, and compensation. Similarly, the Digital
in evaluating their current status regarding gender equality Transformation Maturity Model [10] identifies several
and to help identify areas where improvements are possible. processes and dimensions to systematically analyse this
process.
The CMMI® [8] was created by the Software
Engineering Institute at Carnegie Mellon University to This level of structured systematization in the process
provide organisations with a set of best practices to improve evaluation might be what is required in institutions and
their processes (including requirements analysis, software organisations regarding gender equality. This is the purpose
development, systems engineering, project management, of providing institutions and organisations with a tool with
etc.), and the quality of the products and services they offer. which to comprehensively analyse their current actions and,
Both aspects make up the concept of maturity. CMMI® is a what is even more important, the actions they are not yet
framework that offers tools to assess and improve software doing and that could have a great impact in terms of gender
development maturity in a systematic way. To start with, it equality. In this way, the EMM could be a propeller for
identifies five increasing levels of maturity that are applied action towards gender balance.
to the various processes carried out in the organisation:
III. THE EUGAIN COST NETWORK
1. Initial: Processes are unpredictable, chaotic,
The EUGAIN COST action aims to provide data,
and rarely controlled to the point that any
experiences, and tools for advancing gender balance in
success essentially depends on individual
Informatics. EUGAIN is organised into five workgroups
efforts and intuitions.
that reflect the different stages where specific actions can be
2. Managed: Most processes are defined using taken, including:
projects or tasks that respond to very specific
• WG1. From School to University, that is
goals aimed at coping with already identified
focused on how to increase the number of
issues. The organization has mainly a reactive
female students in Informatics and, in general,
behaviour though there are controls at some
Information and Communication
points in the process.
Technologies (ICT) bachelors and how to
3. Defined: Processes are well characterised and support them to actively participate and
understood by all the implied stakeholders. succeed in their path.
Processes are proactive and tailored to the
organization's needs and are described in a • WG2. From Bachelor/Master studies to PhD,
detailed way using standards, procedures, which is centred on the next stage where the
tools, and methods. At this level, there is a gap is increased, the number of PhD in ICT.
focus on continuously learning and improving • WG3. From Ph.D./Postdoc to Professor, which
the process.
focuses on specific problems and challenges
4. Quantitatively Managed: Processes are that make the academic career of women more
measured and controlled with objective and difficult and how to address these challenges
meaningful data. Quantitative data make it from the institutions.
possible to see and manage performance and • WG4. The cooperation with industry and
quality in terms of statistical measures. This
society aims at integrating all the initiatives
approach is applied during the whole life cycle
regarding gender balance in which industry
of the processes.
and relevant stakeholders are being involved.
5. Optimizing: Processes focus on continuous
• WG5. Strategy and Dissemination, whose goal
improvement based on a quantitative
is to raise awareness and advocate for change,
understanding of the common causes of
reach out to external stakeholders, and
variation and the impact of improvement
disseminate the results of the Action.
opportunities. The organization is proactive in
identifying opportunities for improvement and The EMM model introduced in this paper is a result of
it is agile in implementing such improvements. WG3's collaborative efforts. It builds on prior work of the
team members, specifically two booklets: i) a guide on best
Apart from the levels, the CMMI® framework offers a
practices for aiding the transition of PhD and postdoctoral
conceptual scaffold to help organisations apply this model
researchers into faculty positions [12], and ii) a booklet
to different processes related to software development and
focused on career planning and mentoring to enhance
management. The ultimate goal is to systematize the
organizational support initiatives [13].
analysis of the current situation and the identification of
areas of opportunity to improve current practices. The first booklet is aimed at university departments and
highlights gender balance issues, addressing the reasons for
This same approach of systematization and process
women's underrepresentation and proposing strategies for
maturity has been applied in other domains. Thus, the
improvement in recruiting, retaining, and promoting
People Capability Maturity Model [9] is aimed at helping
women, along with guidelines for evaluating hiring and
human resources departments in setting “basic workforce
promotion applications. These practices are intended for
practices that can be continuously improved to develop theapplication throughout an academic career, promoting equal
opportunities for women.
The second booklet is aimed both at management and
women and examines structural factors, discussing the
prevalent culture in academic institutions, to then suggest
specific actions to address these factors. Steps into action
are presented to foster a supportive environment, implement
career development initiatives, and establish mentoring
programs. The EMM emerged as a mechanism to
systematize the analysis of the current status of institutions
and organisations and to align the application of the
identified strategies and practices with strategic goals and
processes.
IV. THE EQUALITY MATURITY MODEL
The EMM aims to become an actionable tool for
institutions and organisations to reflect upon the actions
they are taking, that they could take in the future to promote
gender equality and the mechanisms they could implement
to support the required cultural change, awareness, and
Fig. 1. Levels of description at the EMM
accountability.
The EMM is structured in five relevant dimensions that
Similarly to CMMI®, the EMM aims at providing
permeate different processes at the institution. To identify
institutions and organisations with a snapshot of their
the current dimensions, we complement the outcomes of the
maturity regarding equality policies, strategies, and
two previous deliverables of WG3 [12, 13], with a literature
practices as well as hints on how to progress to higher
review of existing problems and practices [2, 6, 14-18]. The
levels. The EMM includes Policies, Strategies, and
dimensions currently included in EMM are the following:
Practices (see Figure 1). Policies are principles assumed in
the organisation, strategies are action plans to achieve ● Organisation Policy on Equality: This dimension
policies, and practices are specific and well-organised focuses on the specific actions carried out in the
activities that make up the strategies. All of them need to be organization to support the required culture change
clear, known by the community, accountable, and open to and the right conditions to turn gender equality
improvement. into a valuable asset. Cultural change needs to be
acknowledged and valued by all to avoid negative
For instance, a broadly stated policy is Promoting
effects [13]. This implies raising awareness of the
Gender Equality, which is also the United Nations’
value of gender equality among all the involved
Sustainable Development Goal 5: “Achieve gender equality
agents in a continuous way. A one-shot training
and empower all women and girls”. There are many ways
program might not be enough as the culture of
in which an organisation can achieve this objective,
equality has to reach everyone in the organisation
depending on the specific goals the organisation aims to
during its whole lifecycle. It also needs to go
reach, the available resources, existing barriers and
deeper than just raising awareness as it needs to
opportunities inside and outside the organisation, and the
change the organisation’s values and beliefs. For
starting/current point at which the organisation finds itself
example, the culture of science that could be
in terms of gender equality. The point at which the
perceived as neutral, since it relies upon
organisation finds itself is what we identify with the concept
“objective” data, does not take into account that by
of maturity of the organisation in gender equality. From
rewarding only individual and competitive merits,
such a general goal, a potential strategy could be to increase
the contribution of multidisciplinary teamwork is
the number of women professors in STEM-related
not acknowledged, even if it nurtures innovation
departments. In turn, several practices can be implemented
[2]. Another aspect to analyse is whether the
for such a strategy, including promoting gender-inclusive
organisations have a gender-balanced policy in
hiring guidelines, creating inclusive working environments,
leadership and decision-making that does not
adopting positive discrimination, using promotion criteria
overwhelm women with useless work and does not
inclusive of different career paths and that value different
push them to the glass cliff [2].
types of contributions, and so on.
● Inclusive Work Environment: One of the main
By prompting the organisation to position itself and to
set up and reflect upon policies, strategies, and practices, the causes of the lack of women in leadership
EMM can help to diagnose where the institution is positions is attributed to what is called the “chilly
concerning a policy, which strategies should be prioritised, climate” [14] for women in academia and research
and which action can be put into practice. [2, 6]. Among other issues, this dimension focuses
on the recognition of different kinds of
contributions and career paths, actions for work-
life balance (including flexible work arrangements
or disconnection policies), standards of conduct to
avoid gender-based violence or discrimination,
and identification of gendered experiences thatchallenge preconceived beliefs about the favour men. Many recommendations can be
organisation. For instance, the qualitative study applied when hiring or promoting, as described in
carried out in the NIST [2] showed that the [12].
organizational values of excellence and
● Career Development Program: One of the
meritocracy contributed to nurturing an endemic
gendered experiences that was identified in [2]
elitism that not only favoured men but also was not
was a different perception of how to progress in
necessarily aligned with the contribution to the
the professional career that seemed quite
goals of the institution. An inclusive working
dependent on gender, mainly due to the chilly
environment starts by making the job attractive to
climate and the hidden micro-inequalities.
women and other unrepresented groups when
Implementing specific career development plans
advertising new openings or promotions [12].
can help minimize the effect of some of the biases
● Fair Recruitment, Promotion, and Evaluation described in the previous dimensions by providing
Processes: It has been extensively documented specific networking and visibility opportunities for
that women experience several micro-inequalities women’s contributions [2,12] whilst it will help in
in academia and research that harden their careers. having a clear, equal and transparent career
Micro-inequalities were identified back in the 90s description within the organization [12].
to refer to all the small “things” that happen Mentoring programs are also a key instrument to
covertly and that correspond to biases against a support women in their career development [13].
minority, whether conscious or not [15]. Women
● Gender Equality Plans: Gender equality plans are
are usually perceived as not as good scientists as
almost mandatory in most European Universities,
men [2], have fewer opportunities to participate in
especially after the European Union obliged all
panels and keynotes, are less credited in scientific
institutions to have a gender equality plan to
papers and patents [16], and their work receives
participate in H2020 calls. This dimension not
fewer citations [2]. Women are not less productive
only focuses on the binary fact of having or not
than men, but they value and engage in other kinds
having an equality plan but on how mature it is,
of activities, often voluntary tasks such as
how it is implemented, how it permeates different
mentoring, that are as important and needed to
areas in the organization, and how this impact is
reach the goals of the organizations. Indeed, it is
measured [18].
also recognised that women volunteer and are
directly assigned more non-promotable tasks [9] These above-described dimensions are, like the
losing part of their working time not doing the CMMI® model, assessed using five levels. Each level is
research that is really valued in the committees. characterized by a rubric so that institutions can reflect upon
Hence evaluation criteria must recognize different where they currently stand and how they could go forward
types of contributions and not only numbers as if needed. Thus, examples of practices at each level will be
well as different career paths [2, 12]. There are also also provided to assist institutions in identifying ways to
differences in the recommendation letters written progress in their policies, strategies, and practices. As an
for men and women [17] and hiring and promotion example, Figure 1 shows a simplified rubric for the Gender
committees might have unconscious biases that Equality Plan dimension that is explained below.
Fig. 2. Example of a rubric in the EMM
Having an equality plan serves as a mere checkpoint that progress. While the plan is known to all within the
does not demonstrate the institution's maturity concerning organisation, it may not be because is published but rather
equality strategies and practices. At the Initial level, a plan because due to an informal learning process that has taken
may be in place, possibly due to mandatory requirements, place. Furthermore, modifications to the plan only occur
but the entire organisation lacks awareness of the plan and when faced with ‘awkward’ situations, prompting the
does not align its work and behaviours to the plan. Specific institution to act upon it and respond.
strategies or practices to implement are not identified at this
Moving to the Defined level, the plan includes well-
level, making it impossible to ensure whether the plan has
defined strategies and potential practices or actions. The
any impact on gender equality.
plan is acknowledged and agreed upon by all involved
At the Managed Level, the plan is outlined in terms of stakeholders, reflecting the cultural shift the institution is
generic strategies with no clear ways of acting to propel embarking on. The plan is not solely derived from internalissues but also from proactively learned lessons from other focus groups, will also contribute to raising awareness in the
institutions, to anticipate problems and define how to whole organisation about the importance of gender equality
prevent them and address them. Continuous learning and and identifying the hidden biases and micro-inequalities in
training play a pivotal role in this stage to enhance the plan’s the institution.
comprehensiveness.
ACKNOWLEDGEMENT
At the Quantitatively managed level, the institution has
This work has been partially supported by the EUGAIN
identified specific criteria, metrics, or success indicators to
COST Action CA19122— European Network for Gender
objectively measure the actual impact of the applied
strategies and practices. The management team can Balance in Informatics.
demonstrate that progress is a result of a specific policy
REFERENCES
based on objective measures, establishing a clear link
between data and actions. Using data with no direct relation
to a policy might imply a casual situation rather than a [1] European Commission, Directorate-General for Research and
causal consequence. Innovation, She figures 2021 – Policy briefs, Publications Office,
2021, https://data.europa.eu/doi/10.2777/078011
Finally, at the Optimizing level, the institution [2] Theofanos, M. F., Prettyman, S. S., Evans, J., & Furman, S. (2021).
continuously and quantitively monitors its managed level Voices of NIST: A Study of Gender and Inclusivity.
plan, learning about successful and failed practices. At this [3] De Welde, K., & Laursen, S. (2011). The glass obstacle course:
level, the aim is to be proactive and agile in improving the Informal and formal barriers for women Ph. D. students in STEM
fields. International Journal of Gender, Science and Technology,
plan, demonstrating a commitment to ongoing refinement
3(3), 571-595.
of the plan.
[4] Perez, C. C. (2019). Invisible women: Data bias in a world designed
In this short paper, we propose the EMM as a tool to for men. Abrams.
facilitate cultural change. For such a ground-breaking shift [5] Holman, L., Stuart-Fox, D., & Hauser, C. E. (2018). The gender gap
in science: How long until women are equally represented?. PLoS
to materialize in organizations and institutions, the political,
biology, 16(4), e2004956.
social, and ideological readiness of society is still necessary.
[6] Hunt, V., Prince, S., Dixon-Fyle, S., & Dolan, K. (2020). Diversity
Future work will focus on evaluating the effectiveness of
wins. McKinsey.
the EMM in practice and on gaining insight into the best
[7] Rock, D., & Grant, H. (2016). Why diverse teams are smarter.
way to apply it in real-life scenarios. To investigate these Harvard Business Review, 4(4), 2-5.
aspects is planned for future work. The recommended way
[8] Dwyer, S., Richard, O. C., & Chadwick, K. (2003). Gender diversity
to use the EMM is to establish exploratory focus groups in management and firm performance: The influence of growth
involving different stakeholder profiles in terms of gender orientation and organizational culture. Journal of Business
and responsibilities to discuss, openly and respectfully, the Research, 56(12), 1009-1019.
status of the institution regarding the different dimensions. [9] CMMI Product Team. (2010). CMMI for Development, version 1.3.
Software Engineering Institute, Pittsburgh USA.
Having a varied set of participants will enrich the process,
[10] Curtis, B., Hefley, B., & Miller, S. (2009). People capability
as the perception of different stakeholders will provide a
maturity model (P-CMM) version 2.0. Software Engineering
better picture of the current situation and how it is
Institute, 18.
experienced by diverse people. Though managers could
[11] Gökalp, E., & Martinez, V. (2022). Digital transformation maturity
think that their institution is fully committed to gender assessment: development of the digital transformation capability
equality, hearing the voices of those who daily experience maturity model. International Journal of Production Research,
the working environment can provide a completely different 60(20), 6282-6302.
perspective, as shown in the study carried out by Theofanos [12] Murphy, B., Teixera-Lopes, C., Merelli, E., Diaconou, M.G.,
et al. [2]. Gallais, M, Silva, P.A., Ghilezan, S. and Kremer, S, (2023).
EUGAIN Best practices from Ph.D. to Professor.
V. CONCLUSIONS AND FUTURE WORK
https://eugain.eu/results/deliverables/
[13] Diaz, P, Echihabi, K., Huisman, M., Lorenz, B., Murphy, B., Silva,
A cultural change is needed to close the gender gap in P.A., Tuma, K. (2023) EUGAIN Best practices from Ph.D. to
academia and research. This change has to involve the Professor: Career planning and mentoring. https://eugain.eu/wp-
whole organization and that must be perceived as a joint content/uploads/2024/01/EUGAIN_booklet_WG3_2023-
12_Mentoring-Career-Development.pdf
commitment to advance as an institution, not just as a legal
[14] . Hall, R. M., & Sandler, B. R. (1982). The Classroom Climate: A
or social imposition. As part of the EUGAIN network, we
Chilly One for Women?.
described here some of the outcomes of WG3, when
[15] Rowe, M. P. (1990). Barriers to equality: The power of subtle
studying possible ways forward in the career path from
discrimination to maintain unequal opportunity. Employee
Ph.D./Postdoc to Professor. In particular, we introduced a responsibilities and rights journal, 3, 153-163.
conceptual tool that is currently being developed to assist [16] Ross, M. B., Glennon, B. M., Murciano-Goroff, R., Berkes, E. G.,
organisations in engaging in a self-reflection and Weinberg, B. A., & Lane, J. I. (2022). Women are credited less in
improvement process, the EMM. Though the EMM is in a science than men. Nature, 608(7921), 135-145.
preliminary stage and is still open to growth with best [17] Trix, Frances and Carolyn Psenka (2003). “Exploring the Color of
practices and strategies, it represents an important first stage Glass: Letters of Recommendation for Female and Male Medical
Faculty”. In: Discourse & Society 14.2, pp. 191–220.
to provide a systematic and actionable tool to reflect upon
[18] Addabbo, T. And Badalassi, G.. (2023). Handbook for Sustainable
the maturity of institutions in terms of gender equality.
Gender Equality Plans. LeTSGEPS publication. EU Horizon 2020
While we recognise that the EMM tool will need yet to be
Research and Innovation program, Grant Agreement n.873072.
evaluated by institutions and organizations to verify its https://letsgeps.eu.
effectiveness, this paper marks an important initial effort to [19] Babcock, Linda, et al. "Gender differences in accepting and
introduce a more systematic measurement of gender receiving requests for tasks with low promotability." American
equality. The model, based on discussions in heterogeneous Economic Review 107.3 (2017): 714-747.