Expanding AI Awareness Through Everyday
Interactions with AI: A Reflective Journal Study
Ashish Hingle Aditya Johri
Information Sciences and Technology Information Sciences and Technology
George Mason University George Mason University
Fairfax, USA Fairfax, USA
ahingle2@gmu.edu johri@gmu.edu
Abstract—This research paper presents findings from a re- may take many forms, the growing prevalence of AI systems
flective journal study of undergraduate students’ everyday in- highlightstheimportanceofdevelopinganAI-awareandliter-
teractions with artificial intelligence (AI). As the application of
ate population, especially using a ”high-level understanding”
AI continues to expand, students in technology programs are
as a baseline for the general population [5]. Developing AI poised to be both producers and users of the technologies. They
are also positioned to engage with AI applications within and awareness is especially important for current students, given
outside the classroom. While focusing on the curriculum when it will likely affect their day-to-day interactions. Leveraging
examining students’ AI knowledge is common, extending this students’ personal experiences as educational tools can ef-
connection to students’ everyday interactions with AI provides
fectively enhance their understanding of AI. While formal
a more complete picture of their learning. In this paper, we
AI education programs are increasingly being developed to
explore student’s awareness and engagement with AI in the
context of school and their daily lives. Over six weeks, 22 reach a wider audience, exploring and incorporating informal
undergraduatestudentsparticipatedinareflectivejournalstudy interactions with AI technologies is important to provide a
and submitted a weekly journal entry about their interactions more comprehensive understanding [5], [6].
with AI. The participants were recruited from a technology and
This study explores students’ self-reflections on their inter-
society course that focuses on the implications of technology
actions with AI by bridging their in-class experiences through
on people, communities, and processes. In their weekly journal
entries,participantsreflectedoninteractionswithAIoncampus atechnologyethicscoursewiththeirinformalinteractionswith
(coursework,advertisescampusevents,orseminars)andbeyond everyday AI. We implemented a weekly reflective journal for
(social media, news, or conversations with friends and family). undergraduate technology students, asking them to document
The journal prompts were designed to help them think through
and reflect on their interactions with AI over six weeks. The
what they had read, watched, or been told and reflect on the
theoretical framing for this work is based on prior work on
development of their own perspectives, knowledge, and literacy
on the topic. Overall, students described nine categories of computing and technology students learning through formal
interactions:coursework,newsandcurrentevents,usingsoftware and informal activities [7], [8] and the use of journals for
and applications, university events, social media related to their student self-reflection on AI interactions [9]. The research
work, personal discussions with friends and family, interacting
questions guiding this study, which were developed through
withcontent,andgaming.Studentsreportedthatcompletingthe
reviewingcategorizations ofAIand theiruse [10]–[12],were:
diaries allowed them time for reflection and made them more
awareofthepresenceofAIintheirdailylivesandofitspotential 1) RQ1: Which everyday interactions with AI are salient
benefitsanddrawbacks.Thisresearchcontributestotheongoing for students in the classroom and outside?
work on AI awareness and literacy by bringing in perspectives
2) RQ2:Howdidstudentsperceivetheprocessofreflecting
from beyond a formal educational context.
on AI interactions?
Index Terms—AI literacy, journal study, reflection-based as-
sessment
II. RELEVANTPRIORWORK
I. INTRODUCTION
A. AI Awareness, Literacy, and Learning
Artificialintelligence(AI)drivenapplicationsarebecoming
The field of education has been profoundly impacted by
increasingly common across domains with significant influ-
everyday AI, particularly through its integration into routine
ence over societal functions, including dynamic pricing of
and often subtle daily interactions for learners and educators
consumer goods, search results, and how dependent future
alike [4], [13]. As researchers work to define and integrate AI
learners are on tools [1]–[3]. Some examples of our everyday
learning,considerableresearchhasbeendedicatedtoexploring
interactionswithAIinclude”recommendersystems,customer
AI concepts, methods of implementation, and assessment
service chatbots, search engine algorithms, smart assistants,
approaches. Several reviews have addressed AI literacy (or
digital self-tracking services, etc.” [4, p. 127]. While they
similar constructs questioning what people need to know
about AI) in education contexts and have highlighted the
Funding:U.S.NSFAwards2319137,1954556,USDA/NIFAAward2021-
67021-35329,andGMUMARIEProgram. state of the teaching and learning landscape over the last few
4202
tcO
42
]CH.sc[
1v54881.0142:viXrayears [10], [14]–[16]. Quantitative AI literacy instruments are reflective practices. Lin et al. describe three processes in
also increasingly common across these constructs. Despite a reflective thinking and designing technology-based environ-
variety of framings, the literature consistently differentiates ments that support reflection: ”reflection 1) involves social
between technical and non-technical AI skills, emphasizing interactions;2)isanactive,intentional,andpurposefulprocess
theimportanceofunderstandinghowAIworksandaddressing ofexploration,discovery,andlearning;and3)involvesunder-
the societal implications of AI systems [12], [17]. standingone’sprocessoflearning”[24].Thesedefinitionscan
WhileAIlearninginitiativesincrease,thereisroomforfur- be mapped to Chickering and Gamson’s seminal text on The
ther discussion connecting students’ learning in the classroom Seven Principles for Good Practice in Undergraduate Educa-
toactivitiesbeyond.Students’understandingofwhatAIisand tion. Reflection can be an active learning activity (Principle
how it affects them may be of concern [18]. Researchers have 3), provide students the temporal opportunity to spend time
attemptedtomaketheseconnectionsapparentthroughvarious on the task (Principle 5), and engage the diverse talents of the
interventions. Ali et al. developed a card game that describes learner by allowing for a variety of media in the reflection
uses of AI that could be familiar to learners and focuses on (Principle 7). By constructing reflection through this lens and
having students actively think about the harms caused by AI focusing on an appropriate level of reflection, i.e., simulated,
systems and ways to mitigate them [19]. Kasinidou et al. de- descriptive, dialogic, or critical [25], learners can be given
scribeacourseimplementedattheOpenUniversityofCyprus structure even in an exercise that can seem fluid.
that included eight units addressing various AI applications, Reflectiveactivitiescantakevariousforms:inclass,outside,
includingcomputervision,naturallanguageprocessing,ethics, or based on assignments, for example. Reflective journals are
and living with AI [11]. These initiatives integrate learning one such data collection technique that allows researchers to
experiences, and more research must explore how students collect data from participants over time as they happen. They
engage and learn from AI in the wild. are similar in structure to diary studies. Carter and Mankoff
Informal interactions with AI are gaining traction as an describe feedback studies, where the participants respond to
effective means to educate the public about AI concepts predefined questions, and elicitation studies, where partici-
outside traditional classroom settings. These activities can pants capture thoughts through writing and media, which can
includeeffortstoconnecttoeverydaypracticesandsettingsto beusedinthepost-studyfollow-up[26].Thedataiscollected
makeAIknowledgeaccessibleandengaging[20].Astudyby while not directly involved with the participants to minimize
Longetal.highlightstheimportanceofincorporatingcreative the effects of being observed in the way an interview may
and embodied interactions in informal learning spaces, such influence engagement. Journal studies are a significant time
as museum exhibits, to foster interest in AI and computing- and effort activity for participants, and it is encouraged to
related topics [5]. The study proposes design principles for provide compensation for the engagement.
informal settings, emphasizing collaboration and creativity in Some researchers have used reflective activities specifically
making AI concepts relatable and understandable. By inte- within the context of algorithmic literacy and technology
grating informal learning activities, these programs can reach awareness. Koenig describes using reflective student media
a broader audience, thus helping to demystify AI and make it journals to have communication students reflect on their
more accessible to the general public [21]. engagements with algorithms [9]. Students were prompted
to explore their algorithmic influences and literacy through
B. Student Reflection and Journals for Informal Learning
everydayactivities.Koenighighlightsstudentsmovingtoward
Student reflection activities are defined broadly across the more rhetorical and critical discussions through their media
literature as creating space to think through questions, ponder journals by exploring basic, rhetorical, and critical awareness
alternatives, and synthesize knowledge meaningfully for the through the journals. ”As my results suggest, because the
learner. Clara` highlights a central component from Dewey’s studentswereaskedtowritejournalentriesonthistopic,they
earlier work (1933) of reflection to include observations and were required to not just consider their actions, but turn those
inferences: ”Observation operates by means of facts, the actionsintowords.Becausetheywereaskedtoexaminethose
objective events of a situation, what Dewey sometimes calls patterns of use and their own role in creating those patterns,
conditions or data, whereas inference is a jump beyond these students gained critical and rhetorical understanding of their
observed events, it is an act of imagination, a supposition or engagements” (pg. 11).
hypothesis, what Dewey sometimes calls suggestion or idea.”
[22, p. 265]. For students, the reflection can involve strategies
III. METHOD
tohelpthemthinklikeaprofessionalintheirfieldbybridging In this study, participants submitted their thoughts, percep-
their experiences with how they think of the profession and tions, and opinions on their interactions with AI through a
learning about it [23]. Navigating what was experienced, reflectivejournal.Participantscompletedonereflectivejournal
grappling with the possibilities, mulling through alternative entry weekly for six consecutive weeks, starting in October
paths, and building informed opinions is a significant portion 2023 and ending in November 2023. The journals were
of the reflective experience. collected as part of a more extensive study on students’
Researchers have explored the effectiveness of reflection everyday AI interactions. The primary methodology used a
by analyzing the key components that constitute high-quality feedback approach to elicit participants’ descriptions of theirinteractions with AI. However, due to the open-ended nature from 19 to 32 years old and completed between 40 and 121
of the prompts, which encouraged thorough and expansive university credits. Eleven (11) participants self-described their
responses, an elicitation component was also incorporated gender as female, and eleven (11) participants self-described
[26]. as male. The majority of the students were full-time, working
Participantswereprovidedwithweeklypromptsdesignedto towards a BS in Information Technology with a variety of
centerthediscussionaroundinteractionsbroadlywithAI.Par- specializations.
ticipants were encouraged to describe the formal (structured, Participants were provided a $48 gift card for completing
sequential,repressive,andcompulsorylearningthatisteacher- the six journal entries. No course credit was offered for
led and assessed), non-formal (occurs outside of the school participating, and deciding not to participate did not impact
and is also structured but is non-sequential, non-repressive, course outcomes.
and voluntary learning that teachers may guide), and informal
C. Analysis
(unstructured, spontaneous, and usually learner-led, allowing
the learner to decide when and how it occurs) interactions Twenty-two participants completed and submitted a total of
[27]. The prompts given to students were inspired by broad 132 reflective journal entries - each student completed 6 jour-
categorizations of AI explored through recent AI literacy nal entries over the course of 6 weeks. The authors analyzed
systematic literature reviews [10], [14], [16]. Specifically, thestudentreflectionsthroughanemergentanalysismethodto
students were instructed to submit a journal entry in response explore a broad perspective on the discourse students entered
to the following prompt: in their journals, similar to the analysis framing highlighted
1) 1.Inthelastweek,documentwhereandaboutwhatyou in [9]. The authors read through the journal entries and free-
have noticed mention about artificial intelligence (AI): codedthejournalentries,fromwhichasetofemergentthemes
and subthemes were identified. Initially, this resulted in 15
a) atyourcampus(advertisedevents,coursesyouare
themes, and after discussing the codes in each, rereading
taking, campus news, or guest speakers) or
and identifying collapsible codes, and ensuring saturation was
b) outside of your campus (your social media, local
reached, a final set of 9 themes was created (Table I).
or international news, conversations with family)?
2) WasthewayAIwasdescribedleaveyouwithapositive, IV. FINDINGSANDDISCUSSION
negative, or neutral impression? Why or why not?
A. WhicheverydayinteractionswithAIaresalientforstudents
We chose to undertake this research as a qualitative study in the classroom and outside? (RQ1)
with a comprehensive approach to capture a range of student
In addressing RQ1, we explore the interactions students
responses. This decision reflects the novelty of investigating
describedintheirweeklyjournalentries.Theanalysisrevealed
informal learning activities among technology and computing
theemergenceof9themes.Whilefrequencyisonemethodof
students, particularly in light of recent advancements in AI,
understanding these interactions, it is important to recognize
such as LLMs, that have significantly increased the acces-
the significance of those interactions with fewer instances, as
sibility of consumer-facing AI. Reviewing the literature, we
theyhighlightthewaysinwhichstudentsengagewiththesub-
found few studies exploring how students reflect on their
ject matter across formal, informal, and non-formal contexts.
interactions with AI in and outside the classroom. However,
TableIdescribestheresultsacrossallthejournals.Wepresent
our methodology follows guidelines for conducting research
more details for the themes in the following sections and how
from similar approaches [7], [8].
students explored the aspects of their learning.
A. The Course 1) Coursework: Participantsprimarilyfocusedtheirreflec-
tions on the course discussions when describing their interac-
Students were recruited to participate from a technology
tionsthroughouttheweek.Thisobservationcouldbeattributed
ethics course hosted by a College of Engineering and Com-
to several factors. Firstly, the course held a central position
puting at a large, public university in the Southeastern United
withinthestudydesign;itwastheformallearningcomponent
States. The course covers the social implications of new tech-
and where the students were recruited from. Secondly, the
nology. Students learn about how technology affects systems
nature of the prompt likely influenced this inclination, as it
on an individual, national, and global scale. The course is
encouragedparticipantstoviewthecourseasapotentiallocus
structuredintoseveralmodules,consistentlyfocusingthrough-
ofinteraction.Thisapproachwasdeliberatelycraftedtoensure
out the 16-week semester on societal implications, ethics,
thatallparticipantswouldhavesomethingtodrawuponduring
and values in the design and experience of an interconnected
a slow week.
world. The course brings students from various disciplines
Across the journal entries, the most common reflection was
together and addresses ABET Accreditation Outcome 3 on
by participants discussing what was raised in the course and
Student Outcomes.
reflecting on what they had learned. Participant 18 described
B. Participants discussing the topic of deep fakes in a structured way in the
classroom and used the journal to build on both the benefits
Twenty-two(22)studentswererecruitedfromthecourseto
and the problems of the technology:
participate in this study in October 2023. Participants rangedTABLEI
NUMBEROFINTERACTIONITEMSACROSSALLJOURNALENTRIES
Interaction Description ExamplefromJournals Journal
Freq.
Coursework Discourse and discussions from ”Inthecourse,thedepthoftheconversationarounddeep 49
(FormalLearning) Technical and non-technical course fakeswasbothilluminatingandalarming.”Participant18,
readings,activities,andlectures. Week3.
News and Current Describing reading or watching a ”I saw a news article about an executive order from the 47
Events newspiece.Someparticipantshigh- White House that is forthcoming. I think it is great for
(InformalLearning) lighted doing so for a course, while regulationstobeincludedintheoveralldiscussionofAI.”
othersdidnotmakethisdistinction. Participant11,Week2
UsingSoftwareand Experiences using software and ap- ”I have been using a few AI tools like ChatGPT and 22
Applications plications, including ChatGPT, Spo- Midjourneytoexperimentwithformywork.”Participant
(InformalLearning) tify, Amazon’s Customer Service 22,Week5
Chatbot, and algorithmic recom-
menders,etc.
UniversityEvents Interactionsataneventorganizedby ”Thisweek,Iheardaboutaseriesofworkshopsthrough 14
(FormalLearning) the university or college, such as a my faculty that will be held at Harvard on building AI
researchtalk,researchseries,fireside models for vision tasks specifically. We were invited to
chat,workshop,hackathon,etc. participateandlearn,andIprobablywillgo.”Participant
21,Week4
ThroughSocialMedia Discourse of AI interactions on so- ”On social media I see a lot of advertisements from 13
(InformalLearning) cialmediaplatforms,includingFace- companies like Adobe showcasing their AI generative
book, Instagram, TikTok, Snapchat, toolsintheirproducts.EventhoughIdon’tusePhotoshop,
etc. nordoIfollowthatcontent,becauseofitsAIgenerative
toolsitwasbroughttomyattentionasanADsuggestion.”
Participant6,Week2
At Current Job or Highlightingdiscourseatwork,cur- I was very interested in [restaurant automation through 10
about Future Employ- rent affairs in the participant’s em- AI],becauseIusedtoworkatStarbucks,andIknowthat
ment ployment, or with coworkers about StarbucksisalsoplanningtoutilizeAIfortheirmachines.
(InformalLearning) AI. The new espresso machines that you see at some stores
arecalledtheMastrena2,whichprovidestelemetrydata
toStarbucks’supportcenter.”Participant6,Week3
Discussions with Discourse and Discussions with ”During conversations with family members, the subject 9
Friends&Family friendsandfamily.Canbeinstructive of AI’s effects on the labor market came up, with some
(InformalLearning) orjustconversational. voicingworriesaboutfuturejobdisplacementasaresult
ofautomation.”Participant4,Week1
Interacting with Con- Discourse related to content (media ”ButIhavelearnedthatpeopleonThreadsarealsotalking 6
tent createdforanaudiencetoconsume), about[thenewSpotifyAIDJfeature]aswell,specifically
(InformalLearning) including YouTube Videos, Content athreadstartedbyMKBHD(atechrevieweronYouTube)
Creators,etc. andhehasstatedthataftertestingitworkswellforhim.”
Participant18,Week4
Gaming Related to video game development ”I spent a lot of time playing Mario Kart 8 Deluxe and 3
(InformalLearning) andgame-playexperiences. while I enjoyed my time with it I started disliking the
rubberbandingfromtheCPUopponents,especiallyatthe
endoftheracewhereseveraltimetheyappeartoblatantly
stopandletmethroughtowin,makingmewishtheAI
wasmorepredictable.”Participant3,Week1
In [the course], the depth of the conversation around deep With these types of reflections about the course materials,
fakeswasbothilluminatingandalarming.Ononehand,the the timeliness and relevance beyond the classroom of the
beneficial aspects of deep fake AI are there. The technology course discussion became apparent. Deepfakes are a visual
can revolutionize the entertainment industry, allowing film- form of disinformation that can affect cognitive outcomes,
makers to recreate past performances or generate realistic reducetrustinnewsonsocialmedia,andgenerateuncertainty
visual effects without the need for costly CGI. Additionally, [28]. Though not initially dubbed an everyday interaction, the
in educational contexts, deep fakes could potentially bring ease of developing and deploying these systems has grown
historical figures ”back to life,” providing a dynamic way exponentially,andparticipantsweregenerallyconcernedabout
to engage with history. However, alongside these potential how these might alter social dynamics.
benefitsarenegatives.Themostpressingconcernisthemis- This pattern of AI’s societal implications was common
use of deep fakes in spreading misinformation or fake news, across the course learning. Participant 6 reflects on not just
potentially swaying public opinion or causing unwarranted learningabouttheproblembutthetypesofsolutionsemerging
panic. [Week 3] from the discussion:The [course] group also discussed about ethics that AI was heartening to see AI framed not just as a flashy piece
brings in art. A lot of artists believe that AI simply steals of tech but as a genuine ally in our uphill battle against
artwork from people and enables those who use it to claim climate change. [Week 3]
artwork as their own. I understand and agree slightly with
The article linked by the participant focused on predicting
this because artists who work hard developing a skill are
climate shifts when facing extreme weather and explored the
affected by this. My classmates told us that there are tools
differencesbetweentraditionalandmachinelearningmethods,
that help artists fight back against AI by poison AI data
highlighting the ability to work with complex data [30]. The
which is called Nightshade. [Week 5]
participantcameacrossthisarticleontheirownandbuilttheir
For the majority of participants, the formal course engage- understandingofthefoundationsofwhatwasdiscussedinthe
mentwasvitalforraisingliteracyandknowledgeonthetopics course.
but it also highlighted how collaborative engagement on the Regarding a news piece about the UN’s role in addressing
topic is important to learn about these issues. AI, Participant 7 projects the ideas presented through the
Other participants also raised course interactions beyond article on the past, exploring the implications on the impact
the course they were recruited from. Participant 17 described of people:
engaging with the AI discussion for a semester-long research
I thought it was very interesting because there is always
paper:
a discussion about AI being used for bad along with the
”In my English class, we are supposed to research infor- good. I think this is really important. If we don’t have these
mation in accordance with our discipline and myself along discussions now, the technology will get out of hand and
with a lot of the other classmates have chosen AI to be our we will have to talk about the issues as they are actively
topic of choice for our research papers.” [Week 1] affectingpeoplekindoflikeifwetalkedabouttheimpactof
Facebook before it grew so much, maybe less people would
Though this is expected, ensuring discussions about AI are
be hurt by some of their practices? [Week 1]
presented in the context of different fields is fundamental to
ensuring students have a holistic picture. Ensuring participants reach this level of introspection is
2) News and Current Events: Participants often raised important in discussing how ethics and social discourse affect
newsandcurrenteventsthroughrelevantarticlesatthetimeof learning.
data collection (October-November 2023). These came from 3) Using Software and Applications: Reflections of in-
bothformalandinformalspaces;sometimes,thearticleswere teractions with software and applications emerged frequently
referenced as part of their coursework, but in other cases, the and highlighted participants’ navigating learning about AI
news or current events were described in the wild. whileusingit.Participant19highlightstheirengagementswith
For example, Participant 11 writes about coming across Spotify to recommend new artists and music:
discourseonregulationsforresponsibleAIuseafterbecoming
My favorite feature of AI is through Spotify. They have a
primed to the conversation through course discussions:
playlist called a ”daylist” that updates roughly 5 times a
Isawanewsarticleaboutanexecutiveorderfromthewhite day to match exactly what kind of music you like to listen
house that is forthcoming. I think it is great for regulations to at that time of day mixed with artists that you listen to
to be included in the overall discussion of AI. We really regularly and similar new music and artists you may enjoy.
need new ways of thinking about this and there need to be [Week 1]
government regulations that encourage and enforce them. I
Though not explicitly highlighted, the recommendations
am neutral on AI, but positive on regulations. [Week 2]
are aligned with musical taste preferences based on previous
The reflection on regulations across AI development is not usage. We found that participants who engaged with recom-
newbutwasever-presentacrossthejournals.MostAmericans mendation services employed them for various tasks. In the
already support oversight and regulation in the ways the followingweek’sjournal,Participant19highlightstheirsearch
technology is used [29]. Having students engage with the forrecommendationsonInstagramwhenvisitinganewplace:
discussion and arrive at their own consensus is a reflective
MysecondencounterwasviaInstagramReels,Iwasvisiting
exercise.
Salem, Massachusetts over fall break and needed more
Discussions about the negatives were also tempered with
activitiestodobutwashavingdifficultyfindingsomeonline.
the positive as some students engaged with a positive lens on
To get better access to information on my trip such as,
the uses of AI. Participant 5 described positive news about AI
where to eat, cool places to visit, etc. I looked up Salem
and how it felt out of place in the larger discussion of news
on Instagram and liked a few reels related to Salem to help
and current events:
my algorithm know that that’s what I was looking for. After
[AI seems] to have a knack for spotting patterns that might liking3-4postsrelatingtoSalem,myfeedwasabletolearn
easily slip past the human eye. What struck a chord with thatthiswasthecontentIwantedandprovidemewithgreat
me was the sense of hope [the article I read] radiated. It suggestions. [Week 2]Thistypeofinformation-seekingbehavioriscommonacross werelinkedtowhatshowedupontheirfeeds,highlightingthe
social media platforms where these tools serve as community filter bubbles that can exist on one’s social media. Participant
engagement and credibility, though may be standardized, can 14 describes watching a video on deep fakes on their feed:
provide users with quick, less important information easily
ThenotionthatAIcouldreplicateone’sidentitytofabricate
[31]. Participants highlighted these interactions frequently
false narratives or malicious activities is deeply unsettling.
across the journal entries.
The video’s portrayal of deep fakes and AI manipulation
In contrast to deciding to use an application, several par-
underscored the vulnerabilities inherent in our increasingly
ticipants highlighted involuntary interactions, often through
digitized world. It emphasized the need for heightened
campus-mandated tools. Online exam proctoring has been a
vigilance in discerning between authentic and fabricated
widely discussed topic since the technology has become a
content,especiallyinanerawherethespreadofmisinforma-
staple across coursework over the last decade. Participant 1
tion can have profound societal and political consequences.
reflected on their awareness of the algorithms in the system
- [Week 5]
and highlighted their discontent:
6) AtWorkoraboutEmployment: Severalstudentsdiscuss
Last week, I had mentioned that I was helping a professor
the similarities and differences between discussions about AI
with [online proctoring software] after realizing there was
in their classes and at work. The workplace is often where
a problem with the system. I think he agreed to reconsider
students must demonstrate their training and knowledge of
using it because he said going forward, we’ll try to do this
concepts while adapting to the needs of the work. Participant
exam in class. Personally, I like this more. The impression I
12reflectsoncontrastingviewpointsofAIbetweenwhatthey
hadofthe[onlineproctoringsoftware]wasoverallnegative
are learning about in the classroom and outside:
and I would rather not use it if I can avoid it. [Week 4]
In my course, the focus was on the impact of AI in defense.
4) University Events: Universities throughout the US are
The discussions leaned towards the negative side, as we
embracing various approaches to incorporate artificial intel-
delved into the ethical and moral dilemmas posed by AI
ligence into their teaching and learning frameworks. A pre-
in military applications. This context raised concerns about
vailingtrendacrossinstitutionsinvolvesestablishingprograms
the potential misuse of AI technology and its consequences,
and events designed to expose students to AI concepts during
leaving me with a somewhat pessimistic view of AI in
their time as students. Following this trend, the institution
this specific context. Conversely, at my workplace, there
where the participating students were recruited has imple-
was excitement and positivity surrounding AI. We are in
mented several initiatives, including guest speaker events,
the process of launching an AI-generated tool to assist
fireside chats, and hackathons to foster engagement with AI
us in searching for essential information within our vast
amongitsstudentbody.AsParticipant17describes,thelevels
internal resources. The prospect of increased efficiency and
across discussion can range and can serve as motivation (or
productivity through AI was met with enthusiasm, as it
potentially barriers) for non-formal learning:
promises to simplify our workflow and enhance our ability
to access and utilize valuable data. [Week 1]
I saw a post from the Statistics department about an AI
seminarcalled”FunctionalDataAnalysisThroughtheLens
Other students were interested in what the future of their
of Deep Neural Networks”. I thought the topic was really
own work would be. Participant 22 questions how generative
interesting and shows the type of work that neural networks
AIspecificallywouldaffectthewaystheywouldcreateinthe
are possibly able to do. It did look very complicated though
future:
so maybe I still have a lot to learn here. [Week 4]
Through my work as a social media intern, I have been
While some students found these events useful, others, thinking about how AI is used to make content especially
such as Participant 21, highlight what might come off as thinking about the future of my work. Some of the people at
performative organization or following buzzwords: workuseChatGPTtoedit,copy,andwriteshortpiecesthat
are later edited, so it is interesting to think about what the
IhaveheardaboutAIalotoncampus,buttbh,mostofitis
future of this work will be. [Week 1]
not that memorable. AI feels like a buzzword that we hear
of often across the campus, maybe because it comes with Participant 6 highlights being concerned about what the
being a technology or engineering department. [Week 1] implications of automated work would look like:
Ultimately,universityeventsserveasnon-formaleventsthat Thenew[Starbucks]espressomachinesthatyouseeatsome
can introduce and inspire students. Engaging meaningfully is stores are called the Mastrena 2, which provides telemetry
fundamental to ensure students are making the most of the data to Starbucks’ support center. This allows the support
experience. center to track maintenance data on machines, which could
5) Through Social Media: Participants described social automatically send out parts or even mechanics to service
media as a significant source of information for them. As without employees having to call. They can also utilize
such, several of the interactions highlighted by the students the data they receive to track the quality of the shots andhow many espresso drinks they’re making. It left me with a The incorporation of AI in a flagship game like ”Fortnite”
positive impression because I know that it will help utilize demonstrates the gaming industry’s evolving landscape.
efficiency in the stores, although I am a little worried about From the perspective of a gamer, it’s both thrilling and fas-
the consequences that could result. [Week 3] cinating. We’re not just playing against a pre-programmed
system anymore; we’re navigating an ever-changing virtual
7) Discussions with Friends and Family: Discussions
world that’s learning and reacting. [Week 3]
betweentheparticipantsandtheirfriendsandfamilymembers
emerged across the journal entries. For some, like Participant Other General AI Observations
13, it was in understanding the practical implications of In addition to the categories highlighted in Table I, partici-
building AI systems: pants described interactions with AI that led to other general
observations but did not specifically mention a source or
I was talking with my father who works as a salesman at
event. Participants reflected by synthesizing and summarizing
BMW about the technology in the cars and how advanced
the formal elements of their learning and their feelings and
theyaregetting.Hewastellingmeabouthowdifficultitisto
opinions toward what they had interacted with during the
repair these items as well, and that often the service center
week. Participant 6 raised the discussion about how AI is
ends up having to replace the whole unit when something
described broadly:
goes wrong because there is no way to fix or solder boards.
The technology and the software is getting so advanced A lot of the negative feedback I get about AI is it being
fewer people can actually work on them which is worrying. abused in a way that will replace work or students using it
[Week 3] to cheat. However, I think it opens up the conversation to
look at the current processes we have, like how we teach
Some participants found the balance between convenience
students or how we can use it to complement the work that
andprivacyaninterestingshareddiscussionwiththeirfriends.
wedo.Insteadofallthedoomsdaynegativeimpressionsyou
Participant 19 was ambivalent about this:
get from those who struggle with change. [Week 1]
I also discussed AI with my friends as we were discussing Many of the participants scrutinized the benefits and costs
how personalized ads were becoming on Instagram and of AI systems. As Participant 6 described, these feelings of
whether we liked it or not. We questioned whether trading navigating perceptions about the tools:
privacyofbeinglistenedtoforconvenienceofarelevantad
I feel like the usage of AI in a responsible manner would
was something we cared about. We found that most people
provide people with a way to make processes much easier.
feel as though their privacy is already compromised so we
However, it’s important to understand that quality controls
might as well get relevant ads and Instagram posts out of
are necessary to ensure that we are using these tools
it. [Week 1]
properly. With AI being a hot topic right now, I feel that I
8) Interacting with Content: Content creation refers to will continue to see articles about the public’s reservations
media created for audiences and often uploaded to a social and doubts on AI and its usage. I also understand that
mediaplatformforotherstowatchandengage.Participant16 not everyone understands how it works and its limitations.
highlights: [Week 4]
IcameacrossanintriguingvideoinwhichaYouTuberused In exploring the feedback, students had different expec-
AI to colorize old black and white photos from the 1900s. tations, experiences, and desires with AI. For some, the
The video not only demonstrated the technological prowess convenience factor was the ultimate decider to their attitude
of modern algorithms, but it also brought history to life, toward AI. Participant 19 sums this up with:
making it more relatable and vivid. [Week 2]
Overall this week I have come to believe that AI adds a
However, Participant 16 highlights the different angles sense of convenience to my life that I am happy accepting.
across content: The convenience should serve as a jumping off point for
further personal research and not copying [regarding using
However, not every mention of AI was rosy. A random
AI for coursework]. [Week 1]
episode of the podcast I listened to discussed the ethical
quandaries associated with AI-powered facial recognition
B. How did students perceive the process of reflecting on AI
systems,highlightingpotentialprivacyinvasionsandmisuse.
interactions? (RQ2)
This discussion took on a more cautionary tone, reminding
In addressing RQ2, we asked the participants to complete a
us that, while AI has enormous potential, it is also a two-
shortsurveyattheendofthereflectivejournaldatacollection.
edged sword. [Week 2]
Figure 1 shows participant responses to the end-of-study
9) Gaming: Gaming were mentioned several times across survey. Overall, participants largely highlighted the reflection
the journal entries in describing how AI could show up in un- activities as helping them be more aware of all the aspects of
expected places. Participant 16 highlights this by mentioning: theAIfocusofthisstudy.Participantshighlightedbeingmore
generally aware of AI initiatives on their campus.VI. FUTUREWORK
Thinking forward, this study highlights several important
findingsthatcancontributetothedirectionoffutureworkand
instructional design. Firstly, interactions on campus through
both formal and informal activities are an important mech-
anism for students to be exposed to conversations about AI
and can supplement their learning in the classroom in a semi-
structured way. However, the quality of engagements in this
way is important.
Secondly, participants described interaction with media in
content and gaming, highlighting areas that have largely not
been explored in designing curriculum. It is important to note
that these categories, even the less frequent interactions, were
highly influential on many participants’ perspectives toward
AI. Some courses take advantage of popular culture themes,
highlighting,forexample,howstudentscanlearnaboutethical
speculation by having students participate in the Black Mirror
Writers Room [32]. Therefore, there is an opportunity to
continue developing interesting activities aligning with topics
students are excited about. However, this type of activity
requiresadditionalinstructoreffortandtraining[33],[34]and
design of programs and courses that effectively integrate AI
related knowledge.
VII. CONCLUSION
Allowing students to reflect on their interactions with AI in
a context beyond the classroom is important to ensure they
Fig.1. StudentResponsestoEnd-of-StudySurvey
build a holistic perspective. Using reflective journals as an
unstructured learning activity is one way to have students do
this reflection. Incorporating informal activities serves to an-
V. LIMITATIONS chorstudents’formalclassroomlearningexperiences.Through
reflection and integrating their individual perspectives, stu-
dents demonstrate a more nuanced understanding of AI and
While this study provides valuable insights into expanding
connect it more broadly to other ideas. Moreover, informal
AI awareness through student’s daily interactions with AI, it
learning approaches in AI provide a structured framework
is important to acknowledge the limitations that may have
while accommodating flexibility, fostering an environment
influenced the results and interpretations. One of the primary
conducive to student-driven learning.
limitations is the participants in this study were all pursuing a
The participants in the study described nine distinct cat-
technology degree, which could have influenced their interac-
egories of interactions, spanning coursework, engagement
tions with AI. This shared educational background likely pro-
with news and current events, utilization of software and
videdthemwithabaselineunderstandingoftechnologyandits
applications, attendance at university events, involvement in
applications.Consequently,theirfamiliaritywithtechnological
social media platforms, work-related interactions, personal
concepts and systems might have shaped their responses and
discussions with peers and family members, engagement with
engagement with AI in ways that may not be representative
content, and participation in gaming activities. Through the
of a broader population.
reflectionprocess,itbecameevidentthatstudentsexperienced
Secondly, the emergent analysis methodology provides a
heightened awareness regarding the prevalence of AI in their
flexible and adaptive way to explore qualitative data such as
daily routines, along with a deeper understanding of its in-
those collected through the reflective journal, but may lack
herent strengths and limitations, as facilitated by the practice
thestructuredrigorofmorepredefinedanalyticalframeworks,
ofjournalingandreflectingontheirinteractions.Furthermore,
which is normal among studies of this style.
students underscored the significance of the diary completion
Finally, implementing this activity without the use of in- process, emphasizing its role in affording them valuable time
centives may be challenging to do. In this study, incentives for introspection and contemplation.
were provided for students’ efforts to complete the reflective
journals. The design of the study can be incorporated into
VIII. ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
a course through a graded assignment, but special attention We would like to thank all the study participants for their
would need to be given to the quality of responses. invaluable time and effort, without which this study wouldnot be possible. This work is partly supported by US NSF [16] O. Almatrafi, A. Johri, and H. Lee, “A systematic review of
Awards 2319137, 1954556, and USDA/NIFA Award 2021- AI literacy conceptualization, constructs, and implementation and
assessment efforts (2019–2023),” Computers and Education Open,
67021-35329. This work is also supported by a research
vol.6,p.100173,2024.[Online].Available:https://www.sciencedirect.
grantthroughGeorgeMasonUniversity’sMentoringforAnti- com/science/article/pii/S2666557324000144
Racism and Inclusive Excellence (MARIE) program. Any [17] A. Carolus, M. Koch, S. Straka, M. E. Latoschik, and C. Wienrich,
“MAILS – Meta AI Literacy Scale: Development and Testing of an
opinions, findings, and conclusions or recommendations ex-
AILiteracyQuestionnaireBasedonWell-FoundedCompetencyModels
pressed in this material are those of the authors and do not andPsychologicalChange-andMeta-Competencies,”2023.
necessarily reflect the views of the funding agencies. [18] A. Hingle and A. Johri, “A Research Study on Student Conceptions
of Artificial Intelligence,” in ASEE Southeast Section Conference, no.
10.18260/1-2–44979. Arlington,Virginia:ASEEConferences,March
REFERENCES 2023,https://peer.asee.org/44979.
[19] S. Ali, V. Kumar, and C. Breazeal, “AI audit: a card game to reflect
[1] Z.Buchh,“Onlinepricingalgorithmsaregamingthesystem,andcould on everyday AI systems,” in Proceedings of the AAAI Conference on
meanyoupaymore,”NPRMorningEdition,25/07/2022. ArtificialIntelligence,vol.37,no.13,2023,pp.15981–15989.
[2] S.U.Noble,AlgorithmsofOppression:HowSearchEnginesReinforce [20] A.HingleandA.Johri,“Aframeworktodevelopandimplementrole-
Racism. NewYorkUniversityPress,2018. play case studies to teach responsible technology use,” IEEE Transac-
[3] X.Zhao,A.Cox,andL.Cai,“Chatgptandthedigitisationofwriting,” tionsonTechnologyandSociety,2024.
Humanities and Social Sciences Communications, vol. 11, no. 1, pp. [21] D. Long, J. Roberts, B. Magerko, K. Holstein, D. DiPaola, and
1–9,2024. F.Martin,“AILiteracy:FindingCommonThreadsbetweenEducation,
[4] S.Lomborg,“EverydayAIatwork:Self-trackingandautomatedcom- Design, Policy, and Explainability,” in Extended Abstracts of the 2023
municationforsmartwork,”inEverydayAutomation. Routledge,2022, CHI Conference on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI
pp.126–139. EA’23. NewYork,NY,USA:AssociationforComputingMachinery,
[5] D. Long, T. Blunt, and B. Magerko, “Co-Designing AI Literacy 2023.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3544549.3573808
Exhibits for Informal Learning Spaces,” Proc. ACM Hum.-Comput. [22] M. Clara`, “What Is Reflection? Looking for Clarity in an Ambiguous
Interact., vol. 5, no. CSCW2, oct 2021. [Online]. Available: Notion,” Journal of Teacher Education, vol. 66, no. 3, pp. 261–271,
https://doi.org/10.1145/3476034 2015.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1177/0022487114552028
[6] D.T.K.NgandS.K.W.Chu,“Motivatingstudentstolearnaithrough [23] Tanner, Kimberly D., “Promoting student metacognition,” CBE—Life
social networking sites: A case study in hong kong,” Online learning Sciences Education, vol. 11, no. 2, pp. 113–120, 2012, pMID:
(Newburyport,Mass.),vol.25,no.1,pp.195–,2021. 22665584.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1187/cbe.12-03-0033
[7] R. McCartney, J. Boustedt, A. Eckerdal, K. Sanders, L. Thomas, [24] X. Lin, C. Hmelo, C. K. Kinzer, and T. J. Secules, “Designing
and C. Zander, “Why Computing Students Learn on Their Own: technologytosupportreflection,”Educationaltechnologyresearchand
Motivation for Self-Directed Learning of Computing,” ACM Trans. Development,vol.47,pp.43–62,1999.
Comput. Educ., vol. 16, no. 1, jan 2016. [Online]. Available: [25] K. Strampel and R. Oliver, “Using technology to foster reflection in
https://doi.org/10.1145/2747008 highereducation,”inICT:Providingchoicesforlearnersandlearning.
[8] J. Boustedt, A. Eckerdal, R. McCartney, K. Sanders, L. Thomas, and ProceedingsasciliteSingapore2007,2007.
C. Zander, “Students’ perceptions of the differences between formal [26] S.CarterandJ.Mankoff,“Whenparticipantsdothecapturing:therole
and informal learning,” in Proceedings of the Seventh International of media in diary studies,” in Proceedings of the SIGCHI Conference
Workshop on Computing Education Research, ser. ICER ’11. New on Human Factors in Computing Systems, ser. CHI ’05. New York,
York, NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2011, p. NY, USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2005, p. 899–908.
61–68.[Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/2016911.2016926 [Online].Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/1054972.1055098
[9] A. Koenig, “The Algorithms Know Me and I Know Them: Using [27] H. Eshach, “Bridging in-school and out-of-school learning: Formal,
Student Journals to Uncover Algorithmic Literacy Awareness,” Com- non-formal,andinformaleducation,”Journalofscienceeducationand
putersandComposition,vol.58,p.102611,2020.[Online].Available: technology,vol.16,pp.171–190,2007.
https://www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S8755461520300724 [28] C. Vaccari and A. Chadwick, “Deepfakes and disinformation: Ex-
[10] D. Long and B. Magerko, “What is AI Literacy? Competencies and ploring the impact of synthetic political video on deception, uncer-
DesignConsiderations,”inProceedingsofthe2020CHIConferenceon tainty, and trust in news,” Social media+ society, vol. 6, no. 1, p.
HumanFactorsinComputingSystems,ser.CHI’20. NewYork,NY, 2056305120903408,2020.
USA: Association for Computing Machinery, 2020, p. 1–16. [Online]. [29] M.FaverioandA.Tyson,“WhatthedatasaysaboutAmericans’views
Available:https://doi.org/10.1145/3313831.3376727 ofartificialintelligence,”2023.
[11] Kasinidou, Maria and Kleanthous, Styliani and Otterbacher, Jahna, [30] J. DeLoss, “AI helping to unravel complexity of climate, weather
“Artificial intelligence in everyday life: Educating the public through and land use, find solutions to climate change,” Colorado State
an open, distance-learning course,” in Proceedings of the 2023 University Source, 2023. [Online]. Available: https://source.colostate.
Conference on Innovation and Technology in Computer Science edu/how-can-ai-help-in-climate-change/
EducationV.1,ser.ITiCSE2023. NewYork,NY,USA:Association [31] M. Marcella-Hood and R. Marcella, “Purposive and non-purposive
for Computing Machinery, 2023, p. 306–312. [Online]. Available: information behaviour on Instagram,” Journal of Librarianship and
https://doi.org/10.1145/3587102.3588784 InformationScience,vol.55,no.3,pp.634–657,2023.
[12] M. Hornberger, A. Bewersdorff, and C. Nerdel, “What do university [32] C. Fiesler, “The Black Mirror Writers Room:
studentsknowaboutArtificialIntelligence?Developmentandvalidation The Case (and Caution) for Ethical Speculation
of an AI literacy test,” Computers and Education: Artificial in CS Education,” https://medium.com/cuinfoscience/
Intelligence, vol. 5, p. 100165, 2023. [Online]. Available: https: the-black-mirror-writers-room-the-case-and-caution-for-ethical-speculation-in-cs-education-5c81d05d2c67,
//www.sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S2666920X23000449 2022,accessed:DateAccessed4/30/2024.
[13] A. Johri and A. Hingle, “Students’ technological ambivalence toward [33] J. Schleiss and A. Johri, “A Roles-based Competency Framework
online proctoring and the need for responsible use of educational for Integrating Artificial Intelligence (AI) in Engineering Courses.” in
technologies,” Journal of Engineering Education, vol. 112, no. 1, pp. ProceedingsofSEFI2024. SEFI,2024.
221–242,2023.[Online].Available:https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/ [34] J.Schleiss,A.Johri,andS.Strober,“IntegratingAIEducationinDisci-
abs/10.1002/jee.20504 plinaryEngineeringFields:TowardsaSystemsandChangePerspective.”
[14] D. T. K. Ng, J. K. L. Leung, S. K. W. Chu, and M. S. Qiao, inProceedingsofSEFI2024. SEFI,2024.
“Conceptualizing AI literacy: An exploratory review,” Computers and
Education:ArtificialIntelligence,vol.2,p.100041,2021.
[15] L.Casal-Otero,A.Catala,C.Ferna´ndez-Morante,M.Taboada,B.Ce-
breiro,andS.Barro,“AIliteracyinK-12:asystematicliteraturereview,”
InternationalJournalofSTEMEducation,vol.10,no.1,p.29,2023.