Dynamic EEG-fMRI mapping: Revealing the
relationship between brain connectivity and cognitive
state
GuiranLiu* BinrongZhu
SanFranciscoStateUniversity,CollegeofScience& SanFranciscoStateUniversity,CollegeofScience&
Engineering(CoSE) Engineering(CoSE)
SanFrancisco,UnitedStates SanFrancisco,UnitedStates
gliu@sfsu.edu bzhu2@sfsu.edu
Abstract-: This study investigated the dynamic connectivity offers a deeper understanding of brain dynamics and network
patternsbetweenEEGand fMRImodalities, contributingtoour topology[3].
understanding of brain network interactions. By employing a
comprehensive approach that integrated static and dynamic EEG and fMRI are two complementary imaging
analyses of EEG-fMRI data, we were able to uncover distinct techniques used to study brain activity[4]. fMRI has good
connectivity states and characterize their temporal fluctuations. spatial resolution and captures hemodynamic responses across
The results revealed modular organization within the intrinsic theentirebrain,butitstemporalresolutionisrelativelylow.On
connectivity networks (ICNs) of the brain, highlighting the the other hand, EEG measures cortical electrical activity with
significantrolesofsensorysystemsandthedefaultmodenetwork.
high temporal resolution, but it has lower spatial resolution.
The use of a sliding window technique allowed us to assess how
Combining both signals is an effective way to study brain
functional connectivity varies over time, further elucidating the
dynamics across broader spatial and temporal scales. Previous
transient natureof brainconnectivity.Additionally,our findings
research has found that the low-frequency connectivity
align with previous literature, reinforcing the notion that
cognitive states can be effectively identified through detectedbyEEGcloselyresemblesbrainconnectivityobserved
short-duration data, specifically within the 30-60 second in fMRI, shedding light on the electrophysiological basis of
timeframe. The established relationships between connectivity functionalbrainconnectivity[5].
strength and cognitive processes, particularly during different
visualstates,underscoretherelevanceofourapproachforfuture Neurofeedback (NF) is a technique that helps individuals
research into brain dynamics. Overall, this study not only regulate brain activity through real-time feedback and is
enhances our understanding of the interplay between EEG and commonly used in rehabilitation and the treatment of mental
fMRIsignals but alsopavesthe wayforfurther exploration into health disorders[6]. Both EEG and fMRI are non-invasive
theneuralcorrelatesofcognitivefunctionsandtheirimplications functionalbrainimagingmethodsusedinneurofeedback.EEG
inclinicalsettings.Futureresearchshouldfocusonrefiningthese offersmillisecond-leveltemporalresolution,enablingreal-time
methodologies and exploring their applications in various
monitoring of electrical brain activity, while fMRI reflects
cognitiveandclinicalcontexts.
neurovascular activity through BOLD signals and provides
Keywords- EEG-fMRI Integration; Dynamic Connectivity； highspatialresolution.AlthoughfMRIhasbeenwidelyusedin
FunctionalBrainNetworks；CognitiveStates； neurofeedback, its high cost and operational complexity limit
frequent use in clinical settings. As a result, EEG-based
I. neurofeedback has gained attention due to its convenience and
Graph theory-based analysis serves as a robust tool to flexibility.Inrecentyears,simultaneousrecordingofEEGand
quantitatively describe theInttorpoodluocgtiicoanl characteristics of brain fMRI has been used to explore connections in different brain
networks[1]. This method has been widely applied in brain states, further expanding the applications of multimodal
imaging research, revealing an "economical" small-world measurements[7].
organization in brain networks, where an efficient balance
In this study, the graph theory properties of multimodal
between network cost and efficiency is maintained.
EEG-fMRI brain connectivity were explored. By using
Additionally, the brain connectome exhibits a modular and
simultaneously collected open- and closed-eye data, brain
rich-club organization, which is crucial for the transmission
graphs were constructed in both static and dynamic states,
and communication of neural signals. Studies have shown that
combining the high spatial resolution of fMRI and the high
brain disorders can alter graph metrics and the structure of
temporal resolution of EEG. This approach offers a new
brain networks. However, most research has focused on
framework that integrates the different information from EEG
single-modality brain imaging data, limiting a more
and fMRI within a graph theory model, providing a more
comprehensive understanding of brain connectivity[2]. Thus,
comprehensive representation of the brain's dynamic
integrating multiple modalities, especially EEG and fMRI,
connectivityorganization[8].E.
The fMRI data underwent preprocessing using SPM5
software. ImagFeusncwtieornealrmeaalgignneetidcraensdonsapnacteiailmlyagninogrmalized to
MNI space, with a voxel size resampled to 3 × 3 × 3 mm and
smoothedusingaGaussiankernel(FWHMof5×5×5mm).
A spatial group independent component analysis (ICA)
was performed on the fMRI data from all participants forboth
conditions (eyes-open and eyes-closed). The data for each
Figure1.AMethodforLearningNFPredictorsfromBimodal participant were reduced using principal component analysis
NeurofeedbackSessions (PCA), retaining 120 principal components. Subsequently, the
simplified data were decomposed into 100 independent
II.
componentsusingtheInfomaxalgorithm.Thestabilityofthese
A.
components was confirmed through ICASSO analysis, which
Method
Werecruited25healthyparticipants(age:29±8 years;8
involved 10 iterations. The independent components (IC) and
females) through advertisePmaretnictispaatnodr word of mouth. All
their corresponding time courses (TC) were reconstructed.
individuals had normal or corrected-to-normal vision and
Fifty-four ICs were identified as intrinsic connectivity
hearing.[9] Prior to inclusion in the study, participants
networks (ICN), excluding those associated with physiological
underwent screening to ensure the absence of any DSM-IV
noise, motion-related artifacts, or imaging artifacts. The
Axis I or Axis II psychopathology, assessed through a
evaluation of these components was based on the expectation
structured interview, as well as no history of neurological
that ICNs would exhibit peak activation in gray matter, with
disorders. Each participant provided informed written consent
minimal spatial overlap with known vascular, ventricular,
forthestudy,andtheywerecompensatedfortheirparticipation.
motion, and susceptibility artifacts, and primarily
The experimental design and details regarding simultaneous
low-frequency fluctuations (less than 0.1 Hz). Following
datacollectionhavebeenpreviouslydescribed.
established protocols, the TCs for the 54 ICs underwent
B. additional post-processing, which included detrending for
EEG-fMRI data were recorded simultaneously while linear,quadratic,andcubictrends,multipleregressiontoadjust
participantsfirstrestedwExiptherthimeiernetayledsecsliogsned(for8.5minutes), for six parameters and their temporal derivatives, removal of
followed by resting with their eyes open (for another 8.5 detected outliers, and bandpass filtering within the range of
minutes). During each session, participants were instructed to [0.01–0.10 Hz]. Finally, the ICA time course matrices were
relax, remain still and quiet, and stay awake throughout the extractedforeachparticipantunderbothconditions(eyes-open
recording[10]. andeyes-closed),resultinginatimematrixofdimensions[time:
256 × ICN: 54]. All participants in the study were healthy
C. volunteers, right-handed, and had no prior experience with
EEG data were collected using a 32-channel system neurofeedback experiments. They provided written informed
compatible with MR envirEoengmaecqnutsisaitniodna specialized electrode consentbeforetakingpartinthestudy.Followingaspecialized
cap. The Ag/AgCl electrodes were arranged based on the calibration session, each participant underwent three
international 10-20 standard. Separate channels recorded ECG neurofeedback motor imagery sessions, each lasting 320
andEOGsignals,limitingthenumberofscalpelectrodesto30. seconds. Each session consisted of eight blocks that alternated
The reference electrode was positioned at FCz. Conductive between20secondsofrest, witheyesopen,and20secondsof
paste ensured that the impedance of each electrode remained motor imagery for the right hand. Neurofeedback data from
below5kΩ.EEGsignalsweresampledatarateof5kHz,and thirteenparticipantsweredisplayedasone-dimensional(1D)in
synchronization between the EEG amplifier and the fMRI Figure2(left),whiledatafromtwelveparticipantswereshown
system was achieved using an internal device to avoid timing as two-dimensional (2D) in Figure 2 (middle). In both
discrepancies. scenarios,thegoalwastoguideaballintoadeepbluearea.
D.
FunctionalMRIbrainimageswereobtainedusinga1.5T
Siemens Sonata scannerFmwriithacqauisTit2i*o-nweighted echo-planar
imaging sequence. The key parameters included: repetition
time (TR) of 2 seconds, echo time (TE) of 39 milliseconds,
fieldofviewsetat224mm, acquisitionmatrixof64×64,flip
angleof80degrees,voxeldimensionsof3.5×3.5×3mm,and
a 1 mm gap between slices. A total of 27 slices were acquired
in ascending order, with 256 volumes recorded for both the Figure2.Thedual-modalneurofeedbackmetaphorpresentedduring
eyes-openandeyes-closedsessions. theconferenceF.
The correlation matrix R is formed by utilizing elements
that represent EPEeaGr-sfoMnRIcborrarienlamtiaopnwcaosecffoincsietrnutscte(dr ​ ). These
ij
coefficientsarederivedfromthespectraltimeseriesof30EEG
electrodes and the time series from 54 fMRI independent
components (ICs). This procedure is conducted for five EEG
frequency bands across two conditions (Eyes Open (EO) and
Eyes Closed (EC)). To analyze the relationship between EEG
and fMRI signals, the EEG power time series undergoes
convolution with a standard hemodynamic response function
(HRF)toaccountforthelatencyinhemodynamicresponses,as
supportedbyearlierstudies.
TheundirectedstaticconnectivitygraphforEEG-fMRIis
constructedfromeachN×N correlationmatrixR (where N=84
inthisstudy,comprising30EEGelectrodesand54fMRIbrain
components).Thisgraphincludesnegativecorrelations,aswell
as weighted positive (W+) and negative (W−) connections. In
the positive connection graph, negative correlation values in
RRRarereplacedbyzero,whilethepositivecorrelationvalues
remain unchanged. Conversely, in the negative connection
graph, positive correlations are set to zero, and the absolute
valuesofnegativecorrelationsinRaremaintained. Figure3.TheprocessofconstructingconcurrentEEG-fMRI
multimodalbrainmapsinvolvesseveralkeysteps.
r ifr 0
w  ij ij Weutilizedawindowwidthof20TRs(40seconds)based
ij 0 ifr 0 on research indicating that cognitive states can be accurately
 ij
identified with data from short periods of 30 to 60 seconds.
(1)
|r |ifr 0 Studies have shown that non-stationary fluctuations in
w i
j
 0ij ifrij
0 functional connectivity can be detected with a 40-second
 ij window. Variations in brain connectivity are not particularly
(2)
Dynamic EEG-fMRI graph analysis involves the sensitivetospecificwindowlengthsintherange of10-20TRs
calculationofcorrelationmatrices(256×84;widthL=20TRs, (20-40 seconds). Our previous work has demonstrated that
with a step size of 1 TR) using a continuous sliding window shorter time windows reduce the number of statistically
across the matrix EFEFEF. The first 30 columns represent the significant correlations in brain connectivity and increase
EEG electrodes, while the next 54 columns correspond to the variability.Aslidingwindowsizeofapproximately22TRs(44
fMRI independent components (ICs). This method results in seconds) strikes a good balance between resolving dynamics
237 EEG-fMRI correlation matrices (237 = 256 − 20 + 1) andthequalityofconnectivityestimates.
calculated from 237 windows. As in the static analysis, both
We employed three key metrics—connection strength
positive and negative connection graphs are examined
(CS), clustering coefficient (CC), and global efficiency
separately. Theframework for constructingstatic and dynamic
(GE)—to assess brain network functionality. The Brain
concurrent EEG-fMRI multimodal brain maps is depicted in
Connectivity Toolbox was used to extract global and
Figure3.
node-level values for both static and dynamic graphs. We
computed the variance of dynamic metrics across 237 time
windows and low-frequency (0-0.025 Hz) fluctuation
amplitudes. For statistical analysis, a 5 (frequency bands) × 2
(eye conditions) repeated measures ANOVA and paired t-tests
wereconductedonthestaticanddynamicmeasurements.
G.
Let G denote the collection of all nodes in the weighted
graph W,CwalhceurleateNtNheNeq(iunattihoinsosftuthdey,gNra=p8h4)mseiagsnuirfeiemsetnhte total
number of nodes. The connectivity strength for node i is
definedasfollows:CS  w correlation matrix correspond to groups of time windows
i ij
jòG displaying similar brain connectivity patterns. We analyze the
The connectivity strength at the global level of the g(r3a)ph modular organization of this correlation matrix using a
is the average connectivity strength of all nodes within the modularity algorithm. The number of modules reflects the
graph: different connectivity states present within the dynamic
EEG-fMRI graphs. Lastly, we average the EEG-fMRI brain
1
CS  CS graphs belonging to the same module to derive the graph
net N iòG i representingthatconnectivitystate.
The clustering coefficient at the node level is calcu(l4at)ed
III.
usingthefollowingformula:
A.
Result
Figure 4A illustrates the spatial maps for the 54
1
CC   (w w w )1/3 independent cSopmaptioanlemnatpsneotfwfMorRkIsbr(aICinNcos)mpidoennetniftised through
i CS (CS 1) j,kòG ij ik jk independent component analysis (ICA). These ICNs are
i i
Theclusteringcoefficientfortheentiregraphiscalcu(l5at)ed classified into categories such as subcortical (SC), auditory
as the average of the clustering coefficients across all nodes (AUD), sensorimotor (SM), visual (VIS), cognitive control,
withinthegraph： defaultmode(DM),andcerebellar(CB)components,basedon
their anatomical and presumed functional attributes. The
1 identified ICNs share similarities with those found in earlier
CC  CC
net N iòG i high model-order ICA decompositions, with a subset being
associatedwithmetacognitivefunctionsasrevealedinrelevant
Theglobalefficiencyofnodeiisdefinedas: (6)
studies.
 1
 d
ij
GE  jòN,ji
i N 1
(7)
Where：
d   f  w 
ij uv
aòg
w w
ij
In this context, f refers to a mapping (specifically(8t)he
inverse)thatrelatesweighttolength,whilegi↔j​ represents
the shortest weighted path connecting nodes iii and j. The
global efficiency of the graph is determined by averaging the
globalefficienciesofallnodesinthegraph.
H.
Recent research using functional magnetic resonance
imaginghasshownthDaettfeluctcctuoantnioenctsioinnstitmateu-svaryingfunctional
brain connectivity lead to distinct, well-organized patterns,
Figure4illustratesthespatialmapsof54independentcomponents
known as connectivity states, which can appear or disappear
(A)andthegroupaveragestaticEEG-fMRIbrainmapshighlighting
over time. In this study, we apply a previously developed
structuraldifferencesacrossfivefrequencybandsinopen-eye,closed-eye,
method to identify the connectivity states of dynamic
EEG-fMRIgraphsforeachindividual. andeyeconditions(B).
Figure 4B illustrates the static connectivity structure
Initially, we compute the node-level connectivity strength
betweengraphnodes(ICNsandEEGchannels),calculatedand
for each time-varying EEG-fMRI graph. To evaluate how
averagedoverfMRItimeseriesandEEGspectralpoweracross
EEG-fMRI network patterns are related across different time
fivefrequencybands(delta,theta,alpha,beta,lowgamma) for
windows, we create a new correlation matrix based on the
more than 25 participants in both open-eye and closed-eye
connectivity strengthsbetweennodesacross all time windows.
conditions. The connectivity patterns within fMRI ICNs show
Thisinvolvesexamining each pair oftime windows acrossthe
modular organization in sensory systems and default mode
84nodes.
regions,alongwithanti-correlationsbetweentheseareas.
Modular community structure isa prevalent characteristic
IV.
of complex networks. Modularity assesses the quality of
This study investigated the dynamic connectivity patterns
grouping nodes into communities, where the modules in the
between EEG and fMRCIonmcoludsaiolinties, contributing to ourunderstanding of brain network interactions. By employing a [9] Zich, C., Debener, S., & Kranczioch, C. (2015). Real-time EEG
comprehensive approach that integrated static and dynamic feedback during simultaneous EEG-fMRI identifies the cortical
signature of motor imagery. NeuroImage, 114: 438–447.
analyses of EEG-fMRI data, we were able to uncover distinct
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2015.04.020
connectivitystatesandcharacterizetheirtemporalfluctuations.
[10] Xu, Y. Y., Feng, Z. Q., & Xie, Y. J. (2018). Frontal alpha EEG
The results revealed modular organization within the asymmetry before and after positive psychological interventions for
medical students. Frontiers in Psychiatry, 9: 432.
intrinsic connectivity networks (ICNs) of the brain,
https://doi.org/10.3389/fpsyt.2018.00432
highlighting the significant roles of sensory systems and the
default mode network. The use of a sliding window technique
allowed us to assess how functional connectivity varies over
time, further elucidating the transient nature of brain
connectivity.
Additionally, our findings align with previous literature,
reinforcing the notion that cognitive states can be effectively
identified through short-duration data, specifically within the
30-60secondtimeframe.Theestablishedrelationshipsbetween
connectivity strength and cognitive processes, particularly
during different visual states, underscore the relevance of our
approachforfutureresearchintobraindynamics.
Overall, this study not only enhances our understanding of
theinterplaybetweenEEGandfMRIsignalsbutalsopavesthe
way for further exploration into the neural correlates of
cognitive functions and their implications in clinical settings.
Future research should focus on refining these methodologies
and exploring their applications in various cognitive and
clinicalcontexts.
[1] Zotev, V., Mayeli, A., Misaki, M., & Bodurka, J. (2020). Emotion
self-regulationtraininginmRaejofrerdeenprceesssivedisorderusingsimultaneous
real-time fMRI and EEG neurofeedback. NeuroImage: Clinical, 27:
102331.https://doi.org/10.1016/j.nicl.2020.102331
[2] Pais-Roldán, P., Bosshard, A., Yu, X., Mitricheva, E., & Gruetter, R.
(2023). Functional connectivity of laminar networks in awake
marmosetsrevealedbyhigh-resolutionfMRI.NeuroImage,253:119064.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2022.119064
[3] Deshpande, V., Mehta, R., Dhawan, A., & Singh, K. (2022).
Layer-specific BOLD responses reveal distinct functional connectivity
patterns in the visual cortex. Journal of Neuroscience, 42(23):
4527–4540.https://doi.org/10.1523/JNEUROSCI.0178-22.2022
[4] Koiso,T.,Fujimoto,K.,&Amano,K.(2022).Theroleofcorticaldepth
in modulating brain responses: Insights from layer-specific fMRI.
Frontiers in Neuroscience, 16: 893245.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnins.2022.893245
[5] Woolrich,M.W.,Jbabdi,S.,&Behrens,T.E.(2009).Bayesiananalysis
of neuroimaging data in FSL. NeuroImage, 45(S1): S173-S186.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2008.10.055
[6] Yun,S.,Wang,L.,Sun,L.,Zhang,X.,&Wang,X.(2022).Improving
fMRI resolution using layer-specific feedback neural networks.
NeuroImage, 239: 118259.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.neuroimage.2021.118259
[7] Zotev, V., Phillips, R., Misaki, M., & Wong, C. K. (2018). Real-time
fMRIneurofeedbacktrainingofthemediodorsalandanteriorthalamus
enhances correlation between thalamic BOLD activity and alpha EEG
rhythm. Human Brain Mapping, 39(3): 1024–1042.
https://doi.org/10.1002/hbm.23902
[8] Stanley,J.A.,Olivito,G.,&Walsh,R.(2021).Corticaldepth-specific
mapping of neural activity using phase regression modeling in fMRI.
Frontiers in Systems Neuroscience, 15: 774311.
https://doi.org/10.3389/fnsys.2021.774311