Exploring the Boundaries of Ambient Awareness in Twitter
PabloSa´nchez-Mart´ın13 SonjaUtz2 IsabelValera34
1MaxPlanckInstituteforIntelligentSystems,Tu¨bingen,Germany
2Leibniz-Institutfu¨rWissensmedien,Tu¨bingen,Germany
3SaarlandUniversity,Saarbru¨cken,Germany
4MaxPlanckInstituteforSoftwareSystems,Saarbru¨cken,Germany
psanchez@tue.mpg.de,s.utz@imw-tuebingen.de,ivalera@cs.uni-saarland.de
Abstract mainlybeenstudiedinthecontextoforganizationalknowl-
edge management. Early knowledge management took an
Ambientawarenessreferstotheabilityofsocialmediausers
engineering approach through the use of databases but the
toobtainknowledgeaboutwhoknowswhat(i.e.,users’ex-
time and effort required to store/search information turned
pertise) in their network, by simply being exposed to other
outasamajorbarrier.Instead,theemergentapproachesfo-
users’content(e.g,tweetsonTwitter).Previouswork,based
cused on connecting employees with the respective experts
onusersurveys,revealsthatindividualsself-reportambient
awarenessonlyforpartsoftheirnetworks.However,itisun- in the company (Van den Hooff and Huysman 2009). Re-
clearwhetheritistheirlimitedcognitivecapacityorthelim- cently,bighopesaresetintoenterprisesocialmediabecause
ited exposure to diagnostic tweets (i.e., online content) that employees now could learn who-knows-what as an effort-
preventspeoplefromdevelopingambientawarenessfortheir lessby-productofskimmingupdates(Kane2017;Leonardi
complete network. In this work, we focus on in-wall am- 2015).Nonetheless,studiesinorganizationsarechallenged
bient awareness (IWAA) in Twitter and conduct a two-step bythefactthatitisdifficulttodeterminehowmuchofthis
data-drivenanalysis,thatallowsustoexploretowhichextent
“ambient” awareness stems indeed from skimming social
IWAAislikely,orevenpossible.First,werelyonreactions
mediaupdatesinsteadofofflinecontactwithcolleagues.
(e.g., likes), as strong evidence of users being aware of ex-
pertsinTwitter.Unfortunately,suchstrongevidencecanbe Toovercomethisdifficulty,LevordashkaandUtz(2016)
onlymeasuredforactiveusers,whichrepresenttheminority studiedambientawarenessonTwitter,aplatformwhereitis
inthenetwork.ThustostudytheboundariesofIWAAtoa commontofollowstrangers(Utz2016).Theyobservedthat
larger extent, in the second part of our analysis we instead most respondents reported ambient awareness, albeit only
focusonthepassiveexposuretocontentgeneratedbyother forpartsoftheirnetwork.Yet,itisunclearwhetherthislim-
users—which we refer to as in-wall visibility. This analysis iteddevelopmentofambientawarenessismainlyduetothe
shows that (in line with Levordashka and Utz (2016)) only
finite cognitive capacity of the users, or the fact that many
for a subset of users IWAA is plausible, while for the ma-
Twitter users do not post enough to allow others to infer
jority it is unlikely, if even possible, to develop IWAA. We
their expertise. Twitter can be used for many different pur-
hopethatourmethodologypavesthewayfortheemergence
poses(Kwaketal.2010)andtalkingaboutone’sworkand
ofdata-drivenapproachesforthestudyofambientawareness.
expertiseisjustonepossiblemotivation(Javaetal.2007);it
couldthusbethatonlyasmallproportionofuserspostmes-
1 Introduction
sages that allow to infer others’ expertise. However, prior
Nowadays,onlinesocialnetworks(OSNs)havebecomean workhasfoundthatnotonlyusersofenterprisesocialme-
indispensable part of many people’s daily life. It became diaandprofessionalsocialnetworksites(e.g.,LinkedIn)but
normal that people check their social media feeds several also Twitter users report higher professional informational
times a day (Gerlach and Cenfetelli 2020; Reinecke et al. benefits than non-users (Utz 2016; Leonardi 2015), which
2018), and, consequently, are exposed to a vast stream of mightbedrivenbythedevelopmentofambientawareness.
messages–e.g., tweets in Twitter. Browsing feeds has of- In this work, we approach ambient awareness in Twitter
ten been considered a waste of time or a form of addiction fromadata-drivenperspective.WefocusourstudyonTwit-
(Gerlach and Cenfetelli 2020). On the contrary, it has also tersincei)itprevailsasoneoftheleadingplatformforin-
been shown that even superficial skimming of seemingly formationexchange,andii)usersusuallyfollowlargenum-
mundaneonlineupdateshelpspeopletodevelopawareness ber of distant friends or even strangers (Utz 2016), which
aboutwhoknowswhat/whomwithintheirOSNs.Thisform makesitasuitableOSNforthestudyofambientawareness.
ofperipheralonlinesocialawarenessisdefinedbysocialsci- We propose to quantify “awareness signals”, namely reac-
entists as ambient awareness (Levordashka and Utz 2016; tions and exposure to content, in order to study the limits
Thompson2008),andithappensintheabsenceofextensive of ambient awareness and eventually obtain insights about
one-to-onecommunicationandwithouttheawarenessbeing itsplausibilityorimpossibilityforeachTwitteruser.Tothis
the ultimate goal. The benefits of ambient awareness have end, we first define in-wall ambient awareness (IWAA) as
a particular type of ambient awareness that arises from the
1
4202
raM
62
]IS.sc[
1v67771.3042:viXracontent of a user’s wall1–where Twitter users spend 82% 2 RelatedWork
∼
oftheirsessions(Meier,Aigner,andElsweiler2017).More-
Ambient awareness is defined as “awareness of others,
over, we rely on previous work (Bhattacharya et al. 2014)
arising from the frequent reception of fragmented personal
thatmakesuseoftheListfeatureofTwittertoidentifytop-
information,suchasstatusupdatesandvariousdigitalfoot-
ical experts, as well as information seekers, i.e., users who
prints,whilebrowsingsocialmedia”(LevordashkaandUtz
createdaListandhencearelikelytoseekinformationonthe
2016). In the context of organizational knowledge man-
corresponding topic. We assume that the creation time of a
agement and enterprise social media, the focus is more
seeker’s List informs us of the instant when a seeker con-
specificallyonawarenessoftheexpertiseofnetworkmem-
firms their awareness of an expert. With this information,
bers (Leonardi 2015). Field studies in organizations have
we quantify to which extent the seeker was exposed to the
shown that using enterprise social media is related to bet-
expert’s content prior to the List creation, which we use to
terknowledgemanagement(Leonardi2014,2015;Leonardi
assesstheplausibilityofIWAAforeachoftheseekers.
andMeyer2015;Zhaoetal.2020).Fromthesestudies,itre-
We divide our analysis into two steps, which in turn mainsopenhow“ambient”thisprocessindeedis.Theidea
makeuseofdifferenttypesofdata:thefirstpartfocuseson is that ambient awareness develops without a specific goal
users’ interactions, while the latter measures passive expo- to do so, even without deliberate attention and rather as a
sure.Morespecifically,wefirststudyIWAAbyquantifying by-product of social media use. In organizations, it cannot
thereactions–e.g.,retweets,replies,andlikes–ofseekersto beexcludedthatpeoplealsotalkonothermediaorface-to-
experts’content.Whileinthisanalysiswefindoutthreedif- face to their colleagues. To examine the ”ambient” nature
ferentseekerprofiles,only 10%oftheseekersexhibitre- oftheawareness,previousworkstudiedtheambientaware-
∼
actionstotheexperts’content.Inotherwords, 90%ofthe nessofTwitterusersforpeopletheyknowonlyviaTwitter
∼
seekers do not provide strong evidence of exposure to the (LevordashkaandUtz2016).Althoughmostparticipantsre-
tweetsoftheexperts.Thisis,however,notanecessarypre- portedexperiencingambientawareness,theyusuallydidso
conditionofambientawareness;expertiseinferencesshould for“some”ofthemembersoftheirTwitternetwork.
also occur just by skimming updates in a completely pas- Thedevelopmentofambientawarenesscanbeexplained
sive manner. This motivates our second part of the anal- by spontaneous inferences, which have been largely stud-
ysis, where we do not require seekers to react to experts’ ied by social psychologists (Newman 1993; Uleman et al.
content–thelargershareofTwitterusersare“lurkers”since 1996). A key question has been whether people can make
10%ofTwitteruserscreate80%ofthetweets(Wojcikand inferencesaboutothers’personalitytraitsautomatically.Au-
Hughes2019)–toquantifytheplausibilityofIWAA.Inthis tomatic processes occur without awareness, intention and
second analysis, we focus on exposure to experts’ content: cognitive effort and they are hard to control (Bargh 1994).
wemeasurethetimethecontentofanexpertisexposedin A classical paradigm to study these processes is the false
the seeker’s wall to quantify in-wall visibility. Notice that recognitionparadigm.Peoplereadsentencessuchas“Mon-
if the expert’s content is not visible in the seeker’s wall, ica got an A in the math test” and have to indicate quickly
then IWAA is not possible at all. Since it is not possible to withakey-presswhetherwordssuchas“test”,“intelligent”,
computethetruevisibility,wecomputeanupperandlower or “table” have been in the sentence. These studies show
boundofit.Thisanalysisunveilsthat,forthe“lurker”users, that people more often make mistakes when traits than can
i)IWAAisplausibleonlyfor 10%oftheseekers;whileii) beinferredfromthesentence(inthisexample,“intelligent”)
∼
forover 60%oftheseekersitisunlikely,ifevenpossible, arepresented.Laterworkhasshownthatspontaneousinfer-
∼
to develop IWAA, and thus experts in their List have been ence occur also for goals and roles, and that they are also
discoveredbytheseekeroutsidethewall. tiedtofaces(vs.names)(Chenetal.2014;Moskowitzand
These results form an important contribution to work on Olcaysoy Okten 2016; Todorov and Uleman 2002, 2003).
ambientawarenessastheyindicatethatitmightnotbelim- Utz and Levordashka (2017) adapted the false recognition
ited cognitive capacity, but limited exposure to diagnostic paradigm to the context of social media and showed in ex-
tweetswhatpreventspeoplefrominferringexpertiseforall periments with construed material that people also make
oftheirnetworkmembers. traitandexpertiseinferencesonsocialmedia.Uptothebest
ofourknowledge,thepresentworkconstitutesthefirstdata-
drivenanalysisofambientawarenessinTwitter.
Notation Wedenoterandomvariableswithcapitalletters
A and specific realizations of a random variable in lower- Topical group identification For our analysis, we first
case, i.e., A = a. We denote the expectations with re- need to find topical groups (i.e., groups of users that share
spect to a random variable A as = E []. We denote interest in a specific topic) and also identify the role of the
A A
sets/sequenceswithcalligraphicle⟨ t· t⟩ ers,i.e., ,· andtheircar- usersinsidethegroup(i.e.,seekerofinformationorexpert).
dinality(numberofelements)as .WeuseA (t ,t )tore- In the context of Twitter, diverse methodologies have been
1 2
fertotheelementsofasequence|A w| ithinaninA terval[t ,t ), applied to solve this problem. Some approaches leverage
1 2
and (t )= (0,t ). contentgenerated(Blei,Ng,andJordan2003;Bietal.2014;
2 2
A A Pal and Counts 2011) —i.e. tweets— and/or the network
structure (Page et al. 1999; Weng et al. 2010). These ap-
1The wall (a.k.a. home timeline) is a stream of tweets https: proacheshoweverfailataccountingforthefactthatusually
//help.twitter.com/en/using-twitter/twitter-timeline following-follower relationships are bond-based instead of
2identity-based(Javaetal.2007).Asaconsequence,thein- secondtypeofreactionisessentiallycognitive-effortless
ferredcommunitiesdonotclearlydistinguishbetweenpop- and,therefore,providesbetterevidenceofIWAA.Were-
ularityandexpertise;andmoreimportantly,donotrepresent fertothistypeofinteractionsaseffortlessreactions.
well-defined topics, which plays an imperative role in the
experts’discovery(YangandLeskovec2015). • Exposure to content: The content of the expert is visi-
bleinthewalloftheseeker.Forthisconditiontohappen
Alternativeapproachesrelyinsteadoncrowd-knowledge
either the seeker follows the expert or one of his friends
(Ghosh et al. 2012; Sharma et al. 2012), following the ax-
retweethiscontent.Incontrasttothecontentreactions,it
iom stating that the average over many noisy voices leads
doesnotrequireanyaction(i.e.,effort)fromtheseeker.
tobetteroutcomesthanindividualexperiencedjudgements.
InTwitter,theseapproachesmostlyrelyonmeta-dataofthe
Inordertoquantifytheseeker’sreactionstotheexpert’s
Listfeature,andtendtooutperformtheotherapproachesin
content, we need to reconstruct the online activity of the
terms of both cluster cohesion and coverage of topics and
seeker = p l , which accounts for both posts
users. For our analysis, we will rely on Bhattacharya et al. p andA lis kes {lA .s Th∪ eA ses q} uence of posts p can be further
(2014)asthestartingpoint.Bhattacharyaetal.(2014)show dA ivs ided in twA es ets t, retweets r anA ds replies/answers
that the name and description of the List feature in Twit-
to other tweets
a.A Fs urthermore,A tos
measure the expert’s
teroffersemanticcuestotheexpertiseoftheusersincluded As
contentvisibilityintheseeker’swall,weneedtoreconstruct
in the List. Their methodology allows to identify the cre- theseeker’swall, =(cid:83) t r,where denotes
ators of the Lists as users interested in a topic–i.e. seekers Ws b∈BsAb∪Ab Bs
the set of of friends (a.k.a. followees) of the seeker. Notice
of information–and users included in the Lists as potential
that the replies do not appear in the wall. Also, we remark
experts.Specifically,theyconsiderausertobeanexperton
here that the expert competes with the rest of the seeker’s
atopic,ifheislistedatleast10timesonListsassociatedto
friends for the seeker’s attention. As before, we denote the
the corresponding subject–they set this threshold based on
expert’s online activity by , which can be partitioned
previousfindings(Ghoshetal.2012).Additionally,thecre- Ae
likewise,andhissetoffollowersby .
ation time of the List provides the time instant from which Fe
theseekerconfirmsawarenessoftheexperts.
Givenallthesedataweaimtoexploreandquantifyhow
much has the seeker been ”exposed and acknowledged the
3 In-wallambientawareness
expert’scontent”,sincethiswillprovideevidenceaboutthe
TwitterisanOSNthatoffersitsusersdifferentwaystocon- plausibility or impossibility of IWAA. As a remark, note
sumeotherusers’content,alsoknownastimelines:Explore, the study of ambient awareness, and in particular IWAA,
Profiles,List,andHome(a.k.a.wall)timelines.Theydiffer involves a local problem: we focus on online behaviour of
inhowtheinformationispresented—thesectionsinwhich one expert and one seeker. This differs with the topical ex-
thetimelinesaredivided—andtheuserswhosecontentap- pert identification where the problem is posed as a global
pear. While ambient awareness can happen in any of these problemthatinvolvesallofthenetwork.
places, previous work states that the main usage of Twit-
ter,infact82%ofthesessions,correspondstobrowsingthe
Main assumptions of the analysis For the analysis car-
wall(Meier,Aigner,andElsweiler2017).Motivatedbythis,
ried out in the following sections, we make the following
we focus our study of ambient awareness to the wall, and
assumptions: i) the creation time of a List t points out the
thus,ofin-wallambientawareness(IWAA).Specifically,we l
instantinwhichtheseekerconfirmsawarenessoftheexpert,
ask: is it possible that the seekers get to know who are ex-
i.e.allthemembersofaListareaddedatcreationtime.In
perts on a topic, and thus, add them to a List, due to their
thisway,the”ambient”cannotbeduetotheListtimeline;ii)
usageofTwitter?
thenetwork,i.e.,thefollower&followingconnections,are
Problem statement Consider that seeker s has created a assumedtobestaticduringtheperiodoftheanalysis;andiii)
List on a particular topic (e.g. Math) at time t l. Within the contentisshownintheseeker’swallinchronologicalorder.
membersoftheListthereisanotherusere,whoisanexpert Duringthedatacollectionperiod,Twitteruserscouldtoggle
onthetopic(weremindthatweconsiderausertobeanex- between two different kind of wall timelines: Top Tweets
pertonatopic,onlyifheislistedinatleast10Listsonthat (algorithm-based)andLatestTweets(time-based).Thefirst
topic).Hereweaimtoquantifytheexposureoftheseekerto one uses the Twitter algorithm to shuffle posts in what it
the content of the expert, and thus study the plausibility of suggestsasabetterorder.Eveninthiscase,Twitterexposes
IWAA,inatimeintervalprevioustothecreationoftheList, peopletorelativelyrecenttweets2.Thelatterinsteadshows
thatis[t l T,t l].Tothisend,weconsiderthefollowingtwo friends’tweetsinchronologicalorder,anditisthemodewe
−
typesofphenomenaoccurringwithinthewall: assumeinourstudysincewedonothaveaccesstoTwitter’s
• Reactionstocontent: Theseekerreactstooneormore algorithms. For the same reason, we assume all the tweets
thatappearinthewallcomefromthefollowers.3
tweets of the expert. This reaction can happen in differ-
ent ways: i) s replies to the content of e; ii) s acknowl-
edgesthecontentofethroughalikeoraretweet.Thefirst 2Full details on the timeline algorithm in https://help.twitter.
situation, while being strong evidence of awareness, in- com/en/using-twitter/twitter-timeline.
volvescontentgenerationwhichimpliescognitiveeffort, 3Twittermayoccasionallyaddtweetsfromusersnotfollowed
and thus is unclear how “ambient” it is. In contrast, the https://help.twitter.com/en/using-twitter/twitter-timeline
3Music
ArtificialIntelligence
MachineCe Ll ee ab rr nit ii ne gs 1K Tweets 1M
Entertain Am rte in st t 100 Retweets 100K
Data CS oc A mie c en t dc o ye r 10 Answers 10 1K
K
MD ara vt ea l 1 100
Social
Research 0.1 10
Cinema
DeepLearning 0.01 1
StaH tM u ism ta it o ch sr 0 %20 User4 s0 with60 R>80 r 100 0 %20 Users40 with60 Al>80 al 100
Science
SocialMedia
1M
10M
100K
0 100 200 300 400
NumberofLists 10K 100K
1K
Figure 1: Topics considered in our analysis and number of 1K
100
Listscollectedforeachofthem. 10 10
1
0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100
4 Dataset %UserswithB>b %UserswithF >f
We use the Twitter API 4 to gather data from 1st July 2020 Figure 2: We show the ICDF for different features of the
until 11st November 2020, enough time so that ambient seekers (blue) and the experts (orange). Specifically, we
awareness can be developed (Leonardi 2015). In this time showtherateofpostsR(separatedbytweets,retweetsand
period, we collected activity of users (i.e, tweets, retweets, answers),thecountoflikesA ,friendsB,andfollowersF.
l
likesandreplies/answers),following-followerrelationships
andListmeta-data(i.e,creationtime,creator,name,descrip-
theseekersandtheexpertsaccordingtosomeoftheironline
tionandmembers).Allthisinformationallowsustoi)iden-
features,e.g.,numberoffriends.Figure2shows,fortheex-
tifyusersasseekersand/orexpertsalongsidewiththeirtopic
perts(inorange)andseekers(inblue),theinverseempirical
ofexpertise,ii)extractinteractionsbetweenseekersandex-
cumulativedistributionfunction(ICDF)oftherateofposts
perts, and iii) reconstruct the wall of the seekers and thus
(dividedbytweets,retweetsandanswers),thecountoflikes
analyze exposure to content. In the following, we describe
5, friends and followers. The ICDF allows us to compare
theproceduresforgatheringandfilteringthedataweuseto
differentpopulations:itreadsasthepercentageofthepopu-
exploreIWAA(seeAppendixAforfurtherdetails).
lationlargerthanacertainvalue.Thismeansitallowsusto
Datacollection&filtering Firstofall,weselectanum- comparequantiles—e.g.,themedianofthedistribution:the
ber of topics of expertise, e.g. Artificial Intelligence and sloweraICDFdecreases,thelargerthequantilesare.
Statistics, for which we are interested in analyzing IWAA. BasedonFigure2,wecanhighlightseveralpoints.First,
AllofthetopicsconsideredareshowninFigure1,together the most clear difference between seekers and experts is in
withthenumberofrelatedLists.Intotalwecollected2002 thenumberoffollowers:expertsarefollowedbymanymore
Lists, created by 1836 seekers from 1st August 2020 until people than seekers, whereas they do not differ so much in
11st November2020.Amongtheselectedseekers,wefilter thenumberoffollowees.Thisisafirsthintthatexpertsare
out those for which their activity is private; they are com- popularandenjoyahighreputation.Second,ifwefocuson
pletely passive (i.e., their timeline is empty, p = 0, or the top left figure, we can see that experts generate and re-
their number of likes is zero, l = 0); the| yA ds| o not fol- act to more content than seekers, i.e., they are more active
low any other user, or on the|A cos| ntrary, they follow over users, and thus, more likely to be able to exhibit their ex-
5000users—IWAAcannotbedevelopedinanemptyortoo pertise,whichisapreconditionforIWAA.Thisfigurealso
overcrowded wall. After the filtering, 1682 Lists and 1541 reveals that experts create more tweets than replies or an-
seekers remain for our study, which correspond to 84.02% swers,whereasthisisnotthecaseformosttheseekers.This
and 83.93% of the initial values. From these Lists, we dis- resultfurtherstrengthensourpreviousargument.Asanaddi-
cover atotal of 12033experts, from whichonly 16 happen tionalremark,wediscoveredthataround20%oftheseekers
tobealsoseekers.Thus,intotalwehave13558uniqueusers arelistedin10ormoreLists,whichindicatestheycouldbe
and36895pairsseeker-expert.Additionally,tofacilitatethe expertsonsometopics.
reproducibility of the results, we provide a Github repos-
itory (https://github.com/XXX/XXX) with the scripts used 5 IWAAbasedonreactions
for data collection & IWAA analysis as well as the identi-
Inthissection,weanalyzetheseekers’reactionstotheex-
fiersoftheLists,usersandtweetscollected.
perts’ content, as a strong evidence of the seeker’s IWAA
about an expert. First, we present several quantitative met-
Dataexploration
rics for the reactions alongside with their interpretation.
Prior to the IWAA analysis, we conduct an exploration of Then,weusethesemeasurementstogroupseekerswithsim-
thecollecteddata.Inparticular,wefocusoncharacterizing
5Giventhatwedonotneedtocollectthelikesfortheexperts,
4https://developer.twitter.com/en/docs wedisplaythecountoflikesinsteadoftherate.
4
r
b
la
f1 I=0.05 I=0.07 I=0.44
Clustersize(%) hIef sie hIef sie hIef sie
1.0 1.0 1.0
0.8 0.8 0.8
0.6 0.6 0.6
0.4 0.4 0.4
54.9 8.5 hIea sie 0.2 hIel sie hIea sie 0.2 hIel sie hIea sie 0.2 hIel sie
0.1
36.6
hIer sie hIer sie hIer sie
0 20 40 60 80 100
%SeekerswithI>i (a) (b)
Figure 3: ICDF for the four average Figure4:Clusteringresults.(a)Sizeproportionofeachcluster.(b)Averageinterac-
reaction signals, we generally repre- tionsignalspercluster.
sentwithI.
ilarsignalpatternsandwerelateeachofthemwithanonline pacity required for the reaction, the lower the % of experts
behavior. theyinteractwith.Forexample,while 70%oftheseekers
∼
follow at least 10% of their experts, when looking at likes
Measuringthereactions the percentage of seekers reacting to at least 10% of their
expertsdropsto 20%(andlessthan10%forretweetsand
Twitter provides several ways in which the users can inter- ∼
replies/answers).
actwitheachother.Theinteractioncanbeatnetworklevel
via following other people, which we represent with f; or
Clusteringtheseekers:passivebehavior
at content level via retweet, like and reply/answer, which
we refer to as r, l and a respectively. It is the content level Here, we group the seekers according to their reactions, as
interaction that provides evidence about the plausibility of measuredabove,andexplorewhatotherfeatures(e.g.,num-
IWAA. Concretely, the retweet and like since they require ber of posts) tell us about seekers’ awareness for different
little cognitive effort—not even deliberate processing— seekergroups.
from the user and and are driven from the content of the
Experimental setup We cluster seekers using our three
post. As a consequence, they constitute more meaningful
types of interactions—that is Ir , Il and Ia —as
signals of the existence of IWAA than the reply, which in- ⟨ es⟩e ⟨ es⟩e ⟨ es⟩e
input features tothe clustering algorithm. Notice that these
volves more complex processing and can be steered by the
metricsarealreadynormalizedbetween[0,1],sonofurther
user’s reputation (Cha et al. 2010). The follow interaction
pre-processing is needed. We cross-validate different algo-
mustbetreatedcautiously.Itindicatestheseekerhasinter-
rithms and parameters configurations using the Silhouette
est in receiving the content generated by the expert but it
coefficient (Rousseeuw 1987) as the quantity to be maxi-
canalsoberelatedtobond-basedrelationships,whichcould
mized. Spectral clustering (Von Luxburg 2007) happens to
misleadouranalysis.
performthebest.SeeAppendixBforfurtherdetailsonthe
Remark Inearly2020TwitterlaunchedtheQuoteTweet cross-validationscheme.
(qtweet),whichisjustaretweetwithsomeadditionaltext.In Figure 4 summarizes the clustering results. Specifically,
our analysis, weconsider qtweets as standardretweets. We Figure 3b shows the four average reaction metrics for the
observed that, in the data collected, qtweets represent only clusters,whichareorderedfromlower(ontheleft)tohigher
20%oftheretweets,andcontainshortertextthananswers— (on the right) level of effortless reactions measured as I =
onaverage,answerscontain100.94characterswhileitdras- Ir Il .Wealsoshowtheproportionofusersoneach
⟨ es∨ es⟩e,s
ticallydropsto67.17forqtweets—whichindicatestheyre- clusterinFigure3a.Here,weobservethatover90%ofthe
quirelesscognitiveefforttobecreated. seekers do not interact at all with their experts (blue and
We are interested in the reactions from the seeker to orange clusters). This matches again our prior intuition on
the expert, which we represent with a binary variable Ix the passive behavior of Twitter users and the idea that am-
es
taking value 1 when there is interaction, and 0 otherwise. bient awareness does not require interaction, but may arise
The superscript determines the type of interaction, i.e. x justfromskimmingupdates.Incontrast,theseekersbelong-
r,l,a,f . For example, Ir = 1 indicates the seeker ha∈ s ing to the third cluster (respectively, 8.5% of the seekers),
{ } es
retweeted at least one tweet of the expert (within the stud- present higher level of interactions to their experts. We ac-
ied period). Then, from the point of view of a seeker, we company these results with several features of the experts
can compute the percentage of experts that he reacts to as (seeFigure5)thattheseekersineachclusterinteractwith.
Ix . We can also compute average percentage of reac- Noticethattheclusterwithmoreseekers’reactionsisinturn
⟨ tioe ns⟩ se from seekers to experts, i.e., Ix = Ix . Addition- also characterized with experts presenting by high retweet
s ⟨ es⟩e,s
ally, we refer to the total average of effortless reactions as andanswerratio.
I = Ir Il . Lastly,inFigure6wedisplaythefeaturesoftheseekers
⟨ es∨ es⟩e,s
Figure,3showsthedistributionforeachtypeofreaction in each cluster. Notice that the cluster with more reactions,
asaICDF.Here,weobservethatthepercentageofseekers thegreenone,comprisesthemostactiveseekersinalltypes
that react to experts’ content is very small compared to the of posts: they exhibit the highest rates of tweets, retweets,
number of experts they follow, and the more cognitive ca- answers and likes. As a last remark, we also explored the
5
i10 10 10 10
1 1
0.1 0.1 0.1 0.1
0.01 0.01
0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100
%ExpertswithRt>rt %ExpertswithRr>rr %SeekerswithRt>rt %SeekerswithRr>rr
(a)Tweetsrate (b)Retweetsrate (a)Tweetsrate (b)Retweetsrate
1K 10
10
10 1
0.1 0.1
0.1
0.01
0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100 0 20 40 60 80 100
%ExpertswithRa>ra %SeekerswithRa>ra %SeekerswithRl>rl
(c)Answersrate (c)Answersrate (d)Likesrate
Figure5:ICDFofexperts’featurespercluster. Figure6:ICDFofseekers’featurespercluster.
percentage of seekers that are potential experts, i.e., listed
theintervaloftime[t ,t ]solvingtheintegral:
1 2
10 times or more. As shown in Appendix B, we observed
that the distribution remains similar across clusters, which (cid:90) t2
V (t ,t ):= f (τ)o (τ)dτ, (1)
does not provide information about the composition of the es 1 2 es s
cluster,e.g.,theexistenceofan”onlyexperts”group.
t1
From this empirical evidence, we can conclude that the wherethefunctionf es(t)correspondstotheprobabilityof
rateofactivityoftheseekersrelateswiththeamountofre- thecontentofebeingvisibleinthewallofsattimet,and
actions to the experts: the most active a seeker is, the most o s(t)referstotheprobabilityoftheseekerbeingpresentin
likelyheinteractswithexperts.Unsurprisingly,alargeper- thewall,i.e.,online,attimet.Inthefollowing,weomitthe
centageoftheseekers—around90%—donotreacttotheex- intervallimitstoimprovetheoverallreadability.Intuitively,
perts’content.Thispassivenessoftheseekersmotivatesus thehigherV es,themorelikelytheseekerbecomesawareof
to introduce the concept of in-wall visibility. We thus con- theexpertiseoftheexpertwhileskimmingthroughthewall.
tinuewiththeanalysisofIWAAfromaperspectivethatdoes Importantly, if V es = 0, then IWAA is impossible and thus
notneedexplicitactionsfromtheuser,i.e.,wefocusonpas- awareness of experts must come from somewhere else but
siveexposureofthecontentoftheexperts. theTwitterwall,potentiallyevenfromofflineactivity.Next,
wedetailhowtocomputein-wallvisibility,specifically,how
6 IWAAbeyondinteractions:Exposureto tomodelbothfunctions,f es(t)ando s(t).
content Modelingexposure Theprobabilityofexposureofapost
ofeinthewallofs(f (t))shouldbehighwhenanexpert’s
es
In this section we further investigate the limits of IWAA postappearsatthetopofthetimeline.Then,asweassumea
by looking at the visibility of the expert’s content in the chronological wall, it decreases as posts from other friends
seeker’swallpriortothecreationoftheList,asitdoesnot arrive to the wall, making on average more likely that the
require any further effort from the seekers’ side than skim- seekerwillnotreach/seeit.Followingthisintuitiveidea,we
mingthroughthewall.Inparticular,weprovideaframework proposethefollowingmodeling:
toquantifythetimethatthecontentofanexperteisexposed (cid:20)
min(n
(t),k)(cid:21)m
(orvisible)inthewallofaseekers,whichwerefertoasV es, f es(t;k,m)=f es(t)= 1− e ks , (2)
andthenusethisframeworktostudytheplausibilityofde-
velopingIWAA. where n (t) = (te,t) is the number of posts in
es |Ws/e l |
Notation Let be the sequence of posts of the expert the wall of s since the last post of e, the parameter k de-
es
that appear in thA e seeker’s wall, and te the time of the last finesuptowhichnumberofeventsinthewallf es(t;k,m)
l
postin (t).Let = - bethesequenceofposts is non-zero, and the parameter m determines the decay of
es s/e s es
inthewA alloftheseW ekerexW cludA ingtheonesfromtheexpert. thefunction.Figure7depictstheshapeofthisfunctionfor
n (t) 0,...,100 fordifferentconfigurationsofthepa-
es
∈ { }
Boundsforthevisibility rameters k and m. Intuitively, both parameters should be
We propose to compute the visibility of the content of an chosenaccordingtothedistributionofthenumberofposts
experteinthewallofaseekers,orin-wallvisibility,over theseekerskimsineverysessionofactivity:k isrelatedto
themaximumnumberofpostswhilemrelatestothemean.
6
)yad/steewt(tr
)yad/srewsna(ar
)yad/steewter(rr )yad/steewt(tr
)yad/srewsna(ar
)yad/steewter(rr
)yad/sekil(lrModeling online presence We model the probability of as the expected time (per day) that the seeker s is exposed
anusersbeingonlineattimet,i.e.,o (t),asanasymmetric tothecontentofhisexperts,i.e.,theaveragevisibilityofthe
s
Laplacekernelcenteredatthetimeoftheclosestpostt : expertsintheseeker’swall.Also,weremindthatinthefol-
c
lowingweonlystudytheexpertsthattheseekerhasincluded
− ||t−tc||
o s(t)=e al[t≤tc]+ar[t>tc] witht c =argmind(t j,t), (3) in his List. We split the analysis in two parts by consider-
tj∈Ap s ingtwodisjointsetofexperts:theonesthatarefollowedby
where the parameters a
l
and a
r
determine how the kernel theseekers,werefertoas Ef,andtheonesthatarenotfol-
decays to the left and to the right, respectively. These pa- lowedby,thatis .Additionally,wehaverepeatedtheanal-
E
rameters can be chosen globally or locally, i.e., per event, ysisbelowonawallresultingfromfilteringtheleastpopular
and intuitively capture how the probability of being online Tweets as a proxy to the unavailable Top Tweets Wall pro-
before and after a post decreases as we get further away videdbyTwitter.Theconclusionsreachedaresimilar.
fromthetimeofthepost.Specifically,weassumeherethat Hyperparameters’ selection We analyze the sensitivity
a l = a r = 0.047 (hours) for all the events, but for those of the results to the choice of the hyperparameters k, m of
consecutivepoststhatarecloserthantheaveragelengthofa the exposure function f (t). As a starting point to delimit
es
session—i.e., 4minutesaccordingtoStatista(seefurther therangeofvalues,werelyonpreviousworkthatcharacter-
≈
detailsbelowinthehyperparameterselection),inwhichin- izesusers’behaviorinOSNs.Inparticular,theonlineportal
terval we assume the seeker to be continuously active. As StatistarevealedinitsreportofSeptember2019thatTwitter
shown in (Kooti, Moro, and Lerman 2016), Twitter users usersstayonaveragelessthan4minutespersessiononthe
tendtoshowactivityatthebeginningandtheendofases- platform6.
sion,abehaviorwecouldcapturewiththeparametersa land Aboutthetimeittakestoskimatweet,CountsandFisher
a r.Thissimplebutratherflexiblemodeling,allowstocap- (2011) observed users only allocate a couple of seconds to
tureonlineuserbehaviorwithasmallnumberofparameters. read each tweet. This time frame also matches the setup
RefertoAppendixCforanillustrativeexample. up of spontaneous inference studies (Levordashka and Utz
Unfortunately,asmentionedpreviously,mostofTwitter’s 2017;TodorovandUleman2003),whereusersareexposed
usersarepassive.Thismeans,withourmodelingchoiceof tomessagesbetween2and5seconds.Then,weassumethat
theonlinepresence,wemissanyinactivesession.Moreover, it takes 3 seconds to skim through a post and consider
wecannotconsiderthelikeactivityoftheuserbecauseTwit- k 30,≈ 60,100 andm 1,2 .Figure7(tworight-most
ter only provides the creation time of the post but not the plo∈ ts{ )showsthe} ICDFfo∈ rb{ othb} oundsoftheaveragevisi-
”like”time.Asaconsequence,withthemodelingoftheon- bilityovertheexpertsfordifferentconfigurationsofthepa-
linepresenceo s(t)describedabove,weonlyobtainaloose rameterskandm.Weobservethat,whileasexpectedtheex-
lower bound (LB) on the true online presence, and hence, posureincreasesasweincreasekordecreasem,thetraceof
we are only computing a LB on the true visibility V es. We thevisibilityisconsistentacrosssettings.Foragiventimeof
thus refer to this LB as VLB. If alternatively, we consider averageexposure,themaximumdeviationinthepercentage
es
the user s is always online, that is o s(t) = 1, we obtain ofseekersis10%,whichhappenswhenVUB 6minutes.
anupperbound(UB)ofthevisibilityV es,whichwedenote Appendix C contains further details on the hyp≈ erparameter
V eU sB.Now,weknowthetrueunavailablevisibilityV es lays selectionfortheonlinepresencefunction.Foradeeperanal-
inV eL sB <V es <V eU sB. ysisofthevisibility,wecomputetheboundwithk=100and
As remarks, notice both f es(t) and o s(t) are piecewise m=2.Also,wedividethefollowinganalysisintotwogroups
functions. This enables to solve the integral in Equation 1 ofexperts,namely and .
f
as a sum over the elements in p. Also, notice that E E
Ws ∪As Whatdoesthelowerboundtellus? Figure8ontheleft
thevisibilityisindependentonthetopicofexpertise,itjust
showstheICDFfortheaverageLBofthevisibilityperday
dependsonthepairseeker-expert.
fortheseekers—thatis VLB orVLBinshort.Inpartic-
⟨ es ⟩e,day
Analysisofthevisibility
ular,wedisplaytheVLBfor
f
inorange,for ingreen,and
E E
for the whole population of experts in blue. There are sev-
In this section we study visibility/exposure for the pairs
eralimportantpointstonote.First,noticethatallthevalues
seeker-experts introduced in previous sections, for which
found for VLB lay in the order of seconds per day or less.
we first need to reconstruct each seeker’s wall. As recov-
Even though they may seem meaningless, a percentage of
ering each seeker’s wall requires retrieving all the posts of
themreferstoonetweetperdayofexposureonthe30days
hisfriendsovertheconsideredtimeinterval,weherefocus
previoustotheListcreationtime,whichinfactseemsarea-
thestudyonarandomuniformsampleof137seekersfrom
sonable amount of exposure to develop IWAA. By choos-
theclusterwithoutreactions(blueandorange)foundinSec-
ing 3 seconds per day (black dashed line) as evidence for
tion5thatrepresents90%oftheseekers.Tobeprecise,we
the possibility of developing IWAA, then we observe that
restrict our analysis to the 123 seekers with less than 2500
11%oftheseekersshowstrongevidenceonthepossibility
friends: we observed the average visibility decays quickly
to develop IWAA for the experts that they are already fol-
asweincreasethenumberoffriends(seeAppendixC).We
lowing,i.e.,fortheexpertsin .Thispercentageissurpris-
compute the visibility per day for the 30 days prior to the Ef
ingly high taking into consideration we have a loose lower
creationoftheList.Then,wetaketheaverageoverthedays
andtheexpertstoobtaintheaveragevisibilityforaseeker, 6https://www.statista.com/statistics/579411/top-us-social-
i.e., V . We remark that V can be interpreted networking-apps-ranked-by-session-length/
es day,e es day,e
⟨ ⟩ ⟨ ⟩
71.0 100s
1h
0.8 10s
0.6
1s
0.4 6m
0.2 0.1s
0.0
0.01s 36s
0 20 4 n0 es(t6 )0 80 100 0 %S1 e0 ekers20 with30 VLB40
>v
50 0 %S1 e0 ekers20 with30 VUB40 >v50
Figure7:Ontheleft,plotoff (t;k,m)asn (t)increasesfordifferentvaluesoftheparameterskandm.Onthetworight-
es es
mostfigures,ICDFofthelowerVLB andupperVUB boundsofthevisibilityfordifferentconfigurationsofkandm.
boundonthetruevisibility.Ontheotherhand,thispercent-
agesignificantlydropsto3.92%fortheexpertsthatarenot
followedbytheseekers.Thisfindingtellusthatitissignif-
10s 10h icantlyeasierfortheseekertodevelopIWAAifhefollows
theexpert.However,inorderfortheseekertofollowanex- 1s 1h
pert,eitherTwitterhasrecommendedtheexpertasapoten-
tialconnection,heknowstheexpertoffline,orhemusthave 0.1s 6m
beingexposedtotheexpertviatheretweetsofhisfriends.
0.01s 36s
0 10 20 30 40 50 0 10 20 30 40 50
%SeekerswithVLB>v %SeekerswithVUB>v
What does the upper bound tell us? Figure 8 on the
rightshowstheICDFfortheaveragedupperboundvisibil- Figure8:ICDFoftheboundsofthevisibilityaveragedover
ity,namely VUB orVUB inshort.Asbefore,itisalso expertsanddays.Inbluetheaverageisoveralltheexpert;
⟨ es ⟩e,day es
splitted by the two experts’ groups. The first thing we no- inorangeover ;andingreenover .Ontheleftweshow
f
E E
ticeisthedifferenceintime-scalecomparedtothevisibility VLB withadottedblacklineatavisibilitylevelof3
tl eo lw lser usbo wu end a, reas deV ae lU s iB ngre aa lsc ohe ws iu thp ato lo1 o0 seho uu pr ps e. rT bh ois una dlr .e Yad ety
,
⟨ sece os n⟩ de s,d .a Oy ntherightweshow ⟨V eU sB ⟩e,day.
we observe that for more than 60% of the seekers the ex-
posure to the experts’ content in is less than 36 seconds,
E
the exposure for this group of experts always being below not know whether this was due to the limited cognitive ca-
30 minutes. This indicates that seekers are unlikely— if it pacity of the users or the fact that many Twitter users do
is even possible—to develop IWAA for experts they do not not tweet enough or do not post tweets that are diagnostic
follow. Notice we are considering that the seeker is always of their expertise. The present results indicate that it might
online when in reality, on average, only 40% of the Twit- be the low frequency and/or diagnosticity of the tweets in
terusersconnectdailyforlessthan4minutes,whichwould auser’swallthatlimitsambientawareness.Ourdata-driven
needinturntooverlapwiththelessthan36seconds(of30 approach nicely complements user studies and presents an
minutes in the best case) that the experts are visible in his importantcontributiontoworkonambientawareness.
wall.Whatisevenmorestrikingisthatfortheoverallpop-
ulation of experts, around 60% of the seekers present zero Weremarkthatouranalysisconsidersasignificantnum-
exposure to the experts’ content, even when considering a berofTwitterusers(36895pairsseeker-expert),focuseson
visibilityupperbound.Thus,itseemsthatforatleast60%of diverse topics such as Social Science or Math, and is ro-
passiveseekers,whichareinturnthemajority(over90%), bust to the hyperparameter choice. As a consequence, we
IWAA is impossible, and then the awareness should come expectthatthemainresultsfromthisanalysisarenotsensi-
fromadifferentuseofTwitter(e.g.,theExploretimeline)or tivetotheconsidereddataset–thespecificpercentagesofthe
alternativelyfromofflineactivity. bounds may slightly vary across datasets but not the main
insights.
7 Discussion
Wewouldliketohighlightthatthepresenteddata-driven
Until now, ambient awareness—the knowledge about who- methodology paves the way for further research studies of
knows-whatbysimplyskimmingthroughonlineupdates— ambientawarenessatalargescale.Forexample,toexplore
wasexploredviauserstudies,whichdonoteasilyscaleup theboundariesofIWAAindifferenttopicsandcommunities
tothenetworksize,astheyarecostlyandrelyonsubjective ofTwitter.Moreover,data-drivenapproachesallowstudying
self-reportdata,e.g.,ontheanswersoftheparticipants.Up more fine-grained queries, such as: Is IWAA a property of
tothebestofourknowledge,thispaperispioneeratdevel- theseeker?Ifso,whataretheusercharacteristicsthatmake
opingadata-drivenmethodologytostudytheboundariesof him/hersuitabletodevelopIWAA?DoesIWAAdependson
ambientawarenessinthewallofTwitter(IWAA).Theresult theexpertsauserfollows?Toanswertheseandothersimilar
ofouranalysisareinlinewithLevordashkaandUtz(2016) queries,onewouldneedtoperformadetailedtemporalanal-
whofoundthatmostTwitterusersreportedambientaware- ysisofusers’wall,whichcanbeonlyperformedefficiently
nessonlyforsomeoftheirnetworkmembers.Yet,theydid byrelyingondataanalysistools,likemachinelearning.
8
)m,k;t(
f
se
)yadrep(v
)yadrep(v
)yadrep(
v
)yadrep(v100 1h36min
1h24min
80 1h12min
60 1.0 OnlinePresence 1h
0.8 Events 48m
40 0.6 36m
0.4
24m
20 00 .. 02 12m
0 0 100 200 300 400 500 600 0 5 10 Time1 t5 (min) 20 25 30 0s 0 500 1000 1500 2000 2500
L>l Num. offriends
Figure 10: Illustrative example of the
Figure 9: Plot of the percentage of probability of online presence for a Figure11:Averageupperboundvisi-
seekers listed l times or more in the seeker with four events, i.e., posts in bilityperdayvsnumberoffriendsof
eachofthethreeclusters. twitter. theseekersforpairsunderstudy.
A Datasetdetails around 20% of the seekers are potential experts indepen-
InordertostartthecollectionoftheListsforthestudy,we dentlyontheclustertheylayon.Thispercentagedropsclose
selectedseveralexpertsapriorithatweknowareactiveon to0asweconsiderl > 200.Thisresultstellthatanyofthe
Twitter, as shown in Table 1. Then, we scrape the Lists in clustersrepresentan”onlyexperts”group,regardlessofthe
which they are members and continue the search for new minimumlevelofexpertiseconsidered.
expertsamongthemembersoftheLists. C Visibilitydetails
Figure 10 illustrates the shape of o (t), with the configu-
s
Topic Usernames ration of hyperparameters we use in the analysis. Specifi-
Music ChiliPeppers,johnlennon,jonbonjovi,xtina cally, we assume here that both a and a are equal for all
l r
Entertainment AnnaKendrick47,EmmaWatson,LeoDiCaprio, the events, but for those consecutive posts that are closer
RobertDowneyJr,SamuelLJackson,TheRock, than the average length of a session—i.e., 4 minutes ac-
VancityReynolds cording to Statista, in which interval we as≈ sume the seeker
Artificial beenkim,drfeifei,fhuszar,goodfellow ian, to be continuously active. This happens for the events be-
intelligence karpathy,mrtz,OriolVinyalsML,
tweenminutes5and10andallowustomodeltimeintervals
RandomlyWalking,SchmidhuberAI,shakir za,
where we consider the user is online. In general, this de-
yeewhye,ylecun,yudapearl,ZoubinGhahrama1
signchoiceallowsgreatflexibilitytomodelonlineuserbe-
haviour,alwayswithatrade-offbetweencomplexity—i.e.,
Table 1: Topical experts selected a priori that are active in
numberofparameters—andsimplicity.Then,foreventsfur-
Twitter.
therawaythan4minutes,wehavethefollowingexpression
o s(t) =
e−||t− atc||
with t c = argmin tj∈Ap
s
d(t j,t), which
B Clusteringdetails we can also express in terms of the interval since the last
event,i.e.∆t = t t .Webasethechoiceoftheband-
c
Weexploredifferentalgorithmsandhyperparameterconfig- || − ||
width of the kernel, i.e. a, using previous studies of online
urations to group the seekers according to their reactions
userbehaviourinTwitter—recallfromthemainmanuscript
to the content of the experts. In particular, we have cross-
that the average session of a user lasts less than 4 minutes.
validatedi)k 3,...,10 forKMeans,ii)k 3,...,10 ,
Specifically, we select a = 0.047 such that the probabil-
∈{ } ∈{ }
γ 0.8,0.6,0.5,0.4 forSpectralclustering,iii)damping
ity of being online after 4 minutes since the last event is
∈ { }
factor 0.6,0.7,0.8,0.9 forAffinitypropagation,andiv)
smaller or equal to 0.5, that is o(∆t = 4min) < 0.5.
∈{ }
bandwidth 1,0.8,0.6,0.5 forMeanshift.Spectralclus-
This also means that o(∆t = 10min) = 0.031, which
∈ { }
teringresultstobethebestchoicewithγ = 0.8andk = 3
makes sense. In general, we can obtain a value for a with
andaSilhoutteCoefficientof0.57.Asremark,theSilhouette
Coefficient quantify the affinity among points in the same
o(∆t)<c →e−∆ at <c →a< −∆ lot gc.
clusterwithrespecttotheotherclusters. Do the number of friends affect the visibility? Figure
11showthescatterplotoftheaverageupperboundvisibility
Seekers’expertise Wefurtherexploretheseekers’exper-
perday VUB versusthenumberoffriendsoftheseeker,
tiseregardingtheanalysisinSection5.Particularly,wepose ⟨ es ⟩day
i.e. .Noticethatthevisibilitydecreaseswiththenumber
the following question: how many seekers in the different s
|B |
offriends,andforseekerswithmorethan2000friends,itis
clustersarepotentialexpertswithexpertiselevell,i.e.,are
quite low, never surpassing 12 minutes per day on average
listed more than l times? Figure 9 shows the percentage of
(rightpartoftheplot).
seekers that are potential experts for different levels of ex-
pertise, i.e. L > l, with l [10,600], for the three clus-
∈
ters. The main thing we observe is that the distribution is
quite uniform across clusters and the percentage of seeker
decreases,regardlessofthecluster,asweincresethemini-
mumnumberoflistedtimes,i.e.,l.Forexample,forl =10
9
l>LhtiwsrekeeS%
)t(so
BUVReferences Meier,F.;Aigner,J.;andElsweiler,D.2017. Usingsessionsfrom
clickstreamdataanalysistouncoverdifferenttypesoftwitterbe-
Bargh,J.A.1994. Thefourhorsemenofautomaticity:Intention,
haviour.
awareness,efficiency,andcontrolasseparateissues.
Moskowitz,G.B.;andOlcaysoyOkten,I.2016.Spontaneousgoal
Bhattacharya, P.; Ghosh, S.; Kulshrestha, J.; Mondal, M.; Zafar,
inference(SGI). SocialandPersonalityPsychologyCompass.
M.B.;Ganguly,N.;andGummadi,K.P.2014.Deeptwitterdiving:
Exploring topical groups in microblogs at scale. In Proceedings Newman,L.S.1993. Howindividualistsinterpretbehavior:Idio-
of the 17th ACM conference on Computer supported cooperative centrismandspontaneoustraitinference. SocialCognition.
work&socialcomputing.
Page, L.; Brin, S.; Motwani, R.; and Winograd, T. 1999. The
Bi,B.;Tian,Y.;Sismanis,Y.;Balmin,A.;andCho,J.2014. Scal- PageRankcitationranking:Bringingordertotheweb. Technical
abletopic-specificinfluenceanalysisonmicroblogs. InProceed- report.
ingsofthe7thACMinternationalconferenceonWebsearchand
Pal,A.;andCounts,S.2011. Identifyingtopicalauthoritiesinmi-
datamining.
croblogs. InProceedingsofthefourthACMinternationalconfer-
Blei, D. M.; Ng, A. Y.; and Jordan, M. I. 2003. Latent dirichlet enceonWebsearchanddatamining.
allocation. JournalofmachineLearningresearch. Reinecke,L.;Klimmt,C.;Meier,A.;Reich,S.;Hefner,D.;Knop-
Cha,M.;Haddadi,H.;Benevenuto,F.;Gummadi,P.K.;etal.2010. Huelss, K.; Rieger, D.; and Vorderer, P. 2018. Permanently on-
Measuringuserinfluenceintwitter:Themillionfollowerfallacy. line and permanently connected: Development and validation of
ICWSM. theOnlineVigilanceScale. PloSone.
Chen,J.M.;Banerji,I.;Moons,W.G.;andSherman,J.W.2014. Rousseeuw,P.J.1987. Silhouettes:agraphicalaidtotheinterpre-
Spontaneoussocialroleinferences.JournalofExperimentalSocial tationandvalidationofclusteranalysis. Journalofcomputational
Psychology. andappliedmathematics.
Counts,S.;andFisher,K.2011.Takingitallin?visualattentionin Sharma,N.K.;Ghosh,S.;Benevenuto,F.;Ganguly,N.;andGum-
microblog consumption. In Fifth International AAAI Conference madi,K.2012.Inferringwho-is-whointheTwittersocialnetwork.
onWeblogsandSocialMedia. ACMSIGCOMMComputerCommunicationReview.
Thompson,C.2008.Bravenewworldofdigitalintimacy.TheNew
Gerlach,J.P.;andCenfetelli,R.T.2020. Constantcheckingisnot
addiction: A grounded theory of it-mediated state-tracking. MIS
YorkTimes.
Quarterly. Todorov, A.; and Uleman, J. S. 2002. Spontaneous trait infer-
encesareboundtoactors’faces:Evidencefromafalserecognition
Ghosh, S.; Sharma, N.; Benevenuto, F.; Ganguly, N.; and Gum-
paradigm. Journalofpersonalityandsocialpsychology.
madi,K.2012. Cognos:crowdsourcingsearchfortopicexpertsin
microblogs. InProceedingsofthe35thinternationalACMSIGIR Todorov, A.; and Uleman, J. S. 2003. The efficiency of binding
conferenceonResearchanddevelopmentininformationretrieval. spontaneous trait inferences to actors’ faces. Journal of Experi-
mentalSocialPsychology.
Java,A.;Song,X.;Finin,T.;andTseng,B.2007. Whywetwit-
ter:understandingmicrobloggingusageandcommunities. InPro- Uleman,J.S.;Hon,A.;Roman,R.J.;andMoskowitz,G.B.1996.
ceedingsofthe9thWebKDDand1stSNA-KDDworkshoponWeb On-lineevidenceforspontaneoustraitinferencesatencoding.Per-
miningandsocialnetworkanalysis. sonalityandSocialPsychologyBulletin.
Kane,G.C.2017. Theevolutionaryimplicationsofsocialmedia Utz,S.2016. IsLinkedInmakingyoumoresuccessful?Theinfor-
fororganizationalknowledgemanagement. Informationandorga- mationalbenefitsderivedfrompublicsocialmedia. Newmedia&
nization. society.
Kooti,F.;Moro,E.;andLerman,K.2016. Twittersessionanalyt- Utz,S.;andLevordashka,A.2017. Knowledgenetworksinsocial
ics:Profilingusers’short-termbehavioralchanges.InInternational media. InThepsychologyofdigitallearning.
ConferenceonSocialInformatics. Van den Hooff, B.; and Huysman, M. 2009. Managing knowl-
Kwak,H.;Lee,C.;Park,H.;andMoon,S.2010. WhatisTwitter, edgesharing:Emergentandengineeringapproaches. Information
a social network or a news media? In Proceedings of the 19th &management.
internationalconferenceonWorldwideweb. VonLuxburg,U.2007. Atutorialonspectralclustering. Statistics
Leonardi,P.M.2014. Socialmedia,knowledgesharing,andinno- andcomputing.
vation:Towardatheoryofcommunicationvisibility. Information Weng,J.;Lim,E.-P.;Jiang,J.;andHe,Q.2010. Twitterrank:find-
systemsresearch. ingtopic-sensitiveinfluentialtwitterers.InProceedingsofthethird
Leonardi,P.M.2015. Ambientawarenessandknowledgeacquisi-
ACMinternationalconferenceonWebsearchanddatamining.
tion:usingsocialmediatolearn‘whoknowswhat’and‘whoknows Wojcik,S.;andHughes,A.2019. SizingupTwitterusers. Wash-
whom’. MisQuarterly. ington,DC:PewResearchCenter.
Leonardi,P.M.;andMeyer,S.R.2015. Socialmediaassociallu- Yang,J.;andLeskovec,J.2015. Definingandevaluatingnetwork
bricant:Howambientawarenesseasesknowledgetransfer. Ameri- communitiesbasedonground-truth. KnowledgeandInformation
canBehavioralScientist. Systems.
Levordashka,A.;andUtz,S.2016.Ambientawareness:Fromran- Zhao, Y.; Zhang, X.; Wang, J.; Zhang, K.; and de Pablos, P. O.
domnoisetodigitalclosenessinonlinesocialnetworks. Comput- 2020. Howdofeaturesofsocialmediainfluenceknowledgeshar-
ersinHumanBehavior. ing? An ambient awareness perspective. Journal of Knowledge
Management.
Levordashka,A.;andUtz,S.2017. Spontaneoustraitinferences
onsocialmedia. Socialpsychologicalandpersonalityscience.
10