1
Non-Contact Acquisition of PPG Signal using Chest
Movement-Modulated Radio Signals
Israel Jesus Santos Filho∗, Muhammad Mahboob Ur Rahman∗, Taous-Meriem Laleg-Kirati†, Tareq Al-Naffouri∗
∗Computer, Electrical and Mathematical Sciences and Engineering Division (CEMSE),
King Abdullah University of Science and Technology, Thuwal 23955, Saudi Arabia.
†The National Institute for Research in Digital Science and Technology, Paris-Saclay, France.
∗{israel.filho,muhammad.rahman,tareq.alnaffouri}@kaust.edu.sa, †Taous-Meriem.Laleg@inria.fr
Abstract—We present for the first time a novel method that in estimation of a number of biomarkers, e.g., body vitals
utilizes the chest movement-modulated radio signals for non- [3], blood pressure [4, 5] etc., and diagnosis of a number of
contact acquisition of the photoplethysmography (PPG) signal.
diseases, e.g., vascular aging [6], atrial fibrillation and more.
Under the proposed method, a software-defined radio (SDR)
More recently, researchers have started developing methods
exposes the chest of a subject sitting nearby to an orthogonal
frequency division multiplexing signal with 64 sub-carriers at for acquiring the PPG signals from a distance—the so-called
a center frequency 5.24 GHz, while another SDR in the close remote or non-contact PPG acquisition methods [7]. Such
vicinitycollectsthemodulatedradiosignalreflectedoffthechest. methods mostly utilize a standard RGB camera to record a
Thisway,weconstructacustomdatasetbycollecting160minutes
small video of the face from a distance. This video is known
oflabeleddata(bothrawradiodataaswellasthereferencePPG
to capture the subtle-but-periodic changes in the skin color
signal)from16healthyyoungsubjects.Withthis,wefirstutilize
principalcomponentanalysisfordimensionalityreductionofthe of the face due to cardiac activity, which helps extract the
radiodata.Next,wedenoisetheradiosignalandreferencePPG PPG signal [8]. Very recently, researchers have successfully
signal using wavelet technique, followed by segmentation and Z- demonstrated cardiac pulse detection using another sensing
score normalization. We then synchronize the radio and PPG
modality, i.e., a terahertz (THz) transceiver, by measuring the
segments using cross-correlation method. Finally, we proceed
reflectance of THz waves from upper dermis tissue layer of
to the waveform translation (regression) task, whereby we first
converttheradioandPPGsegmentsintofrequencydomainusing the skin [9].
discrete cosine transform (DCT), and then learn the non-linear Another set of closely related works include methods that
regressionbetweenthem.Eventually,wereconstructthesynthetic aim to solve a more broad range of health sensing problems
PPG signal by taking inverse DCT of the output of regression
in non-contact manner, using many different radio frequency
block, with a mean absolute error of 8.1294. The synthetic PPG
(RF) sensing modalities. Such methods gained popularity in
waveform has a great clinical significance as it could be used
for non-contact performance assessment of cardiovascular and the post-covid19 era, starting with body vitals estimation of
respiratorysystemsofpatientssufferingfrominfectiousdiseases, covid19 patients from a distance [10]. But more lately, such
e.g., covid19. methods are being developed for a multitude of applications
Index Terms—Non-contact methods, RF-based methods, e.g., fall detection, sleep stage analysis, gait analysis, etc.
software-defined radio, PPG, deep learning. RF-based health sensing methods could be mainly catego-
rized into three kinds: 1) Radar-based methods, 2) Software-
defined radio (SDR)-based methods, 3) WiFi-based methods.
I. INTRODUCTION
The radar-based sensing methods deploy various kinds of
Photoplethysmography(PPG)isasimple,cost-effectiveand radars (e.g., ultra-wideband pulse radar, frequency modulated
non-invasivemethodthatutilizesopticalprinciplestomeasure continuous-waveradar,etc.)thatassesscardio-respiratoryper-
rhythmicchangesinthebloodvolumeataperipherallocation. formance of a person in a contactless manner by means of
PPG signal has recently gained widespread attraction among theclassicalrangeandDoppleranalysis[11].TheSDR-based
the researchers and clinicians alike, as a viable biomarker for sensing methods, on the other hand, utilize the fluctuations
monitoring of vital signs, and for performance assessment in the amplitude, frequency and phase of the microwave-
of cardiovascular and respiratory systems [1]. PPG devices band signals reflected off the human body to measure vitals
come in various forms, e.g., wearables, smart watches, smart and respiratory abnormalities [12, 13]. Finally, Wi-Fi-based
bands, smart earphones, smartphones, consumer electronics sensing methods exploit the extensive existing infrastructure
such as cameras, etc. [2]. PPG, being a non-invasive method, ofWiFiroutersindoors,andutilizemachineanddeeplearning
allows seamless and continuous health monitoring in various algorithms on the signals reflected by the human subjects,
diverse settings, from in-hospital patient monitoring to well- in order to do various tasks, e.g., activity recognition, sleep
being of athletes outdoors, to sleep quality analysis indoors. analysis,falldetection,etc.,tohelprealizeasmarthome[14].
The ease-of-use and affordability contribute to the scalability Non-contact methods could improve the comfort-level of
of PPG-based health monitoring, potentially helping it reach thepatients,decreasetheinfectionrisks,andoffercontinuous,
abroaderpopulationandfacilitatingpatient-centrichealthcare seamless and in-situ health monitoring. Further, non-contact
[1].PPGwaveformcontainsawealthofinformationthathelps methods could aid in early disease diagnosis, could enable
4202
beF
22
]PS.ssee[
1v56541.2042:viXra2
personalized and proactive healthcare solutions, could reduce
the burden on existing healthcare systems, and thus could
help realize the vision of smart homes and smart cities of
future [10]. Nevertheless, these methods have their pros and
cons also. For example, these methods need to deal with a
rangeofissuessuchasmotionartifacts,diverseenvironmental
conditions, complex body movements, [11] etc. Last but not
the least, camera-based remote PPG methods are considered
to be a privacy-breach, and this slows down the research in Fig. 1: Theproposedmethodfornon-contactPPGmonitoring:Theexper-
this direction [7]. imental setup consists of an SDR pair whereby the transmit SDR exposes
Contributions. This work belongs to the umbrella of RF thechestofasubjectwithanOFDMsignal,whilethereceiveSDRcollects
thereflectedsignalandfeedsittoapurpose-builtdatapre-processing+deep
sensing methods, and capitolizes on the chest movement- learningpipelinethatultimatelysynthesizesthePPGsignal.
modulatedradiosignalsfornon-contactacquisitionofthePPG
signal. The two key contributions of this work are as follows:
● Weconstructacustomlabeleddataset—firstofitskind— B. Data Acquisition for the Radio-PPG dataset
bysimultaneouslycollecting2.5hoursworthofrawradio
Having described the key details of the experimental setup,
data and reference PPG data from 16 subjects.
we now discuss the pertinent details of the data acquisition
● We present a novel method that consists of a purpose-
process.Fig. 1illustratesthe workingofthe proposedmethod
built data pre-processing + deep learning pipeline which
for non-contact synthesis of PPG waveform. As can be seen
efficiently learns the PPG signal representation from the
in Fig. 1, the subject sits nearby the SDR pair (roughly 35
radio signal, in a contactless manner.
cm away), the transmit SDR strikes the OFDM signal onto
Tothebestofourknowledge,thisisthefirstworkthatdoes
the chest of the subject, while the receive SDR collects the
non-contact PPG monitoring using the radio signals.
signal reflected off the chest of the subject.1 For the purpose
Outline. Section II provides a compact discussion of the
ofgroundtruthacquisition,weutilizeMAX86150modulethat
datacollectionprocess.SectionIIIdescribestheproposeddata
allows us to acquire the reference PPG signal at a sampling
pre-processing and regression pipeline. Section IV discusses
rate of 2.5 KHz when a subject places his/her finger on the
selected results. Section V concludes the paper.
on-board PPG sensor of the MAX86150 module.
We construct the custom Radio-PPG-16 dataset by collect-
II. THEEXPERIMENTALSETUP&DATAACQUISITION
ing data from 16 volunteers (10 male, 6 female, aged 25 to
Given the fact that there currently exists no dataset that
32years).Foreachsubject,wedotwomeasurementsessions,
simultaneously records radio data and PPG data of healthy
whereby in each session we simultaneously collect RF data
humansubjects,weconstructonesuchdatasetwiththeaimto and PPG data for a duration of 5 minutes2. During each
learnthemappingbetweentheradiosignalandthePPGsignal.
experiment session, we make sure that the subject sits still
Below, we discuss the experimental setup followed by the
in order to avoid motion-induced artefacts in the data being
necessary details about the dataset that we have constructed.
gathered. In total, we collect 10 minutes of data per subject,
and 160 minutes of labeled data from the 16 subjects.
A. The Experimental Setup
The proposed method for non-contact acquisition of the III. NON-CONTACTPPGSYNTHESIS
PPG signal utilizes two software-defined radios (SDR), each
The proposed method consists of two distinct phases, i.e.,
connected with a workstation by means of an Ethernet port
data pre-processing and waveform translation (regression).
(see Fig. 1). Specifically, we utilize a pair of Universal Soft-
ware Radio Peripheral (USRP) N210 SDRs, each connected
A. Data Pre-processing Phase
with a directional horn antenna, which forms a single-input,
single-output (SISO) link. We utilize MATLAB R2021a to Data pre-processing phase prepares the data for the deep
programboththetransmitandreceiveUSRPSDRsasfollows. learning models that translate the radio signal to PPG signal.
The transmit SDR sends an orthogonal frequency division This phase consists of the following steps: 1) pre-processing
multiplexing (OFDM) signal consisting of 64 sub-carriers, ofthereferencePPGdata,2)pre-processingoftheradiodata,
with quadrature phase shift keying (QPSK) modulation on and 3) synchronization of the reference PPG and radio data.
each sub-carrier. Eventually, the transmit SDR appends a 1) Pre-processing of reference PPG data: The reference
cyclic prefix (CP) of duration 16 samples to each OFDM PPG signal (acquired through MAX86150 module) suffers
symbol. The receive SDR removes the CP from the received fromanumberofdistortions,e.g.,respiration-inducedbaseline
signal,andlogsthecomplex-valuedtime-domaindatawhichis drift, muscle interaction-induced artefacts, artefacts due to
laterpre-processedofflineandfedtotheproposedmethodthat variations in ambient light conditions, motion artefacts, etc.
ultimatelysynthesizesthePPGsignal.Fortheexperiment,we
setthegainofthetransmithornantennato40dB.Further,we
1Thisstudywasapprovedbytheethicalinstitutionalreviewboard(EIRB)
ofKAUST,SaudiArabia.
utilize a center frequency of 5.24 GHz, a baseband sampling
2ThissimultaneouscollectionofradiodataandPPGdatahelpsussynchro-
rate of 20K samples/sec, and a bandwidth of 20 KHz. nizethesyntheticPPGsignalwiththereferencePPGsignallateron.3
To this end, we manually identify and remove the artefacts
(of various origins) throughout the dataset. Further, we utilize
wavelet transform—the db2 wavelet family—to estimate and
remove the baseline drift. Subsequently, we utilize a 12-th
order Butterworth low-pass filter with cut-off frequency 3.4
Hz, in order to remove out-of-band noise and retain only the
frequency components representing blood volume changes.
We then normalize the conditioned PPG data using Z-score
normalization method. Finally, we segment the data in 2.2
seconds long non-overlapping segments.
2) Pre-processing of Radio data: Pre-processing of the
radio data consists of the following main steps:
● First of all, capitalizing on the frequency diversity rule
and inline with prevailing OFDM channel estimation Fig.2:Topfig.showsapairofradioandPPGsegmentsafterDWTstagebut
practices, we proceed to work with radio data from 16 beforealignment,whilethebottomfig.showsthesituationafteralignment.
equi-spaced sub-carriers, out of 64 sub-carriers.3
● Next, we proceed to fuse the length-N radio data of 16
sub-carriers (X ∈ C16×N) in a linear fashion in order to
B. Waveform Translation Phase
do dimensionality reduction, through the principal com-
ponent analysis (PCA). Since the PCA is not defined for We now discuss the regression mechanism that helps us
complexsignals,wesurrogatethisproblembycomputing translate the conditioned and pre-processed radio signal into
the PCA for the real part and imaginary part of the data a PPG signal, during the test phase. In this work, we do the
separately,togetfirstprincipalcomponentXˆ ∈RN and regression in frequency domain. That is, during the training
R
firstprincipalcomponentXˆ ∈RN,respectively.Wethen phase, we begin by computing the type-II discrete cosine
I
append the imaginary part Xˆ to the real part Xˆ to get transform (DCT) of both the reference PPG and radio seg-
I R
Xˆ ∈R2N. Eventually, we apply the modulus operator to ments. With this, we implement the following two methods
get ∣Xˆ ∣∈R2N. to learn the regression between the DCT coefficients of the
+
● We then apply discrete wavelet transform (DWT) on ground truth PPG and DCT coefficients of radio signal: 1)
∣Xˆ ∣ to obtain a 10-level wavelet decomposition. This linear (ridge) regression, 2) non-linear regression by means
allows us to remove artefacts, out-of-band noise, and of a multi-layer perceptron (MLP) with 5 layers. This way,
frequencycomponentsthatdonotrepresentbloodvolume during the test phase, the proposed method returns us the
changes, by zeroing out the corresponding detailed and DCT coefficients of the PPG signal, in response to an input
approximation wavelet coefficients during the wavelet radio signal. Eventually, we obtain the synthetic PPG signal
reconstruction phase. by taking the inverse DCT during the test phase.
Fig. 3 shows the the block diagram that illustrates the
We then normalize the conditioned radio data using Z-score
complete data pre-processing + regression pipeline of the
normalization method. Finally, we segment the data in 2.2
proposed method, as discussed above.
seconds long non-overlapping segments.
3) Peak synchronization: Synchronization of the radio and
IV. RESULTS
PPG signals is an essential data pre-processing step that
ensuresone-on-onemappingbetweentheradiosignalandPPG We begin by summarizing the key hyperparameters of the
signal, at the sub-cardiac cycle resolution. We synchronize proposedmethod,followedadiscussionoftheselectedresults.
the radio and PPG segments by maximizing the alignment We utilize 80% of data for training, and remaining 20%
between them in a peak-to-peak fashion (i.e., by minimizing data for testing purpose. Next, we compute the DCT and
the phase offset/mismatch between the two segments). We inverseDCTatthesegmentlevel(eachradioandPPGsegment
achieve this by means of the cross-correlation approach, i.e., consistsof400samples).FortheMLPregressor,weuseleaky-
we sweep over a wide range of time shift values in the radio relu activation function in all layers except the last layer. For
segment such that its inner product with the corresponding backpropagation purpose, we use mean absolute error (MAE)
reference PPG segment is maximized. The inner product, as the loss function. Further, in order to avoid overfitting, we
being a viable normalized similarity measure, is maximized useL2regularizationwithλ=10−6.Finally,weuseAdamop-
when both segments are super-imposed, resulting in a peak- timiserwithalearningrateη=10−4.Fig.4illustratesthatthe
to-peak alignment between the two segments. Fig. 2 shows proposed MLP regressor learns the waveform translation task
that the miss-aligned peaks of the radio and PPG segments very efficiently, i.e., both the training loss and the validation
(see top fig.) become aligned due to cross-correlation based loss steadily decrease as the number of epochs is increased.
peak synchronization method (see bottom fig.). Moving forward, we first showcase the performance of the
proposed method in a qualitative manner. Fig. 5 illustrates
by means of two graphical examples that the synthetic PPG
3The two frequency responses of the human body when exposed to two
frequenciesthatarequiteclosetoeachother,arealsoverysimilar. reconstructed by the proposed method is very similar to4
Fig. 3: Completedatapre-processing+regressionpipelineforPPGwaveformsynthesisfromtheradiosignal.
Fig. 5: TwoexamplesofsyntheticPPGreconstructionfromtheradiodata.
Fig. 4: Training and validation losses of the proposed MLP regressor the modulated signal reflected off the chest of the subject. We
undergoasteadydecreasewiththeincreaseinnumberofepochs. collected2.5hoursworthofrawradiodataandreferencePPG
data from 16 subjects to train the proposed non-linear regres-
sionmodels.WeconditionedtheradiodataandreferencePPG
reference PPG, albeit a few minor differences in morphology. data,andthenpasseditthroughtheproposedpipelineinorder
That is, the synthetic and reference PPG signals are slightly to learn the PPG representation of the radio waveform. The
different at the points of dicrotic notch. Further, there is a proposed MLP regressor achieved a decent MAE of 8.1294.
residual time offset between the two waveforms, but since The synthetic PPG waveform has a great clinical significance
this offset is really small (fraction of a second or less), it as it could be used for non-contact performance assessment
could be ignored by the clinicians. Nevertheless, it is worth ofcardiovascularandrespiratorysystemsofpatientssuffering
mentioning that the synthetic PPG preserves a plurality of the from infectious diseases, e.g., covid19.
clinically significant information, e.g., heart rate and more. As for the future work, we aim to study different fusion
This is what we believe makes the synthetic PPG waveform a techniques (to optimally utilize the 64 OFDM sub-carriers)
valuable biomarker for clinicians and healthcare professionals in order to improve the representation of the synthetic PPG
for non-contact performance assessment of cardiovascular signal. We believe this research opens new avenues for the
and respiratory systems of patients suffering from infectious development of contactless health sensing technologies.
diseases, e.g., covid19.
Asforthequantitativeresults,weachieveaPPGwaveform
REFERENCES
reconstructionMAEof7.765onthetrainingset,andanMAE
[1] M.A.Almarshad,M.S.Islam,S.Al-Ahmadi,andA.S.BaHammam,
of8.1294onthetestset.Thisisaprettydecentresult,keeping
“Diagnosticfeaturesandpotentialapplicationsofppgsignalinhealth-
in mind that the synthetic PPG waveform retains most of the care:Asystematicreview,”inHealthcare,vol.10,no.3. MDPI,2022,
morphological features of the reference PPG signal. p.547.
[2] D.Castaneda,A.Esparza,M.Ghamari,C.Soltanpur,andH.Nazeran,
“A review on wearable photoplethysmography sensors and their
V. CONCLUSION&FUTUREWORK potential future applications in health care,” International journal
of biosensors & bioelectronics, Aug 2018. [Online]. Available:
This work proposed for the first time a novel non-contact
https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/pmc/articles/PMC6426305/
methodtomonitorthePPGofasubjectfromadistanceusing [3] A. Mehmood, A. Sarouji, M. M. U. Rahman, and T. Y. Al-Naffouri,
radio signals in the microwave band. We utilized a pair of “Your smartphone could act as a pulse-oximeter and as a single-lead
ecg,”ScientificReports,vol.13,no.1,p.19277,2023.
USRP SDRs whereby the transmit SDR exposed the chest of
[4] M.A.Tahir,A.Mehmood,M.M.U.Rahman,M.W.Nawaz,K.Riaz,
asubjectwithOFDMsignals,whilethereceiveSDRcollected andQ.H.Abbasi,“Cuff-lessarterialbloodpressurewaveformsynthesis5
from single-site ppg using transformer & frequency-domain learning,”
arXivpreprintarXiv:2401.05452,2024.
[5] P. Li and T.-M. Laleg-Kirati, “Central blood pressure estimation from
distal ppg measurement using semiclassical signal analysis features,”
IEEEAccess,vol.9,pp.44963–44973,2021.
[6] M.SaranKhalid,I.ShahidQuraishi,H.Sajjad,H.Yaseen,A.Mehmood,
M. M. U. Rahman, and Q. H. Abbasi, “A low-cost ppg sensor-based
empiricalstudyonhealthyagingbasedonchangesinppgmorphology,”
arXive-prints,pp.arXiv–2312,2023.
[7] R.Sinhal,K.Singh,andM.M.Raghuwanshi,“Anoverviewofremote
photoplethysmographymethodsforvitalsignmonitoring,”inComputer
VisionandMachineIntelligenceinMedicalImageAnalysis,M.Gupta,
D.Konar,S.Bhattacharyya,andS.Biswas,Eds. Singapore:Springer
Singapore,2020,pp.21–31.
[8] M.Kumar,A.Veeraraghavan,andA.Sabharwal,“Distanceppg:Robust
non-contact vital signs monitoring using a camera,” Biomedical optics
express,vol.6,no.5,pp.1565–1588,2015.
[9] Y. Rong, P. C. Theofanopoulos, G. C. Trichopoulos, and D. W. Bliss,
“A new principle of pulse detection based on terahertz wave plethys-
mography,”Scientificreports,vol.12,no.1,p.6347,2022.
[10] W. Taylor, Q. H. Abbasi, K. Dashtipour, S. Ansari, S. A. Shah,
A. Khalid, and M. A. Imran, “A review of the state of the art in non-
contactsensingforcovid-19,”Sensors,vol.20,no.19,p.5665,2020.
[11] S. Ahmed and S. H. Cho, “Machine learning for healthcare radars:
Recentprogressesinhumanvitalsignmeasurementandactivityrecog-
nition,”IEEECommunicationsSurveys&Tutorials,2023.
[12] K.Pervez,W.Aman,M.M.U.Rahman,M.W.Nawaz,andQ.H.Ab-
basi,“Hand-breathe:Non-contactmonitoringofbreathingabnormalities
fromhandpalm,”IEEESensorsJournal,2023.
[13] H.M.Buttar,K.Pervez,M.M.U.Rahman,A.N.Mian,K.Riaz,and
Q. H. Abbasi, “Non-contact monitoring of dehydration using rf data
collectedoffthechestandthehand,”IEEESensorsJournal,2023.
[14] Y. Ge, A. Taha, S. A. Shah, K. Dashtipour, S. Zhu, J. Cooper, Q. H.
Abbasi,andM.A.Imran,“Contactlesswifisensingandmonitoringfor
futurehealthcare-emergingtrends,challenges,andopportunities,”IEEE
ReviewsinBiomedicalEngineering,vol.16,pp.171–191,2022.