Congestion Pricing for Efficiency and Equity: Theory
and Applications to the San Francisco Bay Area ∗
Chinmay Maheshwari, Kshitij Kulkarni, Druv Pai,
Jiarui Yang, Manxi Wu, Shankar Sastry †
Abstract
Congestion pricing, while adopted by many cities to alleviate traffic congestion,
raises concerns about widening socioeconomic disparities due to its disproportionate
impact on low-income travelers. In this study, we address this concern by proposing a
new class of congestion pricing schemes that not only minimize congestion levels but
also incorporate an equity objective to reduce cost disparities among travelers with
different willingness-to-pay. Our analysis builds on a congestion game model with
heterogeneous traveler populations. We present four pricing schemes that account for
practical considerations, such as the ability to charge differentiated tolls to various
traveler populations and the option to toll all or only a subset of edges in the network.
WeevaluateourpricingschemesinthecalibratedfreewaynetworkoftheSanFrancisco
BayArea. Wedemonstratethattheproposedcongestionpricingschemesimproveboth
efficiency (in terms of reduced average travel time) and equity (the disparities of travel
costs experienced by different populations) compared to the current pricing scheme.
Moreover, our pricing schemes also generate a total revenue comparable to the current
pricing scheme. Our results further show that pricing schemes charging differentiated
prices to traveler populations with varying willingness-to-pay lead to a more equitable
distribution of travel costs compared to those that charge a homogeneous price to all.
∗This version: January, 2024.
†C.Maheshwari(chinmay maheshwari@berkeley.edu),K.Kulkarni(kshitijkulkarni@berkeley.edu),D.Pai
(druvpai@berkeley.edu), and S. Sastry (shankar sastry@berkeley.edu) are with the Department of Electrical
EngineeringandComputerSciencesattheUniversityofCalifornia,Berkeley. M.Wu(manxiwu@cornell.edu)
is with the School of Operations Research and Information Engineering at Cornell University. J. Yang
(jy925@cornell.edu) is with School of Operations Research and Information Engineering at Cornell Tech.
1
4202
naJ
03
]TG.sc[
1v44861.1042:viXra1 Introduction
Congestion pricing is a mechanism that sets toll prices on roads to incentivize efficient uti-
lization of road infrastructure among selfish travelers. Widely adopted in many major cities,
both theoretical (Patriksson and Rockafellar, 2002; Pigou, 1912; Roughgarden, 2010; Sheffi,
1984) and empirical (Craik and Balakrishnan, 2023; Eliasson and Mattsson, 2006; Percoco,
2015; Phang and Toh, 2004) studies have shown that congestion pricing can reduce traf-
fic congestion and greenhouse gas emissions, and improve air quality (Han et al., 2022;
LeBeau, 2019; Liu, 2020; Zhang and Batterman, 2013). The revenue generated from conges-
tion pricing is often reinvested to improve the road infrastructure, public transit, and other
sustainable mobility initiatives (Goodwin, 1990; Small, 1992). Despite these benefits, imple-
mentation of congestion pricing often faces challenges, and one of the primary concerns is
its disproportional impact on low-income travelers (DOT, 2008). These travelers often have
limited access to alternative transportation options, and the additional financial burden of
congestion fees may exacerbate existing inequalities.
In this work we present a principled approach to compute congestion pricing schemes
that incorporate both (i) the efficiency objective of minimizing the overall congestion in the
network, and (ii) the equity objective of reducing the disparities of travel costs experienced
by traveler populations with different income levels. We consider a non-atomic routing
game, where travelers make routing decisions based on the travel time of each route plus
the monetary cost that includes tolls and gas prices. The monetary cost is adjusted by the
travelers’ willingness-to-pay— the amount of money a traveler is willing to pay to save a unit
of time. Our game has a finite number of traveler populations, each with a heterogeneous
willingness-to-pay. Extending the result from (Guo and Yang, 2010), we show that the
equilibrium flow on each edge of the network is unique, and can be computed by solving a
convex optimization problem. Moreover, the congestion minimizing edge flow vector that
minimizestheaveragetraveltimeofalltravelersisunique(Proposition4.1). Weproposefour
kinds of congestion pricing schemes that differ in terms of (a) whether tolls are differentiated
based on the type of travelers, and (b) whether tolls can be set on all edges or a subset
of edges. In particular, the four congestion pricing schemes are: (i) homogeneous pricing
scheme with no support constraints, denoted by hom, where all travelers are charged with
the same tolls and all edges are allowed to be tolled; (ii) heterogeneous pricing scheme with
no support constraints, denoted by het, where travelers are charged with differentiated toll
prices based on their types and all edges can be tolled; (iii) homogeneous pricing scheme with
support constraints, denoted by hom sc, where tolls are not differentiated but only a subset
of edges can be tolled; (iv) heterogeneous pricing scheme with support constraints, denoted
by het sc, where tolls are differentiated and only a subset of edges can be tolled.
We develop a two-step approach to compute the tolls in each pricing schemes. First, we
characterize the set of tolls that minimize the total congestion, i.e. achieve the efficiency
objective. Second, we select a particular toll price in the set of tolls computed in the first
step to optimize for an objective that achieves the trade-off between average welfare of
all populations and the equity (evaluated as the maximum difference of equilibrium travel
costs) across populations with different willingness-to-pay. Under the hom and het pricing
schemes, we show that the set of congestion minimizing tolls computed in the first step can
be characterized as the set of solutions of a linear program (Proposition 4.2). This result
2(a) Median income. (b) Driving population percentage.
Figure 1: Driving population percentage and median income distribution in San Francisco
Bay Area from ACS.
extends the study of enforceable equilibrium flows in routing games with heterogeneous
populations (Fleischer et al., 2004). Additionally, we show that the optimization problem in
the second step can also be formulated as a linear program for both hom (Proposition 4.3)
and het (Proposition 4.4). On the other hand, under hom sc and het sc, direct extensions of
the two linear programs to include toll support set constraints are not guaranteed to achieve
the efficiency goal. In fact, the problem of designing congestion minimizing pricing schemes
with support constraints is known to be NP hard without the consideration of heterogeneous
willingness-to-pay (Bonifaci et al., 2011; Harks et al., 2015; Hoefer et al., 2008). Building on
the linear programming based approaches developed for the pricing schemes without support
constraints, we propose a linear programming based heuristic to compute tolls with support
constraints and evaluate their efficiency outcomes in the case study.
We next apply our results to evaluate the performances of the four congestion pricing
schemes in the San Francisco Bay Area freeway network. Populations in the San Francisco
Bay area exhibit significant socioeconomic disparities. This is evident from the distribution
of median annual individual income of each neighborhood as shown in Figure 1a. Moreover,
the area has low public transport coverage and thus majority of the populations commute via
car. WecanseeinFigure1bthatthedrivingpopulationpercentageofmostzipcodesoutside
of San Francisco and Oakland cities are higher than 60%. Moreover, zip codes that are on
the east side of the Bay Area have both a high percentage of driving population and a low
median individual income. This observation underscores the importance to design efficient
and equitable congestion pricing schemes that account for the socioeconomic disparities and
the disproportionate impact of tolling on low-income populations.
We model the freeway network in the San Francisco Bay Area as a network with 17
nodes (Figure 2). Each node represents a major work or home location for travelers, and the
edges represent the primary freeways connecting these locations. Since willingness-to-pay
is a latent parameter that cannot be directly estimated from the data, we use the median
3individual income as a proxy to categorize travelers with home at each node into three types
of populations with low, middle and high willingness-to-pay, respectively. This is justified
by the empirical evidence that the variations of willingness-to-pay are often associated with
income levels (Athira et al., 2016; Gunn, 2001; Thomas and Thompson, 1970; Waters, 1994).
Using high-fidelity datasets from Safegraph, the Caltrans Performance Measurement System
(PeMS), and the American Community Survey (ACS), we calibrate the latency function of
each edge and the demand of each traveler population with each willingness-to-pay and each
home-work node pair.
The current congestion pricing scheme, denoted as curr sets $7 price on each of the
bridges in the Bay Area (Figure 2). We compute the four congestion pricing schemes (hom,
het, hom sc, het sc), and compare the resulting equilibrium routing behavior in comparison
to curr and the zeropricing scheme that set no tolls. We summarize our finding below:
(i) Efficiency: All four proposed pricing schemes leads to a lower congestion level com-
pared to curr. Surprisingly, curr is also marginally outperformed by zero. This is
primarily attributed to the fact that the homogeneous toll price of $7 on all bridges
under curr does not account for the heterogeneous distribution of travelers with differ-
ent home-work locations and different willingness-to-pay. We show that hom and het
achieve the minimum congestion, as indicated by our theoretical result (Proposition
4.2). Additionally, hom sc and het sc achieve lower congestion level than curr and zero
but higher than hom and het. Furthermore, we find that the price of anarchy (POA)
– the ratio between the total travel time in equilibrium with no tolls and that of the
minimum total travel time (Roughgarden, 2010) – in our setup is 1.04, which is close
to 1. This is likely due to high total demand of travelers in the Bay area network
since POA always converges to 1 in routing games as the population demand increases
(Colini-Baldeschi et al., 2020; Cominetti et al., 2021).
(ii) Equity: We observe that all pricing schemes except for hom lead to lower travel cost for
all traveler types in comparison to curr (otherwise stated, these pricing schemes lead
to Pareto improvements in travel cost). Furthermore, the percentage of travelers with
travel costs exceeding a certain threshold is higher in homogeneous pricing schemes
than in heterogeneous pricing schemes, irrespective of the population type and the
specified threshold. This is due to the fact that heterogeneous pricing schemes adjust
the toll prices according to the population’s willingness-to-pay, and thus resulting
in lower monetary costs for travelers with low willingness-to-pay. Additionally, the
proportion of travelers with costs above a certain threshold is lower in pricing schemes
with support constraints, regardless of the type and the threshold. Such difference is
more significant under homogeneous pricing schemes compared to heterogeneous ones.
(iii) Revenue Generation: We observe that the revenue generated by hom is the highest
as it charges high tolls to all travelers in order to achieve the minimum congestion.
Moreover, the revenues generated by het, hom sc and het sc are comparable to curr
with het being marginally higher and, hom sc and het sc, marginally lower.
The rest of the paper is organized as follows: Section 2 presents an overview of past works
related to our paper. Section 3 presents the model of routing games with heterogeneous
4populations. Section 4 presents the computation methods for the four congestion pricing
schemes (hom, het, hom sc, and het sc). Section 5 presents calibration of the routing game
model in the San Francisco Bay Area. Section 6 presents the efficiency and equity evaluation
of the proposed pricing schemes and the comparison of the emerging congestion patterns.
2 Related works
The literature on designing congestion pricing schemes can be categorized into two main
threads: first-best and second-best. First-best pricing schemes allow tolls to be placed on
every edge of the network. The most popular first-best tolling scheme is marginal cost
pricing, which sets the toll price to be the marginal cost created by an additional unit of
congestion on each edge (Arnott and Small, 1994; Beckmann et al., 1956; Roughgarden,
2010; Smith, 1979). Additionally, an extensive line of research in this thread also focuses on
characterizing the set of all congestion-minimizing toll prices (Bai et al., 2004; Bergendorff
et al., 1997; Cole et al., 2003; Dial, 2000; Fleischer et al., 2004; Hearn and Ramana, 1998;
Karakostas and Kolliopoulos, 2004; Yang and Huang, 2004; Yildirim and Hearn, 2005). On
the other hand, second-best pricing schemes restrict the set of edges that can be tolled. The
literature on second-best pricing schemes primarily focuses on formulating the problem as a
mathematical program with equilibrium constraints (MPEC) and developing algorithms to
approximate the optimal solution (Brotcorne et al., 2001; Ekstro¨m et al., 2009; Ferrari, 2002;
Kalashnikov et al., 2016; Labb´e et al., 1998; Larsson and Patriksson, 1998; Lawphongpanich
andHearn,2004;Lim,2002;PatrikssonandRockafellar,2002;Verhoef,2002;YangandLam,
1996). Some works have also considered a complementary problem of finding the minimum
numberoftollboothsrequiredtoensuretheefficientallocationoftraffic(Baietal.,2010;Bai
and Rubin, 2009). Moreover, (Bonifaci et al., 2011; Harks et al., 2015; Hoefer et al., 2008)
studied the problem of characterizing the hardness of the problem of designing second-best
tolls. The paper (Hoefer et al., 2008) showed that it is NP hard to compute optimal tolls
on a subset of edges in general networks and gave a polynomial time algorithm to solve the
problem for the parallel link case with affine latency functions. This was extended to allow
for non-affine latency functions by (Harks et al., 2015), and upper bound on the toll values
in (Bonifaci et al., 2011). From a computational perspective, (Harks et al., 2015) proposed
a gradient based heuristic algorithm that iteratively computes the Wardrop equilibrium in
each round of the algorithm to descend along the gradient of the objective function. In our
setup, hom and het are first-best pricing schemes and hom sc and het sc are second-best
pricing schemes. We contribute to this line of literature by proposing a multi-step linear
programming based approach to compute hom and het that account for the equity objective
and the heterogeneous traveler populations. Our approach is also an efficient heuristic to
solve hom sc and het sc with atmost three linear programs instead of iteratively computing
the Wardrop equilibrium.
The literature on congestion pricing has mostly focused on homogeneous pricing schemes
with a few exceptions. The paper (Feng et al., 2023) considered tolling schemes that dif-
ferentiate conventional vehicles from clean energy vehicles. Moreover, differentiated tolls
are also used in (Lazar and Pedarsani, 2020, 2021; Mehr and Horowitz, 2019) for the study
of mixed autonomy. The paper (Brown and Marden, 2016) studied the impact of differ-
5entiated tolling in parallel-link networks with affine cost functions and travelers that have
heterogeneous value of time.
One effort to ameliorate the inequities resulting from congestion pricing is to refund (a
fraction of) toll revenue to a subset of traveler populations. The papers (Goodwin, 1990;
Small, 1992) were amongst the first to propose different ways to redistribute the revenue
in form of infrastructure development and tax rebates. The effectiveness of redistribution
schemesaretheoreticallyanalyzedinsingle-lanebottleneckmodels((ArnottandSmall,1994;
Bernstein, 1993)), parallel networks ((Adler and Cetin, 2001)), and single origin-destination
network ((Eliasson, 2001)).
Pareto-improving congestion pricing schemes were introduced as another approach to re-
duce inequality. First proposed by (Lawphongpanich and Yin, 2007), Pareto-improving con-
gestionpricingminimizesthetotalcongestionwhileensuringthatnotravelersareworseoffin
comparison to no tolls. The paper (Song et al., 2009) studied the design of Pareto-improving
schemes for travelers with heterogeneous willingness-to-pay, and (Lawphongpanich and Yin,
2010) further proved that such Pareto-improving schemes only exist in special classes of net-
works. The paper (Guo and Yang, 2010) studied the problem of designing Pareto-improving
pricing schemes combined with revenue refund. (Jalota et al., 2021) extended this line of
research by developing optimal revenue refunding schemes to minimize the congestion and
inequity together. In both (Guo and Yang, 2010) and (Jalota et al., 2021), the tolls min-
imize the weighted sum of total travel time with weights being each population’s value of
time. This objective is different from our goal of minimizing the actual congestion level
(unweighted total travel time), which is a more suitable metric to assess the environmental
impact of congestion.
The third approach to addressing inequality is the study of fairness constrained traffic as-
signment problem proposed by (Jahn et al., 2005), where the fairness metric is the maximum
difference of travel time experienced by travelers between the same origin-destination pair.
(Angelelli et al., 2016, 2021) extended this line of research by developing algorithmic meth-
ods to solve the fairness constrained traffic assignment problem. The problem of devising
congestion pricing schemes which could enforce the resulting traffic assignment patters was
studiedin(Jalotaetal.,2023). Particularly, (Jalotaetal.,2023)studieshomogeneouspricing
scheme that implements the traffic assignment minimizing an interpolation of the potential
function (which is used to characterize the equilibrium) and the social cost function.
Our work contributes to all of the above studies on the equity of congestion pricing
from three aspects: (i) Our equity consideration accounts for both the travel time cost
and the monetary cost that includes both the toll and the gas prices. This generalizes
the fairness notion that focuses only on the travel time difference; (ii) Our tolling scheme
minimizes the total congestion in the network (i.e. guarantees the optimal efficiency) while
provides the central planner a flexible way to trade-off between the total welfare, equity
across heterogeneous populations and total revenue. In particular, by tuning the parameter
that governs the trade-off between the average welfare and equity, we can increase or reduce
the revenue collected by the our pricing scheme; (iii) We provide a comprehensive evaluation
of different congestion pricing schemes in terms of efficiency, equity and revenue using real-
world data collected in the San Francisco Bay Area.
Finally, ontheempiricalside, (Barnesetal.,2012;Fricketal.,1996;NakamuraandKock-
elman, 2002; Zhang et al., 2011) focused on understanding the impact of congestion pricing
6of the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge, which is the most heavily congested segment in
the San Francisco Bay Area highway network. Particularly, (Frick et al., 1996) initiated
the study to employ congestion pricing schemes to alleviate congestion on the Bay Bridge.
(NakamuraandKockelman,2002)studiedtheproblemofcombiningtollswithroadrationing
protocols to reduce congestion on the Bay Bridge. (Barnes et al., 2012; Zhang et al., 2011)
studied the reduction in travel time of different type of travelers (such as FasTrak travelers,
cash customers and HOV travelers) after the implementation of a new congestion pricing
scheme on the bridge in 2010. Our work generalizes this line of work to the entire Bay Area
highway network using high-fidelity mobility and socioeconomic datasets.
3 Model
In this section, we introduce the non-atomic networked routing game model that forms the
basis for our theoretical and computational results. We introduce equilibrium routing and
the four types of congestion pricing schemes we consider in this paper.
3.1 Network
Consider a transportation network G = (N,E), where N is the set of nodes, and E is the
set of edges. A set of non-atomic travelers (agents) make routing decisions in the network
between their origin and destination. We denote the set of origin-destination (o-d) pairs as
K and the set of routes (i.e. sequences of edges) connecting each o-d pair k ∈ K as Rk.
Travelers for each o-d pair k are grouped into I populations, where each population is
associated with a different level of willingness-to-pay θi ∈ R that represents the amount of
≥0
money that agents in population i are willing to pay to save a unit of travel time cost. We
refer to agents with willingness-to-pay θi as type i agents. The demand vector is given by
D = (Dik) , where Dik is the demand of agents with type i that want to travel between
i∈I,k∈K
o-d pair k. Throughout this paper, we operate under the inelastic demand assumption:
traveler demands on each origin-destination pair are constant. This assumption is reasonable
given that (a) our analysis focuses on the commuting behavior during the morning rush hour,
when the majority of trips are work-related with little elasticity; (b) the availability of public
transit is sparse and the cost of car ownership is high (Depillis et al., 2023).
The strategy distribution of agents is denoted q = (qik) , where qik is the flow
r r∈Rk,i∈I,k∈K r
of agents with type i and o-d pair k who take route r. Therefore, the set of feasible strategy
distributions is given by:
 
Q(D) :=  q = (qik) : X qik = Dik, qik ≥ 0 ∀r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I,k ∈ K . (1)
r r r
 
r∈Rk
Given a strategy distribution q ∈ Q(D), the flow of agents of type i ∈ I on edge e ∈ E is
given by
fi(q) := X X qik1(e ∈ r), (2)
e r
k∈Kr∈Rk
7and the total flow of agents on edge e ∈ E is
w (q) := X fi(q). (3)
e e
i∈I
The travel time experienced by agents taking edge e ∈ E is ℓ (w (q)), where the latency
e e
function ℓ : R → R is continuous, strictly increasing, and convex. Consequently, the total
e + +
travel time experienced by agents from o-d pair k ∈ K who use route r ∈ Rk is given by
ℓ (q) := P ℓ (w (q)).Withslightabuseofnotation,weuseℓ (q)andℓ (w)interchangeably
r e∈r e e r r
to represent the latency of route r where w is the edge flow vector corresponding to the
strategy distribution q. In addition to the travel time, the total cost experienced by each
individual agent also includes the congestion price imposed by the planner, and the gas cost
required to travel on the route the agent chooses. In particular, let pi be the toll price
e
imposed on travelers of type i ∈ I for using edge e ∈ E, and g be the gas cost of using
e
an edge e ∈ E. Note that we allow for the toll price to be type-specific in the general
setting. We will later discuss different scenarios for setting the toll prices. Given the tolls
p = (pi) , the cost experienced by travelers of type i ∈ I associate with o-d pair k ∈ K
e e∈E,i∈I
and taking route r ∈ Rk is given by
1
ci(q,p) := ℓ (q)+ X (pi +g ). (4)
r r θi e e
e∈r
Crucially, a key feature of our model is that the toll and gas costs experienced by each
agent are modulated by the willingness-to-pay θi of that agent. This allows us to model the
heterogeneity present in the types of travelers. Given this setup, we define Nash equilibrium
to be the strategy distribution such that no traveler has incentive to deviate from their
chosen route. That is,
Definition 3.1. For any tolls p, a strategy profile q∗(p) is a Nash equilibrium if
∀i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk, qik∗(p) > 0 ⇒ ci(q∗(p),p) ≤ ci (q∗(p),p) ∀r′ ∈ Rk.
r r r′
The objective of the planner is to minimize the network congestion, measured by the
total travel time cost experienced by all travelers. For any strategy distribution q, we denote
the planner’s cost function as follows:
X
S(q) := w (q)ℓ (w (q)), (5)
e e e
e∈E
where w (q) is given by (3). We denote the set of socially optimal strategy distributions
e
as q† := argmin S(q), and the induced socially optimal edge flows as w† = (w†) ,
q∈Q(D) e e∈E
where w† = w (q†) given by (3).
e e
3.2 Congestion pricing
We now introduce two practical considerations for toll implementation. The first considera-
tion is whether or not the toll is type-specific. In particular, a congestion pricing scheme is
homogeneous if the toll is uniform across all population types, and heterogeneous if the toll
8varies with population types (formally, whether pi is allowed to depend on i or not, on each
e
edge). The challenge of implementing a heterogeneous scheme is that the willingness-to-pay
is a latent variable that is privately known only by the individual traveler. In practice, an
individual’s willingness-to-pay is often closely correlated with their income level, i.e. higher-
income groups are typically associated with a higher willingness-to-pay, while lower-income
groups correlate with a lower willingness-to-pay (Athira et al., 2016; Gunn, 2001; Thomas
and Thompson, 1970; Waters, 1994). Therefore, one way to implement heterogeneous tolling
is to set tolls based on the income level of travelers. For example, low income groups, which
have significant overlap with the population of low willingness-to-pay travelers, may receive
a subsidy or a toll rebate in certain areas. Such toll relief programs have been established
in several states in the United States, e.g. California 1, Virginia 2, New York 3 etc.
The second consideration is whether or not tolls can be set on all the edges of the network
or only on a subset (formally, whether or not pi is allowed to be strictly positive on all
e
e ∈ E). In practical terms, congestion pricing often requires the installation of infrastructure
facilities,whichmightnotbefeasibleonallroadsegments. Thus,acongestionpricingscheme
has no support constraints if tolls can be imposed on all edges, or has support constraints
if tolls can only be imposed on a subset of edges, denoted as E . We note that congestion
T
pricing schemes with (resp. without) support constraints are also referred as first-best (resp.
second-best) tolling schemes in literature.
Building on the above two considerations, we define four types of tolling schemes:
(i) Homogeneous tolls with no support constraints (hom): pi ≥ 0 and pi = pj for all e ∈ E
e e e
and all i,j ∈ I;
(ii) Heterogeneous tolls with no support constraints (het): pi ≥ 0 for all e ∈ E,i ∈ I;
e
(iii) Homogeneous tolls with support constraints (hom sc): pi = pj for all i,j ∈ I and all
e e
e ∈ E. Additionally, pi = 0 for all e ∈ E\E , and pi ≥ 0 for all e ∈ E .
e T e T
(iv) Heterogeneous tolls with support constraints (het sc): pi = 0 for all e ∈ E\E , and
e T
pi ≥ 0 for all e ∈ E .
e T
4 Computation methods
In this section, we outline methods for computing equilibrium routing strategies and the
four congestion pricing schemes. We first establish that, given any fixed toll values, the
equilibriumoutcomecanbederivedastheoptimalsolutiontoaconvexoptimizationproblem.
We then demonstrate that the set of homogeneous tolls (hom) and heterogeneous tolls (het)
without support constraints that realize the socially optimal edge flows can be characterized
as the set of optimal solutions of linear programs. Next, we present a multi-step approach
for calculating the toll prices that strikes a balance between equity, as measured by the cost
disparity between travelers from different populations, and at the same time, maximizing the
1https://mtc.ca.gov/news/new-year-brings-new-toll-payment-assistance-programs
2https://www.vdottollrelief.com/
3https://new.mta.info/fares-and-tolls/bridges-and-tunnels/resident-programs
9welfare of all traveler populations. For congestion pricing schemes with support constraints,
weadaptourapproachtoprovideaheuristicforcalculatinghom scandhet sc,acknowledging
that such solutions may not guarantee the implementation of the socially optimal edge flows.
Proposition 4.1. Given toll prices p, a strategy distribution q∗(p) is a Nash equilibrium if
and only if it is a solution to the following convex optimization problem:
min Φ(q,p,θ) =
XZ we(q)
ℓ (z) dz +XX
(pi
e
+g e)
fi(q), (6)
q∈Q(D) 0 e θi e
e∈E i∈I e∈E
where wi(q), w (q) are given by (2) and (3), respectively. Moreover, given any toll price
e e
vector p, the equilibrium edge flow vector w∗(p) := w(q∗(p)) is unique. Additionally, the
socially optimal edge flow vector w† is unique.
Proposition 4.1 is an extension of (Guo and Yang, 2010) to incorporate the gas price in
the cost function for each population. The proof of this result builds on the fact that (a)
the equilibrium condition in the routing game is equivalent to the optimality condition of
the convex program (6), and (b) (6) is strictly convex in the edge load vector w. To make
the paper self-contained, we include the proof in Appendix A.
Proposition 4.1 shows that the socially optimal edge load vector w† is unique. However,
we note that such a w† may be induced by multiple type-specific flow vectors f†. Although
these different type-specific flow vectors all induce the same aggregate edge load, and thus
minimize the total cost, they may lead to different travel time costs experienced by different
population types.
Next, we show that the set of prices hom (resp. het) that implements the socially optimal
edge load can be characterized each by a linear program.
Proposition 4.2. (1) A homogeneous congestion pricing scheme p† = (p†) implements
e e∈E
the socially optimal edge flow w† = (w†) if and only if there exists z† such that
e e∈E
(p†,z†) is a solution to the following linear program:
T∗ = max X X Dikzik − X p w†,
hom e e
p,z
i∈I k∈K e∈E
s.t. zik −X (p +g ) ≤ θiℓ (w†), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I, (P )
e e r hom
e∈r
p ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E.
e
(2) A heterogeneous congestion pricing scheme p† = (pi†) implements a type-specific
e e∈E,i∈I
socially optimal edge flow f† = (fi) if and only if there exists a z† such that
e e∈E,i∈I
(p†,z†) is a solution to the following linear program:
T∗ (f†) = max X X Dikzik − XX pif†i,
het e e
p,z
i∈I k∈K e∈E i∈I
s.t. zik −X (pi +g ) ≤ θiℓ (w†), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I, (P )
e e r het
e∈r
pi ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E,i ∈ I.
e
10Proposition 4.2 builds on a result in (Fleischer et al., 2004). In particular, (Fleischer
et al., 2004) showed that any optimal solution of (P ) is a congestion minimizing toll price
hom
vector in hom. We show that the other direction of this argument also holds: any congestion
minimizing toll price vector in hom must be an optimal solution of (P ). Additionally, we
hom
extend the result of hom to het to show that a heterogeneous toll price vector induces the a
congestion minimizing flow if and only if it is an optimal solution of (P ).
het
The proof of Proposition 4.2 builds on the two linear programs (P ) – (P ) and their
hom het
dual programs (D ) and (D ) as follows:
hom het
min X X X (θiℓ (w†)+X g )qik (D )
r e r hom
q
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk e∈r
s.t. X X X qik ≤ w†, ∀e ∈ E, (D )
r e hom.a
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk:e∈r
X qik = Dik, ∀i ∈ I,k ∈ K, (D )
r hom.b
r∈Rk
qik ≥ 0 ∀i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk. (D )
r hom.c
min X X X (θiℓ (w†)+X g )qik (D )
r e r het
q
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk e∈r
s.t. X X qik ≤ f†i, ∀e ∈ E,i ∈ I, (D )
r e het.a
k∈Kr∈Rk:e∈r
X qik = Dik, ∀i ∈ I,k ∈ K, (D )
r het.b
r∈Rk
qik ≥ 0, ∀i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk. (D )
r het.c
In our proof, we show that under both hom and het, the feasibility constraints of the as-
sociated primal and dual programs as well as the complementary slackness conditions are
equivalent to the equilibrium condition where only routes with the minimum cost are taken
by travelers. Moreover, we show that constraints (D ) and (D ) must be tight at
hom.a het.a
optimality, indicating that the induced flow vector in equilibrium is indeed the congestion
minimizing flow vector. Therefore, the set of optimal solutions of (P ) and (P ) are the
hom het
setoftollvectorsthatinducethecongestionminimizingflowunderhomandhet, respectively.
We denote P† as the set of socially optimal toll prices for hom, and P† (f†) as the set
hom het
of socially optimal toll price for het that induces a type-specific socially optimal edge flow f†.
Proposition 4.2 demonstrates that both sets can be computed as the optimal solution set of
linear programs. In particular, we note that the set P† (f†) depends on which edge-specific
het
socially optimal flow f† is induced since the objective function (P ) depends on f†.
het
Furthermore, P† and P† (f†) may not be singleton sets. This presents a challenge for
hom het
the planner, who must then decide which specific toll price from the optimal solution set to
implement. While all tolls in P† and P† achieve the minimum social cost, they do so by
hom het
impacting travelers differently given their individual origin-destination pair and willingness-
11to-pay. We consider that the central planner aims at solving the following problem:
(cid:12) (cid:12)
min L(p) := max(cid:12) (cid:12) 1 X Dikcik†(p)− 1 X Di′kci′k†(p)(cid:12) (cid:12)+λ 1 X X Dikcik†(p),
p i,i′∈I (cid:12) (cid:12)Di Di′ (cid:12) (cid:12) D
k∈K k∈K i∈I k∈K
| {z } | {z }
(8)
(i) (ii)
( P† , in hom,
s.t. p ∈ hom
P† (f†), in het with the population-specific optimal flow f†.
het
where Di = P Dik and D = P Di, λ ≥ 0 and
k∈K i∈I
( )
1
cik†(p) = min ℓ (w†)+ X (p +g ) (9)
r∈Rk r θi e e
e∈r
is the equilibrium cost of individuals with o-d pair k and type i given the toll price p and
socially optimal edge load w†.
In (8), (i) can be viewed as an equity metric that evaluates the maximum difference of
average equilibrium cost of travelers with each type and (ii) is an average welfare metric that
is the average travel time experienced by all travelers. We emphasize that the cost cik†(p)
as in (9) is the minimum cost of choosing a route given the socially optimal load vector w†,
the toll price and the gas fee. This is indeed an equilibrium cost of traveler population with
type i and o-d pair k since any p ∈ P† or p ∈ P† (f†) guarantees that the equilibrium
hom het
edge vector is w†. The objective function in (8) indicates that the central planner selects
the congestion minimizing toll price that also balances the equity among populations with
different willingness-to-pay and the average welfare that accounted for the travel time cost
as well as the toll price and gas fee. Balancing welfare maximization with cost disparity
minimization avoids the potential problem with just minimizing cost disparity: charging
excessively high tolls to every type of travelers. In (8), λ ≥ 0 is the parameter that governs
the relative weight between the equity objective and the welfare objective.
We denote the socially optimal homogeneous congestion pricing scheme that solves the
central planner’s problem (8) as p∗ . The next proposition shows that we can solve the
hom
central planner’s problem (8) for hom by another linear program.
Proposition 4.3. For the hom tolling scheme, p∗ is an optimal solution of the following
hom
linear program:
λ
min y + X X Dikzik (P∗ )
p,z,y D hom
i∈I k∈K
1 Dikzik 1 Di′kzi′k
s.t. y ≥ X − X , ∀i,i′ ∈ I, (P∗ )
Di θi Di′ θi hom.a
k∈K k∈K
X X Dikzik − X p w† ≥ T∗ , (P∗ )
e e hom hom.b
i∈I k∈K e∈E
zik −X (p +g ) ≤ θiℓ (w†), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I, (P∗ )
e e r hom.c
e∈r
p ≥ 0 ∀e ∈ E, (P∗ )
e hom.d
where T∗ is the optimal value of the objective function. of(P ).
hom hom
12In (P∗ ), constraints (P∗ ) and (P∗ ) ensure that variables (p,z) are in the feasible
hom hom.c hom.d
set of (P ), and constraint (P∗ ) further restrict that the set of (p,z) in (P∗ ) to be the
hom hom.b hom
set of optimal solutions of (P ). Thus, following Proposition 4.2, any feasible p in (P∗ )
hom hom
must be a toll vector that induces the socially optimal edge flow w†. Moreover, the proof of
Proposition 4.2 further ensures that for every i ∈ I,k ∈ K there exists r ∈ Rk such that the
corresponding constraint in (P∗ ) must be tight at optimum, which indicates that any zik
hom.c
in (P∗ ) equals to θi·cik†(p). Additionally, constraints (P∗ ) guarantee that at optimality
hom hom.a
(cid:12) (cid:12)
(cid:12) (cid:12)
y = max (cid:12) 1 P Dikcik†(p) − 1 P Di′kci′k†(p)(cid:12). Thus, the linear program (P∗ )
i,i′∈I (cid:12)Di k∈K Di′ k∈K (cid:12) hom
(cid:12) (cid:12)
computes the congestion minimizing hom toll price that optimizes the equity and welfare
objectives with relative weight λ.
Propositions 4.2 and 4.3 provide a two-step approach of computing p∗ : first, compute
hom
T∗ by solving the linear program (P ) given the unique congestion minimizing edge flow
hom hom
w†. Second, compute p∗ by solving the linear program (P∗ ) using T∗ .
hom hom hom
Next, we show that the central planner can compute the congestion minimizing toll
price vector for het that optimizes the equity-welfare objective function (8), denoted as p∗ ,
het
using a similar approach as described above. However, in het, one additional issue arises
as both the congestion minimizing toll price set P† (f†) and consequently p∗ depend on
het het
the selection of the type-specific flow vector f†, which is not unique. Here, we propose to
select the congestion minimizing population-specific flow vector f† as the one that induces
the congestion minimizing flow vector w† while also minimizing the difference of average
travel time cost across all traveler populations. To compute such a f†, we first find a feasible
routing strategy profile q† that induces w† and minimizes the average cost difference among
traveler populations. Such a q† can be solved by the following linear program:
min x,
q
s.t. x ≥ X X qikℓ (w†)− X X qi′kℓ (w†), ∀i,i′ ∈ I,
r r r r
k∈Kr∈Rk k∈Kr∈Rk
X qik = Dik, ∀ i ∈ I,k ∈ K, (11)
r
r∈Rk
X X X qik = w†, ∀e ∈ E,
r e
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk:e∈r
qik ≥ 0, ∀ i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk.
r
Then, theinducedpopulation-specificflowvectorf† associatedwithq† isgivenby (2). Based
on f†, we compute p∗ as the optimal solution of a linear program.
het
Proposition 4.4. For the het tolling scheme, given f†, p∗ is an optimal solution of the
het
following linear program:
λ
min y + X X Dikzik (P∗ )
p,z,y D het
i∈I k∈K
1 Dikzik 1 Di′kzi′k
s.t. y ≥ X − X , ∀i,i′ ∈ I, (P∗ )
Di θi Di′ θi het.a
k∈K k∈K
X X Dikzik − X p w† ≥ T∗ (f†), (P∗ )
e e het het.b
i∈I k∈K e∈E
13zik −X (pi +g ) ≤ θiℓ (w†), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I, (P∗ )
e e r het.c
e∈r
pi ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E, (P∗ )
e het.d
where T∗ (f†) is the optimal value of the objective function of (P ) associated with f†.
het het
Propositions4.2and4.4showthatp∗ canbecomputedusingathree-step approach: first,
het
we compute the type-specific flow vector f† that induces the congestion minimizing edge flow
w† while also minimizing the average cost difference among all traveler populations using
(11). Second, wecomputeT∗ (f†)using (P )givenf†. Third, wecomputep∗ using (P∗ ).
het het het het
Finally, we discuss how to extend our approaches of computing p∗ and p∗ to incorpo-
hom het
rate the support constraints of the toll price. Previous studies (Bonifaci et al., 2011; Hoefer
et al., 2008) showed that the problem of computing the congestion minimizing toll price
with support set constraints is NP hard even without considering heterogeneous willingness-
to-pay of travelers or equity objectives. Here, we provide heuristics for computing the toll
prices with support constraints. We evaluate the performance of our heuristics in terms of
congestion minimizing gap, equity, and welfare on the San Francisco Bay Area network in
Sec. 4.
Heuristics for computing p∗ . We propose a two-step heuristic to compute hom sc
hom sc
by appropriately modifying the two-step method to compute hom.
We first solve the following linear program that adds the support constraints to (P ):
hom
T∗ = max X X Dikzik − X p w†,
hom sc e e
p,z
i∈I k∈K e∈E
s.t. zik −X (p +g ) ≤ θiℓ (w†), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I, (P )
e e r hom sc
e∈r
p ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E , p = 0, ∀e ∈ E \E .
e T e T
We note that the equilibrium edge load associated with any optimal solution of (P ),
hom sc
say wˆ, may not be equal to the socially optimal edge load w†. This is because the constraints
that edges in E \E having zero tolls remove the dual constraints in (D ) for edges in
T hom.a
E . As a result, the primal and dual argument in the proof of Proposition 4.2 no longer
T
holds, and thus the induced edge flow wˆ may not be equal to w†.
Note that the optimal solution to (P ) will be non-unique. Therefore, inspired by
hom sc
(P∗ ), we consider the following heuristic to incorporate both equity and welfare metric
hom
while also accounting for support constraints. Note that simply adding the support con-
straints in (P∗ ) could render the optimization problem infeasible as the optimal set of
hom
homogeneous tolls P∗ need not have a solution that satisfies the support constraints. Par-
hom
ticularly the constraint (P∗ ) would get violated. This is because T∗ ≥ T∗ as the
hom.b hom hom sc
constraint set of (P∗ ) is contained in that of (P∗ ). Therefore, we compute p∗
hom sc hom hom sc
as the optimal solution of the following linear program which adds support constraints to
(P∗ ) while relaxing the constraint (P∗ ) by using T∗ instead of T∗ :
hom hom.b hom sc hom
λ
min y + X X Dikzik (P∗ )
p,z,y D hom sc
i∈I k∈K
141 Dikzik 1 Di′kzi′k
s.t. y ≥ X − X , ∀i,i′ ∈ I, (P∗ )
Di θi Di′ θi′ hom sc.a
k∈K k∈K
X X Dikzik − X p w† ≥ T∗ , (P∗ )
e e hom sc hom sc.b
i∈I k∈K e∈E
zik −X (p +g ) ≤ θiℓ (w†), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I, (P∗ )
e e r hom sc.c
e∈r
p ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E ,p = 0, ∀e ∈ E \E . (P∗ )
e T e T hom sc.d
Heuristics for computing p∗ . The computation of p∗ follows a three-step proce-
het sc het sc
dure, similar to that of p∗ . First, we compute the population-specific flow vector f† that
het
inducesthecongestionminimizingedgefloww† whilealsominimizestheaveragedifferenceof
travel time among all traveler populations using (11). Next, we add the support constraints
to (P ) to compute the optimal value T∗ (f†) as follows:
het het sc
T∗ (f†) = max X X Dikzik − XX pif†i,
het sc e e
p,z
i∈I k∈K e∈E i∈I
s.t. zik −X (pi +g ) ≤ θiℓ (w†), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I, (P )
e e r het sc
e∈r
pi ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E ∀i ∈ I, p = 0, ∀e ∈ E \E ∀i ∈ I.
e T e T
Analogous to the case hom sc, the equilibrium edge load associated with the optimal solution
of (P ), wˆ, maynotbeequaltothesociallyoptimaledgeloadw† duetotheaddedsupport
het sc
constraints. We compute p∗ as the optimal solution of the following linear program which
het sc
addssupportconstraintsto(P∗ )whilerelaxingtheconstraint(P∗ )byusingT∗ instead
het het.b het sc
of T∗ :
het
λ
min y + X X Dikzik, (P∗ )
p,z,y D het sc
i∈I k∈K
1 Dikzik 1 Di′kzi′k
s.t. y ≥ X − X , ∀i,i′ ∈ I, (P∗ )
Di θi Di′ θi′ het sc.a
k∈K k∈K
X X Dikzik − X piw† ≥ T∗ , (P∗ )
e e het sc het sc.b
i∈I k∈K e∈E
zik −X (pi +g ) ≤ θiℓ (w†), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I, (P∗ )
e e r het sc.c
e∈r
pi ≥ 0, ∀e ∈ E ,pi = 0, ∀e ∈ E \E . (P∗ )
e T e T het sc.d
5 Model calibration for the San Francisco Bay Area
freeway network
In this section, we calibrate the non-atomic routing game model for the San Francisco
Bay Area freeway network using the Caltrans Performance Measurement System (PeMS)
15dataset 4, American Community Survey (ACS) dataset 5 and Safegraph neighborhood pat-
terns dataset from 2019 6. In Sec. 5.1, we briefly describe each dataset. We subsequently
present the calibration of the Bay Area transportation network, the demand of each popu-
lation type in Sec. 5.2, and the willingness-to-pay parameters in Sec. 5.3.
5.1 Datasets
Caltrans PeMS Dataset. The Caltrans Performance Measurement System (PeMS) is
a dataset based on measurements taken from loop detectors placed on a network of major
freeways and bridges in California. Our dataset is taken from district 4, which covers the
entire San Francisco Bay Area. This dataset provides hourly flow counts and average vehicle
speeds measured by each loop detector placed along the freeways. We use this dataset to
calibrate the latency functions of edges in the Bay Area transportation network. See Sec.
5.2 for detailed discussion.
American Community Survey (ACS) Dataset. The American Community Survey
is a dataset collected by the US Census Bureau to record demographic and socioeconomic
information. WeusetheMeansofTransportation(2019)dataset, whichprovidesinformation
of commuters’ mode choices (percentage of driving population), employment, and household
income. The dataset is collected at the zip-code level for the entire United States.
Safegraph Neighborhood Patterns Dataset. This dataset records the aggregate mo-
bility pattern using the data collected from 40 million mobile devices in the United States.
The Neighborhood Patterns Dataset estimates the commuting pattern by counting the num-
ber of mobile devices that travel from one census block group (CBG) to another CBG and
dwell for at least 6 hours between 7:30 am and 5:30 pm Monday through Friday. We use
the ACS dataset and the Safegraph data set to estimate the demand of driving commuters
between each o-d pair in the network within each income level. See Sec. 5.2 for detailed
discussion.
5.2 The San Francisco Bay Area freeway network
We represent the San Francisco Bay Area using a network with 17 nodes (see Fig. 2). Each
node represents a major city as listed in Table 1, and the edges are the major freeways
connecting these cities. Among these edges, five of them are bridges: the Golden Gate
Bridge, the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge, the San Francisco-Oakland Bay Bridge, the San
Mateo-Hayward Bridge, and the Dumbarton Bridge. They are represented as the magenta
boxes in Figure 2. In 2019, a flat toll of $7 is imposed for a single crossing on each bridge in
the direction denoted in Figure 2.
4available at https://pems.dot.ca.gov/
5available at https://www.census.gov/programs-surveys/acs
6This dataset was available for public use at https://www.safegraph.com till 2021 and is now commer-
cially available
16Node Node Abbreviation
San Rafael SRFL
Richmond RICH
Oakland OAKL
San Francisco SFRN
San Leandro SLND
Hayward HAYW
South San Francisco SSFO
Fremont FREM
San Mateo SANM
Redwood City REDW
Palo Alto PALO
Milpitas MILP
Mountain View MTNV
San Jose SANJ
Sausalito SAUS
Daly City DALY
Berkeley BERK
Table 1: List of nodes and node abbreviations.
Figure 2: Bay Area transportation network with tolled bridge segments. Different colors on
the map represent the boundaries of cities.
17Demand estimate. We categorize the driving population into three distinct segments
based on their willingness-to-pay, namely low, middle, and high willingness-to-pay. The
determination of the fraction of driving population in each of these categories relies on the
Means of Transportation dataset from ACS. Specifically, we assign a traveler to the (a) low
willingness-to-pay category if their annual individual income is less than $25,000, to the (b)
middle willingness-to-pay category if their annual individual income falls within the range of
$25,000 to $65,000, and to the (c) high willingness-to-pay category if their annual individual
income exceeds $65,000.
Figure 3 provides a visual representation of the distribution of traveler demand to and
from each node in the network, stratified by willingness-to-pay. It is essential to under-
score that this demand specifically pertains to inter-node travel, with within-node demand
excluded from the analysis. We describe the methodology employed for demand estima-
tion in the next section. Moreover, we find that approximately 40% of travelers are high
willingess-to-pay, and 30% of travelers are of middle and low willingness-to-pay, each.
In Figure 3a (resp. Figure 3b), we present the distribution of traveler demand based
on their home (resp. work) location. Around 55% of traffic emerges from relatively few
nodes on the East Bay such as RICH, OAKL, SLND, HAYW, FREM, SANJ. Moreover, around
40% of traffic has a work destination in one of the four nodes SFRN, PALO, MTNV, and
OAKL. Notably, there exists substantial heterogeneity in both the home and work locations
of different traveler types, as can be observed by comparing the distribution of demands in
Figure 3 to the distribution of median income found in Figure 1a. For instance, nodes such
as RICH, HAYW, SLND, and DALY are predominantly inhabited by a higher number of low
willingness-to-pay travelers, while nodes such as PALO, OAKL, SFRN, FREM, and SAUS are
predominantly inhabited by high willingness-to-pay travelers. It is interesting to note that
on most of the nodes the demographics of incoming traffic predominantly comprise high
willingness-to-pay travelers. Additionally, as can be seen in Figure 4, high-income travelers
make up a large fraction demand that originates in the West Bay, as well as of the work
location demand on both the East and West Bay.
Next, we describe the approach used to compute the daily demand of different types
of travelers traveling between different o-d pairs during January 2019-June 2019. There
are three main steps to our approach: first, we obtain an estimate of the relative demand
of travelers traveling between different zip-codes in the Bay Area by using the Safegraph
dataset. Particularly, for every month, the Neighborhood Patterns data in the Safegraph
dataset provides the average daily count of mobile devices that travel between different
census block groups (CBGs) during the work day, which is then aggregated to obtain the
relative demand of travelers traveling between different zip codes. After accounting for the
sampling bias induced due to the randomly sampled population across the United States,
we calibrate demands by using the ACS dataset which provides the income-stratified driving
population in every zip code. Finally, to obtain an estimate of daily variability in demand we
further augment the demand data with the PeMS dataset by adjusting for daily variation in
the total flow on the network in every month. The details of demand estimation are included
in Appendix C.
18(a) Distribution of traveler types based on their origin
(home) nodes.
(b) Distribution of traveler types based on their destination
(work) nodes.
Figure 3: Distribution of origin and destination traveler demands.
(a) Home Location (b) Home Location (c) Work Location (d) Work Location
Figure 4: Distribution of demands across high, middle, and low income levels.
19Calibrating the edge latency functions. We calibrate the latency functions of each
edge of the Bay Area freeway network shown in Figure 2. We adopt the Bureau of Public
Roads (BPR) function proposed by the Federal Highway Administration (FHA) (Manual,
1964) as follows:
ℓ (w ) = a +b w4, ∀ e ∈ E, (15)
e e e e e
where a represents the free-flow travel time (i.e. latency with zero flow) of edge e and b is
e e
the slope of congestion.
We compute the average driving time of each edge during the morning rush hour (6am to
12pm) on each workday from January 1, 2019 to June 30, 2019 using the speed and distance
data from the PeMS dataset. We denote the set of all days as T , the average travel time
and traffic flow of each edge e ∈ E on day t ∈ T as ℓˆt and wˆt, respectively. The details of
e e
computing
(cid:16) ℓˆt,wˆt(cid:17)
are provided in Appendix B. We estimate the free-flow travel time a
e e e
t∈T
of each e ∈ E using the average travel time of edge e computed from the PeMS dataset at
3am, when the traffic flow is approaching zero. We denote the estimated value of a as aˆ
e e
for each e ∈ E. We next estimate the slope b of each edge e ∈ E using an ordinary least
e
ˆ
squares regression. In particular, the estimate b is solved as the minimizer of the following
e
convex program:
ˆ b = argminX ∥ℓˆt −aˆ −b ·(wˆt)4∥2, ∀ e ∈ E.
e e e e e
be∈R
t∈T
5.3 Estimating the willingness-to-pay parameters
We formulate the problem of estimating the willingness-to-pay parameters as an inverse
optimization problem. Specifically, the optimal estimate of willingness-to-pay parameters
corresponding to the three types of travelers, θH∗,θM∗,θL∗, are the ones that minimize the
difference between the observed flows on each edge of the network and the corresponding
equilibrium edge flows. That is,
θ∗ ,θ∗ ,θ∗ = argmin X X (wˆt −w (qt))2
H M L e e
θH,θM,θL t∈T e∈E
s.t. qt ∈ argmin Φ(q,p,θ) ∀t ∈ T , (16a)
q∈Q(Dt)
w (qt) is given by (3), (16b)
e
Q(Dt) is given by (1), (16c)
where p is the toll price vector in 2019 (i.e. $7 on each bridge, and $0 for the remaining
edges), wˆt is the observed edge flow on each edge e ∈ E and each day t ∈ T computed using
e
the PeMS dataset, and Dt is the estimated demand vector of each day t computed using the
ACS and Safegraph datasets.
Directly solving (16) is a challenging problem due to the non-linearity of the edge latency
function and the potential function in (16a). We compute the estimates using grid search:
we construct a grid of willingness to pay, where the granularity of each of θH,θM,θL is $5 per
hour. We also assume that the maximum value of willingness to pay is $100 per hour and
20Figure 5: Comparison of observed flow and computed equilibrium edge flow.
the minimum is $0 per hour. Therefore, we define the set of all possible parameter values as
Θ := {0,5,10,15,...,100}3. For each θ = (θH,θM,θL) ∈ Θ, we compute the the equilibrium
flow q for every t ∈ T and compute the total squared error as in the objective function
t
of (16). The optimal parameter θ∗ is the one that minimizes the total squared error. We
obtain:
θ∗ = (θL∗,θM∗,θH∗) = ($10/hour, $30/hour, $70/hour). (17)
Our estimate θ∗ is consistent with the observations reported in prior works, which show
that the willingness-to-pay values typically lie between 60% − 100% of the average hourly
income of the population ((Athira et al., 2016; Meunier and Quinet, 2015; Palmquist et al.,
2007)).
Furthermore, as a robustness check, we plot the equilibrium edge flow w (qt∗) and ob-
e
served edge flow wˆt for every e ∈ E,t ∈ T in Figure 5. Each dot in this figure represents
e
the flow on an edge e ∈ E on a single day t ∈ T . Overall, the dots are distributed along
the diagonal of the plot indicating that the our computed equilibrium edge flow are rel-
atively consistent with the observed edge flow subject to noise in time costs and demand
fluctuations.
6 Efficiency and equity analysis of congestion pricing
schemes
Our goal in this section is three fold. First, we analyze the congestion levels induced at
equilibrium due to current congestion pricing scheme, curr, and identify corridors in the Bay
Area which are congested. Next, using the computational method introduced in Section
4 and the calibrated model of San Francisco Bay area freeway network in Section 5, we
compute the toll values under the congestion pricing schemes hom, het, hom sc, and het sc.
21(a) Proportional travel time increase under (b) Difference between equilibrium flow in-
curr (normalized by free flow travel time). duced by curr and optimal flow.
Figure 6: Current congestion pricing scheme
Finally, we compare different congestion pricing schemes in terms of efficiency and equity of
travel cost, and also in terms of overall revenue generated at equilibrium.
6.1 Congestion under the current congestion pricing scheme (curr)
Here, we analyze the congestion levels induced at equilibrium under the current congestion
pricing scheme, curr, which imposes a uniform toll of $7 on each of the five bridges in the
Bay Area, namely on the Richmond-San Rafael Bridge (RICH-SRFL), San Francisco-Oakland
Bay Bridge (OAKL-SFRN), Golden Gate Bridge (SAUS-SFRN), San Mateo-Hayward Bridge
(HAYW-SANM), and Dumbarton Bridge (FREM-PALO).
Figure 6a depicts the difference between the equilibrium travel time given curr and the
congestionminimizingtraveltime(normalizedbyfreeflowtraveltimeoneveryedge). Weob-
serve that edges on the eastern corridor (connecting nodes RICH-BERK-OAKL-SLND-HAYW-
FREM) are over-congested. Meanwhile, the edges on the western corridor (connecting nodes
SRFL-SAUS-SFRN-DALY-SSFO-SANM-REDW) are relatively less congested. Furthermore,
we observe that amongst all bridges the Bay Bridge (OAKL-SFRN) is also most congested,
which is consistent with several prior studies (Barnes et al., 2012; Gonzales and Christofa,
2015; Nakamura and Kockelman, 2002). Additionally, Figure 6b presents the difference in
the edge flows induced at equilibrium with that of socially optimal edge flows. We observe
that in order to reduce the overall congestion we need to ensure that
(R1) the travelers using the edges in the corridor RICH-BERK-OAKL-SFRN (resp. SFRN-
OAKL-BERK-RICH) are incentivized to use the edges in the corridor RICH-SRFL-
SAUS-SFRN (resp. SFRN-SAUS-SRFL-RICH).
(R2) the travelers using the edges in the corridor SFRN-SSFO are incentivized to use the
corridor SFRN-DALY-SSFO.
22Travel Cost Low (% travelers) Middle (% travelers) High (% travelers)
more than 60 minutes 68 53 49
more than 90 minutes 50 34 27
more than 120 minutes 34 16 10
more than 150 minutes 18 2 1
Table 2: Fraction of low, middle and high willingness-to-pay travelers that incur total cost
(in minutes) more than the threshold at equilibrium.
(R3) the travelers using the eastern corridor MILP-FREM-HAYW-SLND-OAKL are di-
verted to use the western corridor MTNV-PALO-REDW-SANM-SSFO by suitably
incentivizing them to use the Dumbarton Bridge or the San Mateo-Hayward Bridge.
Furthermore, we note that the average travel cost (the sum of the travel time cost and
the equivalent time cost of the monetary expense as in (4)) experienced by different types
of travelers at equilibrium is unequal in curr. Specifically, low willingness-to-pay travelers
bear the travel cost of approximately 91 minutes, while high and middle willingness-to-pay
travelers face costs of 61 and 68 minutes, respectively. Moreover, as indicated in Table 2,
this unequal distribution of travel time persists not only on average but also when examined
across different threshold levels of travel cost.
To summarize, we observe that the current congestion pricing scheme implemented the
Bay area does not result in efficient allocation of traffic on the network. Additionally, it also
leads to unequal distribution of travel cost across different types of travelers.
6.2 Toll values under different congestion pricing schemes
Here, using the calibrated model of the Bay area obtained in Section 5, we present the
computed values of tolls on various edges of the Bay area network under different conges-
tion pricing schemes (namely, hom, het, hom sc, het sc) obtained using the computational
methodology presented in Section 4.
Figure 7a presents the toll values computed under hom by solving (P∗ ). Figures 7b-7d
hom
present the toll values for low, middle, and high willingness-to-pay travelers under het by
solving (P∗ ). Figure 7e presents the toll values computed under hom sc by solving (P∗ ).
het hom sc
Figure7ffurtherpresentsthetollvaluesforlow, middle, andhighwillingness-to-paytravelers
under het sc by solving (P∗ ). To compute all of these toll values, we choose λ = 5 in
het sc
(P∗ ), (P∗ ), (P∗ ), and (P∗ ). This choice of parameter λ ensures that the numerical
hom het hom sc het sc
value of the average welfare metric and the equity metric in these optimization problems are
of the same order of magnitude.
Note that in hom and het, on all the bridges, tolls in the east-to-west direction are lower
than tolls in the west-to-east direction. This is in contrast to curr, where the west-to-east
direction is not tolled at all on any bridge and only the east-to-west direction is tolled at
a flat rate of $7 (refer Figure 2). Given that the western corridor is less congested than
the eastern corridor in curr (refer Figure 6a), such tolling is useful to efficiently redistribute
traffic in the network. Furthermore, note that in all of the congestion pricing schemes we
compute, unlike curr, the Golden Gate Bridge (SAUS-SFRN) is not tolled at all. This choice
23ensures that more travelers in the eastern corridor, particularly in nodes such as RICHand
BERK are able to reach nodes in the west, particularly SFRN.
6.3 Discussion on efficiency, equity and revenue generation
In this subsection, we compare the effectiveness of curr, hom, hom sc, het and het sc in terms
of efficiency (the average travel time per traveler), equity (average total cost experienced
by different types of travelers), and revenue generation (the total toll revenue generated by
these schemes). Additionally, we also compare these pricing schemes with the scenario when
no toll is implemented (denoted zero).
6.3.1 Efficiency Considerations.
Figure8representstheaveragetraveltimeexperiencedbytravelersunderdifferentcongestion
pricing schemes.
As expected from Proposition 4.2, the congestion pricing schemes hom and het achieves
the minimum congestion levels on the network. Additionally, we note that hom sc and het sc
do not achieve the minimum congestion level due to the support constraints. Furthermore,
it’s noteworthy that het sc results in a slightly improved average travel time compared to
hom sc. This improvement can be attributed to the flexibility of heterogeneous pricing
schemes, which allow for type-specific tolls.
From Figure 8, we observe that the price of anarchy – which is the ratio of the social cost
of equilibrium congestion levels induced under no tolls with that of opt– is 1.04 for the Bay
area transportation network. This is likely due to the high congestion level of the network
during the morning rush hour. Indeed, theoretical studies (Colini-Baldeschi et al., 2020;
Cominetti et al., 2021) have proved that the price of anarchy approaches to 1 as the total
demand of travelers increases. Moreover, empirical studies (O’Hare et al., 2016; Youn et al.,
2008) have also shown that the price of anarchy in the transportation networks of London,
Boston and New York city are also close to 1.
We find that all congestion pricing schemes hom, hom sc, het, het sc outperform curr in
terms of the average travel time. Surprisingly, it is also marginally outperformed by zero. A
key reason is that curr imposes the same tolls on all of the bridges which does not result in
effective re-distribution of traffic from eastern corridor to western corridor. While a reduced
toll price or zero toll price may increase the total demand of travelers, but its impact is likely
to be not significant due to (1) the high expense of car ownership and parking fee ((Depillis
et al., 2023) estimates that US average annual car ownership cost is $12182 in 2023), and
(2) the low coverage of public transportation in the Bay Area.
6.3.2 Equity considerations.
Figure 9 illustrates the average travel cost experienced by type of travelers under different
pricing schemes. We observe that the difference of average cost across the three traveler
types is lower in het, het sc, hom sc, and zero, in comparison to curr. Moreover, we observe
that for all type of travelers, the average travel cost is lower in het, het sc, hom sc, and
zero, in comparison to curr. Furthermore, we note that this observation not only holds
24(a) Tolls under hom (b) Tolls under het for low type
(c) Tolls under het for middle type (d) Tolls under het for high type
(e) Tolls under hom sc (f) Tolls under het sc
Figure 7: Toll values under congestion pricing schemes hom, het, hom sc, and het sc.
25Figure 8: Comparison of average social cost per traveler for curr, zero, hom, hom sc, het,
and het sc. Here, the orange dashed line represent congestion minimizing cost computed by
solving (5).
in the averaged sense but also in a distributional sense as illustrated in Table 3, which
presents the proportion of travelers of a particular type experiencing travel costs surpassing
a predetermined threshold. We observe that, regardless of the value of threshold and the
type of travelers, the proportion of travelers experiencing cost higher than a threshold is
higher in curr in comparison to het, het sc, hom sc, and zero. This shows that all proposed
alternative pricing schemes (except for hom) are more equitable than curr for every type of
travelers. The pricing scheme hom results in higher travel cost because it charges higher tolls
to travelers.
In homogeneous congestion pricing schemes, regardless of the threshold and the type of
traveler,ahigherpercentageoftravelersincurtravelcostsexceedingasetthresholdcompared
toheterogeneouspricing. Thisisduetotype-specifictollsinheterogeneousschemesresulting
in lower tolls for travelers. Additionally, pricing schemes with support constraints reduce the
percentage of travelers exceeding a threshold. While the differences are marginal between
het and het sc, such differences are more prominent between hom and hom sc.
Recall from (4) that the travel cost experienced by each traveler type includes the travel
time cost and the equivalent time cost of monetary expenses (tolls and gas fee) assessed by
the willingness-to-pay. Figure 10a, which complements Figure 8, presents the average travel
time under different congestion pricing scheme stratified by traveler types. Additionally,
Figure 10b presents the average monetary cost (including both toll and gas prices) paid by
each traveler type under different pricing schemes.
Weobservethatforeverytypeoftravelers,thetraveltimeexperiencedundercurrandzero
is worse than any of the proposed pricing scheme. This arises from curr imposing uniform,
non-zerotollsonallBayAreabridges, apracticethatoverlookstheregion’sgeographicdiver-
sity in residential and workplace locations, as well as the significant socioeconomic disparities
among its populations. By changing the pricing scheme to any one of the alternatives, we
can reduce the average travel time of all three traveler types. Furthermore, we observe that
for every type of travelers the average travel time experienced is higher in pricing schemes
26Figure9: Averagetravelcostexperiencedbydifferenttypesoftravelersunderdifferenttolling
schemes.
Travel Cost curr zero het sc hom sc hom het
more than 60 minutes 68% 60% 62% 63% 77% 67%
more than 90 minutes 50% 42% 44% 46% 60% 47%
more than 120 minutes 34% 26% 28% 29% 49% 29%
more than 150 minutes 18% 10% 11% 13% 35% 14%
(a) low willingness-to-pay travelers
Travel Cost curr zero het sc hom sc hom het
more than 60 minutes 53% 51% 54% 52% 61% 57%
more than 90 minutes 34% 31% 34% 32% 42% 34%
more than 120 minutes 16% 13% 11% 12% 20% 17%
more than 150 minutes 2% 1% 2% 2% 10% 4%
(b) middle willingness-to-pay travelers
Travel Cost curr zero het sc hom sc hom het
more than 60 minutes 49% 48% 47% 47% 51% 48%
more than 90 minutes 27% 26% 25% 25% 28% 25%
more than 120 minutes 10% 9% 9% 9% 12% 9%
more than 150 minutes 1% 0% 1% 0% 2% 1%
(c) high willingness-to-pay travelers
Table3: Percentageoftravelerswithtotalcost(4)exceedingthethresholdundereachpricing
scheme.
27(a) Average travel time
(b) Average monetary cost (tolls + gas price)
Figure 10: Average travel time and average monetary cost under curr, hom, het, hom sc,
het scand zero.
28with support constraints than the ones without.
The average monetary cost of zero and hom sc is lower than that of curr for every type
of traveler. Moreover, het and het sc results in higher monetary cost for high and medium
types, and lower cost for the low type in comparison to curr. Additionally, it is evident that,
for each traveler type, the average monetary cost experienced in hom is the highest compared
to any other pricing scheme. This is attributed to hom imposing high tolls to ensure minimal
congestion. However, the average monetary costs experienced in het are only slightly higher
than those in other schemes, even though het minimizes congestion (refer Figure 8). This
is due to type-specific toll prices in het which provides desired re-distribution of traffic with
lower toll values.
6.3.3 Revenue considerations
Another important aspect of determining the congestion pricing scheme is the revenue it
generates, which could be used for maintenance of existing transportation infrastructure,
enhancing public transit options, amongst other things. Figure 11 presents a comparison
of different congestion pricing scheme in terms of total revenue. As per the data released
by Metropolitan Transportation Commission (MTC) 7 a total toll revenue of $633,932,206
was collected in the Bay Area during the year 2019-2020. Our calibrated model in curr
predicts toll revenues on the same order of magnitude but slightly lower than MTC data.
The mismatch between our prediction and MTC data is attributed to the fact that (i) our
analysis only focuses on morning rush hour but MTC data also include tolls collected beyond
morning rush hour as well, (ii) MTC data also includes tolls on HOV (High Occupancy
Vehicle) lanes which are currently not added in our analysis, (iii) there is some additional
demand incoming from other nearby cities not included in our analysis, and (iv) higher tolls
are charged to multi-axle vehicles, with tolls charged as high as $36 in 2019.8
Notably, hom generates the highest revenue as it applies uniformly higher prices across
all edges, irrespective of traveler types, with the goal of achieving a minimum congestion
congestion level. Moreover, the revenue of the other three pricing schemes hom sc, het and
het sc are comparable to that of curr with het being slightly higher and hom sc and het sc
being slightly lower.
7 Conclusion and discussion
We study the problem of designing congestion pricing schemes which not only minimize the
overall congestion but also reduce the disparate impact of congestion pricing schemes on the
basis of socioeconomic and geographic diversity of travelers. We present a multi-step linear
programming based approach to design four kinds of congestion pricing schemes varying in
terms of their implementation depending on whether (a) they can toll travelers on the basis
of their willingness-to-pay, and (b) they can toll every edge of the network or only a subset
7available at https://mtc.ca.gov/about-mtc/authorities/bay-area-toll-authority/
historic-toll-paid-vehicle-counts-toll-revenue
8refer http://tinyurl.com/MTC-Multi-Axle)
29Figure 11: Comparison of total revenue collected for current,hom,hom-c,het,het-c.
of it. The evaluation and comparison of these congestion pricing schemes on the San Fran-
cisco Bay Area highway network reveal several significant insights. The proposed schemes
outperform the currently implemented scheme in terms of overall congestion reduction and
exhibit improvements in equity by providing better travel costs to each type of traveler. The
analysis also highlights the revenue generation potential of different pricing schemes. Fur-
thermore, heterogeneous pricing schemes can yield more equitable distribution of travel cost
between different types of travelers, paving the way for future research to explore effective
implementation strategies.
There are several interesting directions of future research. First, the implementation
question inspires a study of the design of tax rebate programs that facilitate heterogeneous
pricing schemes. Second, a more comprehensive empirical understanding of traffic patterns
in the Bay Area can be done by incorporating travelers incoming from other cities in the
Bay Area. Finally, it would be interesting to account for mode choice between driving and
public transit, and more generally to account for elasticity of demand occurring from other
choices such as remote work.
A Proofs for Section 4
Proof of Proposition 1.
(1) To establish this result, we first show that for any given set of tolls p, the optimiza-
tion problem (6) is a convex optimization problem. Next, using KKT conditions for
optimality we show that the optimal solution to (6) satisfy the requirements of Nash
equilibrium posited in Definition 3.1.
To show that the (6) is a convex optimization problem, we note that the constraint
set is convex as it is a product simplex which is a convex set. Next, we show that
the objective function is convex. Since the objective is differentiable, it is sufficient to
30show that
!
X X X ∂Φ(q,p) − ∂Φ(q˜,p) (cid:16) qik −q˜ik(cid:17) ≥ 0 ∀ q,q˜∈ Q,q ̸= q˜. (18)
∂qik ∂qik r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk r r
To see this, we note that
∂Φ(q,p) ∂w (q) (pi +g )∂wi(q)
= X ℓ (w (q)) e +XX e e e
∂qik e e ∂qik θi ∂qik
r e∈E r i∈I e∈E r
(pi +g )
= X ℓ (w (q))1(e ∈ r)+ X e e 1(e ∈ r) = ci(q,p).
e e θi r
e∈E e∈E
Consequently, for any q,q˜∈ Q such that q ̸= q˜it holds that
!
X X X ∂Φ(q,p) − ∂Φ(q˜,p) (cid:16) qik −q˜ik(cid:17)
∂qik ∂qik r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk r r
!
= X X X X (ℓ (w (q))−ℓ (w (q˜)))1(e ∈ r) (cid:16) qik −q˜ik(cid:17) ,
e e e e r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk e∈E
= X (ℓ (w (q))−ℓ (w (q˜)))X X X 1(e ∈ r)(cid:16) qik −q˜ik(cid:17) ,
e e e e r r
e∈E i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk
X
= (ℓ (w (q))−ℓ (w (q˜)))(w (q)−w (q˜)) ≥ 0.
e e e e e e
e∈E
where the last inequality follows because ℓ is strictly increasing function. Thus, we
e
have established the (6) is convex optimization problem.
Next, we analyze the KKT conditions associated with (6). Define the Lagrangian
L(q,λ,µ;p) = Φ(q,p)+X X λik(Dik − X qik)−X X X µikqik.
r r r
i∈I k∈K r∈Rk i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk
Since (6) is a convex optimization problem and the strong form of Slater’s conditions
hold as the feasible set is a product-simplex, we obtain the following first-order neces-
sary and sufficient condition of optimality:
∂L(q∗(p),λ∗,µ∗;p)
= 0 ∀ i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk, (C1)
∂qik
r
X q∗ik(p) = Dik ∀ i ∈ I,k ∈ K, (C2)
r
r∈Rk
µ∗ikq∗ik(p) = 0 ∀ i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk, (C3)
r r
µ∗ik ≥ 0,q∗ik(p) ≥ 0 ∀ i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk. (C4)
r r
Note that (C1) can be equivalently written as
∂L(q∗(p),λ∗,µ∗;p) ∂Φ(q∗(p),p)
0 = = −λik −µik = ci(q∗(p),p)−λik −µik
∂qik ∂qik r r r
r r
Additionally, using (C4) we obtain that ci(q∗(p),p) ≥ λik, for every i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈
r
Rk. Furthermore, from (C3) we obtain that if for some i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk, q∗ik > 0
r
then ci(q∗(p),p) = λik. This is precisely the conditions stated in Definition 3.1.
r
31(2) Using the first-order necessary conditions for constrained optimality, we observe that,
X X X
∂S(q†)
(cid:16) q˜ik −q†,ik(cid:17) ≥ 0 ∀ q˜∈ Q. (19)
∂qik r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk r
Similarly, it holds that
X X X
∂S(q¯†)
(cid:16) q˜ik −q¯†,ik(cid:17) ≥ 0 ∀ q˜∈ Q. (20)
∂qik r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk r
Selecting q˜ = q¯† in (19), and selecting q˜ = q† in (20) and substracting the resulting
inequality we obtain
X X X
∂S(q†)
−
∂S(q¯†)!
(cid:16) q†,ik −q¯†,ik(cid:17) ≤ 0. (21)
∂qik ∂qik r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk r r
Suppose there exists q†,q¯† ∈ Q† such that there exists e ∈ E such that w (q†) ̸= w (q¯†).
e e
Then we will show that (21) is violated.
Note that for any q ∈ Q,
∂S(q) ∂w (q) ∂w (q)
X e X e
= ℓ (w (q))+ w (q)∇ℓ (w (q))
∂qik ∂qik e e e e e ∂qik
r e∈E r e∈E r
= X1(e ∈ r)ℓ (w (q))+ X w (q)∇ℓ (w (q))1(e ∈ r).
e e e e e
e∈E e∈E
Using this, we compute the left-hand side of (21),
X X X
∂S(q†)
−
∂S(q¯†)!
(cid:16) q†,ik −q¯†,ik(cid:17)
∂qik ∂qik r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk r r
=X X X X1(e ∈ r)(ℓ (w (q†))−ℓ (w (q¯†)))(cid:16) q†,ik −q¯†,ik(cid:17)
e e e e r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rke∈E
+X X X X (w (q†)∇ℓ (w (q†))−w (q¯†)∇ℓ (w (q¯†)))1(e ∈ r)(cid:16) q†,ik −q¯†,ik(cid:17)
e e e e e e r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rke∈E
=X (ℓ (w (q†))−ℓ (w (q¯†)))X X X 1(e ∈ r)(cid:16) q†,ik −q¯†,ik(cid:17)
e e e e r r
e∈E i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk
+ X (w (q†)∇ℓ (w (q†))−w (q¯†)∇ℓ (w (q¯†)))X X X 1(e ∈ r)(cid:16) q†,ik −q¯†,ik(cid:17)
e e e e e e r r
e∈E i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk
=X (ℓ (w (q†))−ℓ (w (q¯†)))(cid:16) w (q†)−w (q¯†)(cid:17)
e e e e e e
e∈E
+ X (w (q†)∇ℓ (w (q†))−w (q¯†)∇ℓ (w (q¯†)))(cid:16) w (q†)−w (q¯†)(cid:17)
e e e e e e e e
e∈E
(cid:16) (cid:17)
NotethatP (ℓ (w (q†))−ℓ (w (q¯†))) w (q†)−w (q¯†) ≥ 0,duetothemonotonicity
e∈E e e e e e e
of latency function. Moreover, note that
X (w (q†)∇ℓ (w (q†))−w (q¯†)∇ℓ (w (q¯†)))(cid:16) w (q†)−w (q¯†)(cid:17)
e e e e e e e e
e∈E
32=X (w (q†)∇ℓ (w (q†))−w (q¯†)∇ℓ (w (q†))+w (q¯†)∇ℓ (w (q†))−w (q¯†)∇ℓ (w (q¯†)))(cid:16) w (q†)−w (q¯†)(cid:17)
e e e e e e e e e e e e e e
e∈E
=X ∇ℓ (w (q†))(w (q†)−w (q¯†))2 + X w (q¯†)(∇ℓ (w (q†))−∇ℓ (w (q¯†)))(cid:16) w (q†)−w (q¯†)(cid:17) .
e e e e e e e e e e e
e∈E e∈E
Note that P ∇ℓ (w (q†))(w (q†) − w (q¯†))2 > 0 due to the hypothesis that there
e∈E e e e e
exists at least one edge where w (q†) ̸= w (q¯†) and the fact that the latency function is
e e
(cid:16) (cid:17)
strictlyincreasing. MoreoverP w (q¯†)(∇ℓ (w (q†))−∇ℓ (w (q¯†))) w (q†)−w (q¯†) ≥
e∈E e e e e e e e
0 as ℓ (·) is assumed to be convex. Thus, we obtain
e
X X X
∂S(q†)
−
∂S(q¯†)!
(cid:16) q†,ik −q¯†,ik(cid:17) > 0,
∂qik ∂qik r r
i∈I k∈Kr∈Rk r r
which contradicts (21).
□
Proof of Proposition 4.2.
(1) First, we prove that given any optimal solution (p†,z†) of (P ), p† induces the
hom
socially optimal edge flow vector w†. Consider any optimal solution of (D ), denoted
hom
as q†. From strong duality theory, we know that (p†,z†,q†) must satisfy complementary
slackness conditions associated with the constraints in (P ) and (D ). In particular, the
hom hom
complementary slackness condition for (P )-(D ) indicates that for any i ∈ I, k ∈ K,
hom hom
and r ∈ Rk,
q†ik > 0, ⇒ z†ik = θiℓ (w†)+X (p† +g ) = θici(q†,p†).
r r e e r
e∈r
Additionally, from (P ), we have for all i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r′ ∈ Rk,
hom
z†ik ≤ θiℓ (w†)+ X (p† +g ) = θici (q†,p†).
r′ e e r′
e∈r′
Consequently,
∀i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk, q†ik > 0, ⇒ ci(q†,p†) ≤ ci (q†,p†), ∀r′ ∈ R . (22)
r r r′ k
Thatis, theflowvectorq† onlytakesrouteswiththeminimumcostgiventhesociallyoptimal
edge flow vector w†. We next prove that w† is indeed induced by q†, i.e. constraint (D )
hom.a
is tight with the optimal solution.
For notational brevity, we denote wˆ = P P P q†ik as the edge flow in-
e i∈I k∈K r∈{Rk|r∋e} r
duced by q†. Suppose for the sake of contradiction that for some non-empty subset of edges
E† ⊆ E,
∀ e ∈ E†, wˆ = X X X q†ik < w†,
e r e
i∈I k∈Kr∈{Rk|r∋e}
∀ e ∈ E\E†, wˆ = X X X q†ik = w†.
e r e
i∈I k∈Kr∈{Rk|r∋e}
33Then,
X wˆ ℓ (wˆ ) = X wˆ ℓ (wˆ )+ X wˆ ℓ (wˆ ) < X w†ℓ (w†)+ X w†ℓ (w†) = X w†ℓ (w†),
e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e e
e∈E e∈E† e∈E\E† e∈E† e∈E\E† e∈E
where the inequality is due the the fact that ℓ is a strictly increasing function. This con-
e
tradicts with the fact that w† minimizes the social cost function. Therefore, we must have
wˆ = P P P f†ik = w†, for every e ∈ E.
e i∈I k∈K r∈{Rk|r∋e} r e
Following from the fact that q† satisfies (22) and induces the socially optimal edge flow
vector w†, we can conclude that w† is an equilibrium edge flow vector induced by the flow
vector q† associated under the toll price p†. Hence, the optimal solution p† of (P ) indeed
hom
implements the socially optimal edge flow.
We now prove the other direction. Suppose that there exists a hom toll vector p˜ that
induces the socially optimal edge flow w† in equilibrium, then there exists z˜ such that (z˜,p˜)
is an optimal solution to (P ). We denote q˜ as a Nash equilibrium strategy distribution
hom
given toll p˜. Then, such q˜is a feasible solution of (D ), and (D ) holds with equality.
hom hom.a
Next, we define z˜ik = min θiℓ˜ (w†)+P (p˜ +g ). This ensures that
r∈Rk r e∈r e e
z˜ik ≤ θiℓ˜ (w†)+X (p˜ +g ), ∀k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk,i ∈ I.
r e e
e∈r
Therefore, (p˜,z˜) is a feasible solution of the primal problem (P ). Moreover, we note that
hom
(p˜,z˜,q˜) satisfies the complementary slackness condition associated with (P ) and (D ).
hom hom
Thus, (p˜,z˜) is an optimal solution to (P ) and q˜is an optimal solution to (D ).
hom hom
(2) The proof of this part follows an analogous procedure as that in part (1). We denote
an optimal solution of (P ) as (p†,z†), and an optimal solution of (D ) as q†. From the
het het
complementary slackness condition associated with (P )-(D ), we know that if q†ik > 0
het het r
for some i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r ∈ Rk, then z†ik = θiℓ˜ (w†)+P (p†i+g ) = θici(q†,p†). Moreover,
r e∈r e e r
we know that for every i ∈ I,k ∈ K,r′ ∈ Rk,
z†ik ≤ θiℓ˜ (w†)+ X (p†i +g ) = θici (q,p†),
r′ e e r′
e∈r′
which implies that ci(q†,p†) ≤ ci (q†,p†), i.e. q† sends flow on routes with the minimum cost
r r′
associated with the heterogeneous toll p† and the socially optimal edge flow w†. Moreover,
following the same procedure as that in the hom case, we can argue that q† induces the
socially optimal edge flow f† (i.e. (D ) is tight), otherwise we arrive at a contradiction
het.a
that f† is not socially optimal. Therefore, we can conclude that q† is an equilibrium strategy
distribution that induces the socially optimal (type-specific) edge flow f† given the het toll
vector p†.
On the other hand, suppose that there exists a het toll vector p˜that induces the socially
optimal edge flow w†in equilibrium, then we define z˜ik = min θiℓ (w†) + P (p˜i + g )
r∈Rk r e∈r e e
for all k ∈ K, r ∈ Rk, and i ∈ I. Analogous to the case with hom toll, we can argue that
(p˜,z˜) (resp. q˜ ) is a feasible solution of (P ) (resp. (D )), and satisfies complementary
het het
slackness conditions. Consequently, we know that (p˜,z˜) (resp. q˜) is an optimal solution of
(P ) (resp. (D )). □
het het
34B Latency function calibration
Here, we present the methodology used to compute the latency function of all freeways in
Figure 2. Recall from Section 5, we need to compute the average travel time and average flow
on every edge for every day. To achieve this goal, we utilize morning rush hour data from the
PeMSdataset,spanningfromJanuary2019toJune2019. Let’sdenotethesetofallweekdays
in this time-frame by T . For every edge e ∈ E and day t ∈ T , let’s denote the average travel
time by ℓˆt and the average edge flow by wˆt. In order to estimate these quantities, we use
e e
PeMS data during the morning rush hours H = [6am−7am,7am−8am,8am−9am,9am−
10am,10am−11am,11am−12noon]. Let S be the number of sensors fitted on edge e ∈ E
e
which provide average hourly flow and average speed information.
First, we demonstrate how to use the raw data from sensors to compute the average
travel time on every edge. We compute an estimate of the time required to travel the edge e
at hour h by accumulating the average time required to travel between sensors on that link
as follows:
ℓˆht =
S Xe−1 Ls
e , ∀ e ∈ E,h ∈ H,t ∈ T , (23)
e vsht
s=1 e
where Ls is the distance between sensor s and s+1 on edge e ∈ E and vsht is the average
e e
speed of traffic passing over the sensor s on edge e during hour h on day t. Next, we compute
the average hourly flow on an edge as follows:
PSe−1Lsw˜sht
wˆht = s=1 e e , ∀ e ∈ E,h ∈ H,t ∈ T ,
e PSe−1Ls
s=1 e
where w˜sht is the hourly average flow of traffic passing over sensor s on edge e during hour
e
h on day t. We use the hourly average edge flows wˆht and the hourly average travel times
e
ℓˆht
to compute the average travel time on any edge e ∈ E as follows:
e
P wˆhtℓˆht
ℓˆt = h∈H e e , e ∈ E,t ∈ T .
e P wˆht
h∈H e
Similarly, we compute the average of the hourly flows as follows:
1
wˆt = X wˆht, t ∈ T ,e ∈ E.
e |H| e
h∈H
C Demand computation
We outline our method for calculating the daily demand of travelers moving between various
origin-destination pairs from January 2019 to June 2019. Our approach involves three main
steps:
35Step 1: Estimating relative demand between nodes using the Safegraph dataset:
We leverage the Safegraph dataset to obtain the relative demand of travelers traveling be-
tween different nodes in the Bay Area. Specifically, the Neighborhood Patterns dataset from
Safegraph provides the average daily count of mobile devices moving between different cen-
sus block groups (CBGs) on workdays for each month. This is then aggregated over the set
of nodes after adjusting for sampling bias.
More formally, let’s denote the set of CBGs in the Bay Area by C. The SafeGraph dataset
provides the average daily count of travelers Ncc′ traveling from CBG c to c′. However, the
SafeGraph dataset exhibits sampling bias9 because different CBGs are sampled at different
rates. We correct for sampling bias in this data by modifying the counts Ncc′ using the
population data provided by the ACS. That is, we compute the corrected count of travelers
traveling from CBG c to c′ as follows
Rc P P Ncc′
N˜cc′ = Ncc′ · c∈C c′∈C ,
P Rc P Ncc′
c∈C c′∈C
where Rc is the number of residents in CBG c as reported by the ACS dataset.
Step 2: Calibrating type-specific demands with ACS dataset. Given the the ad-
justed count of travelers we compute the demand of travelers from o-d pair k ∈ K by
aggregating the demand over set of nodes as follows
D˜k
=
X X N˜cc′,
C
c∈koc′∈k
d
where k ,k ∈ N are the origin and destination nodes of the o-d pair k ∈ K. To obtain the
o d
demand in terms of units of flow we compute
D˜k Aiko
Dik = ,
P D˜k′1(k′ = k ) |H|
k′∈K o o
where Aiko is the total driving population of type i at node k as given by the ACS dataset
o
and |H| is the number of hours in morning rush hours (6 am to 12 noon).
Step 3: Incorporating daily variability with the PeMS dataset. We convert the
monthly demand estimates obtained in Step 2 into daily demand data by scaling it propor-
tional to the total daily flow from PeMS dataset. More formally, we compute the average
total edge load over all workdays from January 2019 to June 2019 as follows
1
w = X X wˆt, (24)
|T | e
t∈T e∈E
where wˆt is the average edge load on day t on edge e, which is obtained in Appendix B using
e
PeMS data. Next, to obtain the daily demand, we scale the monthly demand obtain in Step
2 as follows:
P wˆt
Dik = e∈E e ·Dik, ∀ t ∈ T ,i ∈ I,k ∈ K. (25)
t w
9as referred in https://colab.research.google.com/drive/1u15afRytJMsizySFqA2EPlXSh3KTmNTQ
36References
Adler, J. L. and Cetin, M. (2001). A direct redistribution model of congestion pricing.
Transportation research part B: methodological, 35(5):447–460.
Angelelli, E., Arsik, I., Morandi, V., Savelsbergh, M., and Speranza, M. G. (2016). Proactive
routeguidance toavoid congestion. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 94:1–
21.
Angelelli, E., Morandi, V., Savelsbergh, M., and Speranza, M. G. (2021). System optimal
routing of traffic flows with user constraints using linear programming. European journal
of operational research, 293(3):863–879.
Arnott, R. and Small, K. (1994). The economics of traffic congestion. American scientist,
82(5):446–455.
Athira, I., Muneera, C., Krishnamurthy, K., and Anjaneyulu, M. (2016). Estimation of value
of travel time for work trips. Transportation Research Procedia, 17:116–123. International
Conference on Transportation Planning and Implementation Methodologies for Develop-
ing Countries (12th TPMDC) Selected Proceedings, IIT Bombay, Mumbai, India, 10-12
December 2014.
Bai, L., Hearn, D. W., and Lawphongpanich, S. (2004). Decomposition techniques for the
minimum toll revenue problem. Networks: An International Journal, 44(2):142–150.
Bai, L., Hearn, D. W., and Lawphongpanich, S. (2010). A heuristic method for the minimum
toll booth problem. Journal of Global Optimization, 48(4):533–548.
Bai, L. and Rubin, P. A. (2009). Combinatorial benders cuts for the minimum tollbooth
problem. Operations research, 57(6):1510–1522.
Barnes, I. C., Frick, K. T., Deakin, E., and Skabardonis, A. (2012). Impact of peak and
off-peak tolls on traffic in san francisco–oakland bay bridge corridor in california. Trans-
portation research record, 2297(1):73–79.
Beckmann, M., McGuire, C. B., and Winsten, C. B. (1956). Studies in the economics of
transportation. Technical report.
Bergendorff, P., Hearn, D. W., and Ramana, M. V. (1997). Congestion toll pricing of traffic
networks. Springer.
Bernstein, D. (1993). Congestion pricing with tolls and subsidies. In Pacific Rim TransTech
Conference—Volume II: International Ties, Management Systems, Propulsion Technology,
Strategic Highway Research Program, pages 145–151. ASCE.
Bonifaci, V., Salek, M., and Sch¨afer, G. (2011). Efficiency of restricted tolls in non-atomic
network routing games. In Algorithmic Game Theory: 4th International Symposium,
SAGT 2011, Amalfi, Italy, October 17-19, 2011. Proceedings 4, pages 302–313. Springer.
37Brotcorne, L., Labb´e, M., Marcotte, P., and Savard, G. (2001). A bilevel model for toll opti-
mizationonamulticommoditytransportationnetwork. Transportation science, 35(4):345–
358.
Brown, P. N. and Marden, J. R. (2016). A study on price-discrimination for robust social
coordination. In 2016 American Control Conference (ACC), pages 1699–1704. IEEE.
Cole, R., Dodis, Y., and Roughgarden, T. (2003). Pricing network edges for heterogeneous
selfish users. In Proceedings of the thirty-fifth annual ACM symposium on Theory of
computing, pages 521–530.
Colini-Baldeschi, R., Cominetti, R., Mertikopoulos, P., and Scarsini, M. (2020). When is
selfish routing bad? the price of anarchy in light and heavy traffic. Operations Research,
68(2):411–434.
Cominetti, R., Dose, V., and Scarsini, M. (2021). The price of anarchy in routing games as
a function of the demand. Mathematical Programming, pages 1–28.
Craik, L. and Balakrishnan, H. (2023). Equity impacts of the london congestion charging
scheme: an empirical evaluation using synthetic control methods. Transportation research
record, 2677(5):1017–1029.
Depillis, L., Lieberman, R., and Chapman, C. (2023). How the costs of car ownership add
up.
Dial, R. B. (2000). Minimal-revenue congestion pricing part ii: An efficient algorithm for
the general case. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 34(8):645–665.
DOT, U. (2008). Income-Based Equity Impacts of Congestion Pricing.
Ekstro¨m, J., Engelson, L., and Rydergren, C. (2009). Heuristic algorithms for a second-best
congestion pricing problem. NETNOMICS: Economic Research and Electronic Network-
ing, 10:85–102.
Eliasson, J. (2001). Road pricing with limited information and heterogeneous users: A
successful case. The annals of regional science, 35:595–604.
Eliasson, J. and Mattsson, L.-G. (2006). Equity effects of congestion pricing: quantitative
methodology and a case study for stockholm. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and
Practice, 40(7):602–620.
Feng, R., Zhang, H., Shi, B., Zhong, Q., and Yao, B. (2023). Collaborative road pricing
strategy for heterogeneous vehicles considering emission constraints. Journal of Cleaner
Production, 429:139561.
Ferrari, P. (2002). Road network toll pricing and social welfare. Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological, 36(5):471–483.
38Fleischer, L., Jain, K., andMahdian, M.(2004). Tollsforheterogeneousselfishusersinmulti-
commodity networks and generalized congestion games. In 45th Annual IEEE Symposium
on Foundations of Computer Science, pages 277–285. IEEE.
Frick, K. T., Heminger, S., and Dittmar, H. (1996). Bay bridge congestion-pricing project:
Lessons learned to date. Transportation Research Record, 1558(1):29–38.
Gonzales, E. J. and Christofa, E. (2015). Empirical assessment of bottleneck congestion
with a constant and peak toll: San francisco–oakland bay bridge. EURO Journal on
Transportation and Logistics, 3(3):267–288.
Goodwin, P. (1990). How to make road pricing popular. Economic Affairs, 10(5):6–7.
Gunn, H. (2001). Spatial and temporal transferability of relationships between travel de-
mand, trip cost and travel time. Transportation Research Part E: Logistics and Trans-
portation Review, 37(2-3):163–189.
Guo, X. and Yang, H. (2010). Pareto-improving congestion pricing and revenue refunding
with multiple user classes. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 44(8-9):972–
982.
Han, L., Peng, C., and Xu, Z. (2022). The effect of commuting time on quality of life:
evidence from china. International journal of environmental research and public health,
20(1):573.
Harks, T., Kleinert, I., Klimm, M., and Mo¨hring, R. H. (2015). Computing network tolls
with support constraints. Networks, 65(3):262–285.
Hearn, D. W. and Ramana, M. V. (1998). Solving congestion toll pricing models. Springer.
Hoefer, M., Olbrich, L., and Skopalik, A. (2008). Taxing subnetworks. In International
workshop on internet and network economics, pages 286–294. Springer.
Jahn, O., M¨ohring, R. H., Schulz, A. S., and Stier-Moses, N. E. (2005). System-optimal
routing of traffic flows with user constraints in networks with congestion. Operations
research, 53(4):600–616.
Jalota, D., Solovey, K., Gopalakrishnan, K., Zoepf, S., Balakrishnan, H., and Pavone, M.
(2021). When efficiency meets equity in congestion pricing and revenue refunding schemes.
In Equity and Access in Algorithms, Mechanisms, and Optimization, pages 1–11.
Jalota, D., Solovey, K., Tsao, M., Zoepf, S., and Pavone, M. (2023). Balancing fairness and
efficiency in traffic routing via interpolated traffic assignment. Autonomous Agents and
Multi-Agent Systems, 37(2):32.
Kalashnikov, V. V., Herrera Maldonado, R. C., Camacho-Vallejo, J.-F., and Kalashnykova,
N. I. (2016). A heuristic algorithm solving bilevel toll optimization problems. The Inter-
national Journal of Logistics Management, 27(1):31–51.
39Karakostas, G. and Kolliopoulos, S. G. (2004). Edge pricing of multicommodity networks
for heterogeneous selfish users. In FOCS, volume 4, pages 268–276.
Labb´e, M., Marcotte, P., and Savard, G. (1998). A bilevel model of taxation and its appli-
cation to optimal highway pricing. Management science, 44(12-part-1):1608–1622.
Larsson, T. and Patriksson, M. (1998). Side constrained traffic equilibrium models—traffic
management through link tolls. In Equilibrium and advanced transportation modelling,
pages 125–151. Springer.
Lawphongpanich, S.andHearn, D.W.(2004). Anmpecapproachtosecond-besttollpricing.
Mathematical programming, 101(1):33–55.
Lawphongpanich, S. and Yin, Y. (2007). Pareto-improving congestion pricing for general
road networks. Technique Report. Gainesville, FL: Department of industrial and System
Engineering, University of Florida.
Lawphongpanich, S.andYin, Y.(2010). Solvingthepareto-improvingtollproblemviamani-
fold suboptimization. Transportation Research Part C: Emerging Technologies, 18(2):234–
246.
Lazar, D. A. and Pedarsani, R. (2020). Optimal tolling for multitype mixed autonomous
traffic networks. IEEE Control Systems Letters, 5(5):1849–1854.
Lazar, D.A.andPedarsani, R.(2021). Theroleofdifferentiationintollingoftrafficnetworks
with mixed autonomy. arXiv preprint arXiv:2103.13553.
LeBeau, P. (2019). Traffic jams cost us $87 billion in lost productivity in 2018, and boston
and dc have the nation’s worst.
Lim, A. C. (2002). Transportation network design problems: An MPEC approach. The Johns
Hopkins University.
Liu, J. (2020). Commuters in this city spend 119 hours a year stuck in traffic.
Manual, T. A. (1964). For application with a large, high speed computer.
Mehr, N. and Horowitz, R. (2019). Pricing traffic networks with mixed vehicle autonomy.
In 2019 American Control Conference (ACC), pages 2676–2682. IEEE.
Meunier, D. and Quinet, E. (2015). Value of time estimations in cost benefit analysis: the
french experience. Transportation Research Procedia, 8:62–71.
Nakamura, K. and Kockelman, K. M. (2002). Congestion pricing and roadspace rationing:
an application to the san francisco bay bridge corridor. Transportation Research Part A:
Policy and Practice, 36(5):403–417.
O’Hare, S. J., Connors, R. D., and Watling, D. P. (2016). Mechanisms that govern how the
price of anarchy varies with travel demand. Transportation Research Part B: Methodolog-
ical, 84:55–80.
40Palmquist, R., Phaneuf, D., and Smith, V. K. (2007). Measuring the values for time.
Patriksson, M. and Rockafellar, R. T. (2002). A mathematical model and descent algorithm
for bilevel traffic management. Transportation Science, 36(3):271–291.
Percoco, M. (2015). Heterogeneity in the reaction of traffic flows to road pricing: a synthetic
control approach applied to milan. Transportation, 42:1063–1079.
Phang, S.-Y. and Toh, R. S. (2004). Road congestion pricing in singapore: 1975 to 2003.
Transportation Journal, pages 16–25.
Pigou, A. C. (1912). Wealth and welfare. Macmillan and Company, limited.
Roughgarden, T. (2010). Algorithmic game theory. Communications of the ACM, 53(7):78–
86.
Sheffi, Y. (1984). Urban Transportation Networks: Equilibrium Analysis With Mathematical
Programming Methods.
Small, K.A.(1992). Usingtherevenuesfromcongestionpricing. Transportation, 19:359–381.
Smith, M. (1979). The marginal cost taxation of a transportation network. Transportation
Research Part B: Methodological, 13(3):237–242.
Song, Z., Yin, Y., and Lawphongpanich, S. (2009). Nonnegative pareto-improving tolls with
multiclass network equilibria. Transportation Research Record, 2091(1):70–78.
Thomas, T. C. and Thompson, G. I. (1970). The value of time for commuting motorists as a
function of their income level and amount of time saved. Highway Research Record, (314).
Verhoef, E. T. (2002). Second-best congestion pricing in general networks. heuristic algo-
rithms for finding second-best optimal toll levels and toll points. Transportation Research
Part B: Methodological, 36(8):707–729.
Waters, W. G. (1994). The value of travel time savings and the link with income: implica-
tions for public project evaluation. International Journal of Transport Economics/Rivista
internazionale di economia dei trasporti, pages 243–253.
Yang, H. and Huang, H.-J. (2004). The multi-class, multi-criteria traffic network equilibrium
and systems optimum problem. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological, 38(1):1–
15.
Yang, H. and Lam, W. H. (1996). Optimal road tolls under conditions of queueing and
congestion. Transportation Research Part A: Policy and Practice, 30(5):319–332.
Yildirim, M. B. and Hearn, D. W. (2005). A first best toll pricing framework for variable
demand traffic assignment problems. Transportation Research Part B: Methodological,
39(8):659–678.
41Youn, H., Gastner, M.T., andJeong, H.(2008). Priceofanarchyintransportationnetworks:
efficiency and optimality control. Physical review letters, 101(12):128701.
Zhang, K. and Batterman, S. (2013). Air pollution and health risks due to vehicle traffic.
Science of the total Environment, 450:307–316.
Zhang, L., Du, H., and Lee, L. (2011). Congestion pricing study of san francisco–oakland
bay bridge in california. Transportation research record, 2221(1):83–95.
42