Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in
Billboard Advertisement ⋆
Dildar Ali, Suman Banerjee, and Yamuna Prasad
Department of Computer Science and Engineering,
Indian Institute of Technology Jammu, Jammu & Kashmir 181221, India.
{2021rcs2009,suman.banerjee,yamuna.prasad} @iitjammu.ac.in
Abstract. Creating and maximizing influence among the customers is
one of the central goals of an advertiser, and hence, remains an active
areaofresearchinrecenttimes.Inthisadvertisementtechnique,thead-
vertisers approach an influence provider for a specific number of views
of their content on a payment basis. Now, if the influence provider can
provide the required number of views or more, he will receive the full,
else a partial payment. In the context of an influence provider, it is a
lossforhimifheoffersmoreorlessviews.Thisisformalizedas‘Regret’,
and naturally, in the context of the influence provider, the goal will be
to minimize this quantity. In this paper, we solve this problem in the
contextofbillboardadvertisementandposeitasadiscreteoptimization
problem. We propose four efficient solution approaches for this prob-
lem and analyze them to understand their time and space complexity.
We implement all thesolution methodologies withreal-life datasets and
comparetheobtainedresultswiththeexistingsolutionapproachesfrom
theliterature.Weobservethattheproposedsolutionsleadtolessregret
while taking less computational time.
Keywords: Out-of-home Advertisement · Regret Minimization · Influ-
ence Provider · Advertisers · Discrete Optimization.
1 Introduction
Inrecenttimes,Outdooradvertisinghasemergedasa29billion-dollarindustry,
and every year it is increasing by 3% to 4% 1. Several outdoor advertisement
approaches exist, such as billboards, public transportation systems, etc. and at
least 74% of its growth comes from billboard advertisements. Billboard adver-
tisementhasemergedasaneffectiveapproachfortheout-of-homeadvertisement
technique. In this advertisement technique, display boards (e.g., billboards) are
placed in popular locations (e.g., Mall, Park, Cafeteria, Side of Highways, etc.),
⋆ TheworkofSumanBanerjeeissupportedbytheSeedGrant(SGT-100047)provided
by the Indian Institute of Technology Jammu, India. A very preliminary version of
this paper has appeared as a student abstract in 37th AAAI Conference on
Artificial Intelligence (AAAI 2023)[3].
1 https://www.marketing-interactive.com/ooh-advertising-spend-to-soar-to-us33-billion-by-2021/
4202
naJ
92
]RI.sc[
1v46461.1042:viXra2 Ali et al.
andanE-Commercecompanydisplaysadvertisementcontent(i.e.,image,video,
animation, etc.) to ingrain it to the people’s mind. It is reported that 80% of
the people look at the display content while driving2. From a recent market
survey, it is known that in billboard advertisement, the investment of return is
65% more compared to other advertisement techniques 3. Also, a recent study
by Zhang et al. [39] shows that more than 50% of travelers are impressed by at
least five billboards on each trip. Recently, billboards have become digital and
are available to the e-commerce house slot-wise.
Now,itisanessentialquestionofhowtoquantifytheinfluenceofabillboard
slot or a given set of billboard slots. In the consumer behavior literature, it has
been reported that if a traveler sees an advertisement several times then it is
highly unlikely that they will take any action [11,12,16,23,25]. As an example
if the advertisement is for a product then the action may be as follows: the
traveler may purchase the item or influence others regarding the product. Also,
some evidence shows an S-like function should measure the repetition of any
advertisement content [10,19,21,24]. The influence of billboard slots is less when
thenumberofviewsonthatbillboardslotsisless,andtheinfluencewillincrease
dramatically upon seeing more. However, when the same advertisement content
isshownmoreoften,theeffectofadditionalimpressionswilldeclineastheextra
informationdiminishes.Also,themarketingliteraturehasreportedthataperson
sees at least five billboards in a trip [39]. It is feasible for an influence provider
to rent multiple billboard slots (possibly in different billboards) to ingrain the
content in the traveler’s mind. In many existing studies, the basic triggering
model has been used to compute the influence [1,2,18,28,37]. So, one important
point to highlight here is that to compute the influence of a billboard slot (or
a set of billboard slots) we need the information about the traveler’s location
(which is called as trajectory database) and information about the billboards
(e.g., location, cost, etc. and this is known as billboard database).
In billboard advertisement technique, the billboards belong to an influence
provider, and several advertisers approach the influence provider to obtain the
requiredamountofinfluenceonapaymentbasis.Theinfluenceproviderallocates
billboard slots to the advertisers based on the payment and influence demand.
The payment model follows: “The E-Commerce house will pay the quoted price
if the quoted influence demand (or more) is satisfied, else a partial payment on
apro-ratabasiswillbemade”.Now,iftheinfluenceproviderallocatesbillboard
slots that lead to more influence than the quoted influence, this is a loss for the
influenceprovider.Thereasonhereisthat,firstofall,thereisnoextraincentive
fortheextrainfluence.Secondly,thebillboardslotsthatcausetheextrainfluence
may be allocated to one of the advertisers whose quoted influence is unsatisfied.
Asthequotedinfluenceofthatadvertiserisnotsatisfied,thisadvertiserwillnot
make the full payment to the influence provider. This loss is formally quantified
in terms of regret. This regret can be of two types:
2 http://www.runningboards.com.au/outdoor/relocatable-billboards
3 https://topmediadvertising.co.uk/billboard-advertising-statistics/Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 3
– The first kind of regret is formalized as excessive regret when an extra influ-
ence is provided to the advertiser rather than the quoted influence.
– The second kind of regret is formalized as unsatisfied regret when less influ-
ence is provided.
Several studies in the literature in the context of billboard advertisement tech-
niques exist. In most of the studies, the problem that has been considered is
locating the influential locations to place the billboards or finding out a lim-
ited number of influential billboard slots [18,28,37,38,39]. However, in practice,
there exist multiple advertisers. We are surprised to see a very limited amount
of literature exists in the multiple advertiser setting. In particular, in the pres-
ence of multiple advertisers, the problem becomes more challenging. Next, we
summarize our contributions to this regret minimization problem.
Our Contribution In this paper, we make the following contributions:
– We study the Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Adver-
tisement Problem in multi-advertiser settings for which the literature is
very limited.
– We propose four efficient heuristic solutions: Effective Allocation Policy, Ef-
fective Advertiser Driven One-by-One Exchange Policy, Effective Billboard
Driven One-by-One Exchange Policy and Effective Billboard Driven One-
by-Two Exchange Policy.
– We perform an extensive set of experiments in real-world datasets and com-
paretheperformanceoftheproposedallocationstrategieswiththeavailable
methods in the literature.
Organization of the Paper The subsequent sections of the paper are struc-
tured in the following manner: Firstly, in Section 2, we explore the existing
literature related to our problem. Section 3 provides an overview of the con-
textandformallydefinestheproblem.Section4discussestheproposedsolution
approachesforsolvingtheproblem.Section5comprehensivelydescribestheex-
perimental setup and the required parameters. Section 6 discusses the observa-
tionsoftheproposedapproachesoverdifferentdatasetsandparametersettings.
Lastly, Section 7 serves as the final part of our study and provides suggestions
for future research.
2 Related Work
As mentioned previously, our study comes under the umbrella of outdoor ad-
vertisement. Our literature survey is categorized into four major categories: (1)
Influential Site Selection, (2) Trajectory Driven Influence Maximization, (3) In-
fluential Billboard Selection, and (4) Regret Minimization. First, we start with
influential site selection problems.4 Ali et al.
2.1 Influential Site Selection
In the past few years, influential site or zone selection problems have gained the
attentionofresearchersduetotheirvastapplicationareas.Inthisdirection,Ca-
bello et al. [7,6] introduce facility location problems to find the most influential
place or sites and introduce three optimization problems. They propose an ap-
proachbasedonEuclideandistancetoaddresstheissueoflocatingalldatapoints
in a dataset with a given query point as their closest neighbor. Next, Stanoi et
al. studied the problem of finding the RNN, and they showed how the finding
of the influential set can be reduced to the nearest neighbor and range queries;
theyproposedasolutioninwhichtheR-Treeiscalledmultipletimes,andthisis
thedrawbackoftheirwork.Toovercomethisdrawback,Xiaetal.[31]introduce
a problem of finding the top-t most influential sites from a given spatial region.
They propose a new metric to prune less influential areas and an efficient algo-
rithm to solve the problem. Cabello et al. [6] find the location in which placing
aservicesiteguaranteesthevisitofamaximumnumberofcustomers.However,
a customer can visit k places for multiple product requirements. So, Zhou et
al.[42] extended the MaxBRNN problem to the MaxBRKNN and proposed an
efficient solution, the ‘Maxfirst’, by partitioning regions into different quadrants
to solve this. Next, Wang et al. [29] studied a more generalized problem where
the goal is to place several new facilities to maximize a score. This score can be
defined as profit or influence given by the placed object. They proposed a solu-
tion methodology called PRIME-LS, which considers mobility and probability
of movement factors into consideration. Further, they improved the proposed
solution approach by incorporating two different optimization strategies. Later,
Huang et al. [14] studied the problem of the most influential location selection
problemandintroducedanewtypeoffacilityquery.Theyproposedtwopruning
techniquestoreducethesearchspaceregionandefficientlyprocessthequery.An
extensivesetofexperimentswithrealandsyntheticdatasetsshowstheefficiency
of their proposed solutions.
2.2 Trajectory Driven Influence Maximization
Duetotherecentadvancementofwirelessinternetandhandheldmobiledevices,
tracking of locations of moving objects become easier. Hence, several trajectory
datasets are publicly available [41,26]. Zhang et al. [35] studied the problem of
transit advertisement where the goal is to select Top-k bus routes such that the
targeted influence is maximized. They proposed a framework that captures the
mobility pattern of the passengers and the characteristics of bus stops. Guo et
al.[13] studied the influence maximization problem using trajectory databases.
They identify the k most optimal trajectories for associating with a specific ad-
vertisementtomaximizetheanticipatedinfluenceamongalargeaudience.They
propose three upper-bound estimation techniques to speed up the processing
time. They also presented a greedy approach that guarantees an approximation
ratio of (1− 1) and a cluster-based technique that further improves the greedy
e
approach. Next, Wang et al. [30] studied a new query to find the capacity andTowards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 5
route planning. Their main goal is to find an optimal route from the starting
point to the endpoint to attract the maximum number of passengers according
to the predefined travel distance. In social network analysis, Cai et al. [8] stud-
ied the problem of influence maximization in social networks and used mobile
crowdsource data from location-based social network services. They proposed a
network and propagation models for social networks and considered the phys-
ical world. Further, Cai et al. [9] study a survey on influence maximization in
online(e.g.,socialnetwork)andoffline(e.g.,billboard)advertisements.Theyana-
lyzetheexistinglocation-driveninfluencemaximizationworksandclassifythem
into different categories. Next, Zhang et al. [36] studied the problem of finding
a set of locations within a budget constraint such that it achieves the maximum
user reach. They proposed a deterministic algorithm over a simple greedy ap-
proach and a learning-based variant, ‘NN-Sower’, to improve efficiency further.
Theirexhaustiveexperimentsoverreal-worlddatasetsshowtheeffectivenessand
efficiency of the proposed methods.
2.3 Influential Billboard Selection
Recently, several studies have been done in the context of trajectory-driven bill-
board advertisements. Zhang et al. [38] studied the trajectory-driven influential
billboard placement problem where a set of billboards, location, and cost are
given. The goal here is to choose a subset of the billboards within the budget
that influence the largest number of trajectories. Later, Wang et al. [27] studied
the problem of the Targeted Outdoor Advertising Recommendation (TOAR)
problem considering the facts of user-profiles and advertisement topics. Their
main contribution was a targeted influence model that characterizes the ad-
vertising influence spread along with user mobility. Based on the divide and
conquer approach, they developed two solution strategies. Implementation with
real-worlddatasetsshowstheefficiencyandeffectivenessoftheproposedsolution
approaches. Later, Liu et al. [17] performed visual data analytics of large-scale
taxi trajectories to place billboards. Wang et al. [28] studied the problem of
selecting k influential billboards using trajectory data to empower audience-
targeted billboard advertising. They proposed a noble method to quantify the
influence by integrating traffic conditions, speed, etc., and semantic advertise-
ment topics. As this problem is a large-scale combinatorial optimization prob-
lem, they employed the popular divide-and-conquer approach and proposed a
utility-driven optimal searching approach. Zhang et al. [39] studied the prob-
lemofoptimizingimpressioncountwheregivenabillboarddatabase,trajectory
database, and budget, the goal is to select a subset of k billboard slots within
the budget that has the maximum influence. Zahradka et al. [34] did a case
study analysis of the cost of billboard advertising in the different regions of the
Czech Republic. Recently, Ali et al. [1,2,4] studied the problem of finding Top-k
influential billboard slots and proposed a submodularity graph-based pruning
technique to prune less influential billboard slots. Further, they extended their
work for the same problem and proposed three spatial clustering-based solution6 Ali et al.
methodologies. An extensive set of experiments shows the effectiveness of their
proposed approaches.
2.4 Regret Minimization
Thereareseveralstudiesonregretminimizationindatabasequeryoptimization.
The k-regret queries, which handle decision-making based on several factors,
were studied [20,22,33] as a step towards database query optimization. Their
approach aims to get around the problems with both the top-k query and sky-
line queries. The top-k query needs an exact utility function from the user, and
the skyline query can’t control the size of the result. The purpose of a k-regret
query is to choose k tuples from a specified database so that, regardless of the
exact utility function used, the utility of the user’s preferred tuple among these
k selections is only slightly less than the usefulness of their preferred tuple in
the entire database. Next, Xie et al. [32] represent a simple framework for in-
teractive regret minimization and find the most favorable tuple in the database.
They proposed two solutions with asymptotically optimal interactions with 2-
dimensional space and two with theoretical guarantee in a d-dimensional space
where each dimension corresponds to an attribute in a tuple in the database.
Later, Aslay et al. [5] introduce a new domain of allocating social network users
totheadvertisertominimizethetotalregretofaninfluenceprovider.Theyhave
proposedagreedyapproachwithanupperboundontheregret.Theirreal-world
datasetsexperimentationshowsthescalabilityandqualityofthesolutionscom-
pared to the baseline methods. There are few studies in the context of billboard
advertising that consider the minimization of regret that is caused by provid-
ing influence to the advertiser. In this direction, Zhang et al. [40] studied the
problem of regret minimization in billboard advertisements and proposed sev-
eral solution methodologies. Experimentation with real-world datasets showed
theefficiencyoftheproposedsolutionmethodologies.Further,Alietal.[3]intro-
duce a problem of regret minimization of an influence provider in the billboard
advertisement. They present an efficient algorithm tominimize the regret under
a multi-advertiser setting.
3 Background and Problem Definition
In this section, we describe the background and formally define our problem.
Consider ℓ number of billboards B ={b ,b ,...,b } are placed at different loca-
1 2 ℓ
tionsofacity.Eachbillboardb ∈Brunsfortheduration[T ,T ].Asmentioned
i 1 2
previously,digitalbillboardsareleasedbytheE-Commercehouseforafixedtime
slot. For simplicity, we assume that all the billboards’ slots have the same du-
ration, and ∆ denotes it. We call each ∆ duration as a billboard slot. Now, we
formally state what a billboard slot is in Definition 1.
Definition 1 (BillboardSlot).Abillboardslotisdefinedasatupleofthefrom
(b i,[t,t+∆])whereb
i
∈B andt∈{T 1,T 1+∆+1,T 1+2∆+1,...,T2 ∆−T1−∆+1}.Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 7
Given a set of billboards B and the working duration [T ,T ], we denote the
1 2
set of all the billboard slots as BS. Given a subset of billboard slots, we aim to
calculateitsinfluence.First,wehavedefinedtrajectoryandbillboarddatabases,
which are stated in Definition 2 and 3, respectively.
Definition 2 (Trajectory Database). A trajectory D contains location in-
formation about a number of persons and each tuple of the following form:
< P id, L id,time stamp > which signifies that person with the id P id was
there at the location with the id L id at the time stamp.
Definition 3 (Billboard Database). A billboard database contains billboard
information, including their location, slot duration, cost, and so on. So, each
tupleofthisdatabasewillbeofthefollowingform:<B id, L id,Slot Duration,
Slot Cost>.
Given the information about trajectory and billboard database, for a given
subset of billboard slots S ⊆ BS, we denote its influence as I(S) and can be
computedindifferentways.Inthisstudy,weconsidertheinfluenceishappening
by the rule of triggering model [15].
Definition 4 (InfluenceofBillboardSlots).Givenasubsetofbillboardslots
S, a trajectory database D, and the influence of S under the triggering model
can be computed using the following equation
(cid:88) (cid:89)
I(S)= 1− (1−Pr(bs ,t )) (1)
i j
tj∈D bsi∈BS
where Pr(bs ,t ) denotes the influence probability of the billboard slot bs on the
i j i
trajectory t .
j
Inthisstudy,weassumethatforallbs ∈BSandt ∈D,thevalueofPr(bs ,t )
i j i j
is known. However, there are standard methods to calculate this value [1,38,40].
ConsidertherearenadvertiserA={a ,a ,...,a }andoneinfluenceprovider
1 2 n
X. Each advertiser a ∈ A submits a campaign proposal to X as follows: “The
i
advertiser a want an influence of amount σ based on payment u .” The influ-
i i i
ence provider X has the advertiser database A whose content are the tuples of
the form (a ,σ ,u ) for all i = 1,...,n. Now, for any advertiser, the payment
i i i
ruleisasfollows:iftheinfluenceprovidedtoa ∈Aismorethanorequaltoσ ,
i i
then the payment of amount u will be made by a else a partial payment (e.g.,
i i
pro-rata basis which will be lesser than the u ). Now, there are a few important
i
points to highlight.
– Thefirstoneisforanyadvertiser,iftheinfluenceprovidedbyX islessthan
what is expected, then this is a loss for X because a partial payment will be
received. We call this regret as the Unsatisfied Regret.
– On the other hand, if X provides more influence than expected, that also
leadstoalossforX.Thereasonisasfollows.Assumethatforanadvertiser
a , the billboard slots that are allocated is S by the influence provider X.
i i8 Ali et al.
Now,ifI(S )>σ ,thenX doesnotgetanyextraincentivefortheexcessive
i i
influenceamount(I(S )−σ ).Also,asubsetofbillboardslotsfromS maybe
i i i
allocated to the other advertisers, which may help them reach the required
influence. We call this kind of regret the Excessive Regret.
Combining the above-mentioned two cases, we define the regret model in Defi-
nition 5.
Definition 5 (TheRegretModel).Foranyadvertisera ∈Aiftheallocated
i
billboard slots S by X then the associated regret with this allocation is denoted
i
by R(S ) can be given by the following conditional equation:
i
(cid:40)
u ·(1−γ· I(Si)), if σ >I(S )
R(S i)= ui
·
I(Si)−σi,σi othei
rwise
i
i σi
Here,thefraction I(Si) ispartofthesatisfiedinfluence,andtheγ isaparameter
σi
that is called the penalty ratio due to the unsatisfied demand. The developed
solution methodologies are independent of the choice of γ, which has been ex-
plainedfurtherinSection5ofthispaper.So,fromtheinfluenceprovider’spoint
ofview,thegoalistofindabillboardslotallocationplantominimizetheoverall
regret. Consider Y = {S ,S ,...,S } is an allocation of billboard slots to the
1 2 n
advertisers. Now, we define the total regret associated with this allocation.
Definition 6 (Total Regret Associated with an allocation). Given an al-
locationofthebillboardslotsY ={S ,S ,...,S }thetotalregretassociatedwith
1 2 n
the allocation Y is denoted by R(Y) defined as the sum of the regret associated
with the individual advertisers.
(cid:88)
R(Y)= R(S ) (2)
i
Si∈Y
We denote an optimal allocation of the billboard slots by YOPT. From the
influence providers’ point of view, the goal will be to find an optimal allocation,
i.e., an allocation that minimizes the total regret. We call this problem the
RegretMinimizationinBillboardAdvertisementProblem.Weformally
state this problem in Definition 7.
Definition 7 (Regret Minimization in Billboard Advertisement Prob-
lem). Given the billboard slot information BS, a trajectory database D, and
the advertiser database A, the goal of this problem is to create an allocation
Y = {S ,S ,...,S } in which the set of billboard slots S are allocated to the
1 2 n i
advertiser a such that the total regret is minimized and for one billboard slot
i
is allotted to only one advertiser. Mathematically, this problem can be posed as
follows:
YOPT =argmin R(Y ) (3)
i
Yi∈L(Y)
Here, the constraint is for all S , S and they need to be disjoint i.e. S ∩S =∅.
i j i jTowards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 9
From the computational point of view, this problem can be written as follows:
Regret Minimization in Billboard Advertisement Problem
Input: The Set of Billboard Slots BS, The Influence Function I(), The
Trajectory Database D, Advertiser Database A.
Problem: Find out an optimal allocation YOPT ={S ,S ,...,S } of the
1 2 n
billboard slots that minimizes the overall regret.
Definition 8 (Effective Split of Billboard Slots). Given the billboard slot
information
BS′
and
BS′′
, a split is said to be an effective split if an allocation
′′ ′′ ′′
Y from BS where BS ⊆ BS and Y = {S ,S ,...,S } in which the set of
3 3 1 2 n
billboard slots S are allocated to the advertiser a such that the total regret R(Y)
i i
is minimized. Mathematically, it can be written as follows:
YES = argmin R(Y) (4)
Y∈BS′∪BS′′
3
′′ ′′
Here, BS is divided into three parts in the tree fashion. At first, BS is di-
′′ ′′
videdintotwopartswherethefirstoneBS ,consists[(1/3)*lengthofBS ]and
1
′′ ′′
the second one BS , consists [(2/3)* length of BS ] many number of billboard
f
′′ ′′
slots. Again BS is divided into two parts in the same way named BS , and
f 2
′′ ′′ ′′
BS . Now, we can say that BS contains maximum influential, BS is medium
3 1 2
′′
influential, and BS is less influential billboard slots as they are already sorted
3
′′
as per influence in descending order. This BS is further used in Algorithm 3
3
and Algorithm 4.
The following hardness of approximation result of the regret minimization
problem in the context of billboard advertisement has been mentioned in [40].
Theorem 1. The Regret Minimization Problem in Billboard Advertisement is
NP-hard and NP-hard to approximate within any constant factor.
Thisnegativeresultmotivatesthedevelopmentofefficientheuristicsolutions
for this problem. There are a few heuristic solutions proposed by Zhang et al.
[40]. This paper describes four heuristic solutions that dominate the existing
solution methodologies in the literature.
4 Proposed Solution Approaches
Considering hardness,the Regret Minimizationproblem says thatefficientalgo-
rithms w.r.t to optimal regret do not exist unless P = NP. In this section, we
propose four solution methodologies. The first is the Effective Allocation of the
billboard slots to the advertisers. Now, we describe this solution methodology.10 Ali et al.
4.1 Effective Allocation Policy (EA)
In this section, we discuss the Effective Allocation policy of the billboard slots
totheadvertisers.Atfirst,wesorttheadvertisersbasedonbudgetoverdemand
andsubsequentlycomputetheinfluenceofeachbillboardslot.Next,sortedslots
based on ‘payment per unit influence’ are allocated simultaneously as long as
they reach the advertiser’s influence demand. It will ensure that all ideal bill-
board slots should not be assigned to the few most budget-effective advertisers,
and low-budget-effective advertisers are still unsatisfied or only get less influen-
tial billboard slots. During allocation, when a billboard slot satisfies the con-
dition (demand < supply), then we will not allocate that billboard slot to the
advertiser.
Before further describing this procedure, we define the marginal regret of a
billboard slot in Definition 9.
Definition 9 (MarginalRegretofaBilloardSlot).Givenasetofbillboard
slotsS andabillboardslotb∈BS\S,themarginalregretofthisslotisdefinedas
thedifferencebetweenregretvaluewhenbisnotincludedandwhenitisincluded.
Mathematically, this has been mentioned in Equation 5.
R(b|S)=R(S)−R(S∪{b}) (5)
Consider, S′ is the set of billboard slots allocated so far and S′′ = BS\S′
i i
be the remaining billboard slots. Now, we compute the value of I(S′) using
i
Equation 1 and from this it is easy to observe that I(S′)≤ (cid:80) I(s).
i
s∈S′
i
So,wekeeponputtingthebillboardslotsintoS′ basedonmaximummarginal
i
regret using Equation 6 to obtain S′ such that I(S′) ≥ σ . As long as unallo-
i i i
cated billboard slots are available, we repeat this process for all the advertisers
onebyone.Now,weconsidertheratioofthemarginalregretandtheindividual
influence of the billboard slot.
R(S)−R(S∪{b})
b∗ ←−argmax (6)
I(b)
b∈BS\S′
i
Complexity Analysis. We analyze this algorithm to understand its time and
space requirements. In Line No. 1 initializing all the S together will take O(n)
i
time. Now, in Line No. 2 to 4 for all the advertisers, computing their payment
perunitinfluencewilltakeO(n)time.Sortingtheadvertisersbasedonthisvalue
will take O(nlogn) time in Line no 5. It is easy to observe from Equation No. 1
that for any billboard slot bs ∈BS computing the value of I(bs ) will take O(t)
i i
timewheretisthenumberoftuplesinthetrajectorydatabase.Assumethatthe
number of billboard slots in the database BS is ℓ. Hence, the time requirement
from Line No. 6 to 8 will be O(ℓ·t). Sorting the billboard slots based on the
individual influence value will take O(ℓlogℓ) time. Now, it is easy to observe
that the for loop at Line No. 11 will iterate O(n) times. The initializationTowards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 11
Algorithm 1: EffectiveAllocationPolicyoftheBillboardSlotsforthe
Regret Minimization Problem
Data:TrajectoryDatabaseD,BillboardSlotInformationBS,AdvertiserDatabaseA,and
theInfluenceFunctionI().
Result: AnallocationY ofthebillboardslotsthatminimizesthetotalregret
′ ′ ′
1 initializeY←{S 1,S 2,...,S |A|}ofemptylists;
2 forAllai∈Ado
3 Zi←− u σii;
4 end
5 A←−SorttheadvertisersbasedondescendingorderinZ;
6 forAllbsi∈BSdo
7 CalculateI(bsi)usingEquationNo.1;
8 end
9 BS←−Sortthebillboardslotsbasedontheindividualinfluencevalue;
10 c←−1;
11 fori=1to|A|do
′ ′
12 S i ←−∅;I(S i)←−0;
13 whileI(S i′ )<σi and|BS|̸=∅do
14 S
i′
←−S
i′(cid:83)BS[c];
15 I(S i′ )←−I(S i′ )+I(BS[c]);
16 BS←−BS\(BS[c]);
17 c←−c+1
18 end
′
19 CalculatethevalueofI(S i)usingEquationNo.1;
′ ′
20 σ i ←−σi−I(S i);
21 end
22 fori=1to|A|do
23 whileI(S i′ )<σ i′ and|BS|̸=∅do
24 b∗←−a br ∈g Bm S\Sa i′xR(S)− IR (b( )S∪{b});
′ ′
25 S i ←−S i∪{b};
26 BS←−BS\{b}
27 end
28 end
′ ′ ′
29 ReturnY←{S 1,S 2,...,S |A|}
statementsatLineNo.12willtakeO(1)time.Now,itiseasytoobservethatin
the worst case, the while loop at Line No. 13 will execute at most the number
of billboard slots in BS which is of O(ℓ). All the statements from Line No. 14
to 17 will take O(1) time. As the size of S′ can be O(ℓ) in the worst case, so
i
computingtheinfluenceofthebillboardslotsinLineNo.19usingEquationNo.
1willtakeO(ℓ·t)time.StatementinLineNo.20willtakeO(1)timetoexecute.
So, the total time required between Line No. 11 to 21 is O(n·ℓ·t). It is clear
that For loop in Line No. 22 will take O(n) time and the while loop of Line
No. 23 will also iterate O(ℓ·t) times as to calculate regret we need to calculate
influence for ℓ number of slots and all the remaining statements in Line no. 25
and 26 will take O(1) time. Hence, the total time required between Line No. 22
to 28 is O(n·ℓ·t). So, the total time requirement by Algorithm 1 will be of
O(n+nlogn+t·ℓ+ℓlogℓ+n·ℓ·t)=O(nlogn+ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ.t).
TheextraspaceconsumedbyAlgorithm1tostorethelistsS andS′,thelist
i i
Z, and the additional column in the billboard database to store the individual12 Ali et al.
influence.Itiseasytoobservethatintheworstcase,thesizeofS′ willbeofO(ℓ).
i
Hence, the space requirement for storing these lists will be O(n·ℓ). The space
requirement to store the list Z and the extra column in the billboard database
will be of O(n) and O(ℓ), respectively. Hence, the total space requirement will
be of O(n·ℓ+n+ℓ)=O(n·ℓ). So, Theorem 2 holds.
Theorem 2. Time and space requirement by Algorithm 1 is of O(nlogn +
ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ.t) and O(n·ℓ), respectively.
An Illustrative Example. Assumeaninfluenceproviderownstenslots,BS=
{b ,b , ...,b } with corresponding individual influence for each slot as re-
1 2 10
portedinTable1a.Threeadvertisers,A={a ,a ,a }approachtotheinfluence
1 2 3
provider for their required influence demand I and corresponding budget L as
reported in Table 1c. To satisfy the advertisers, the influence provider allocates
a set of billboard slots using initial allotment, and the results are represented
in Table 1b. From Table 1b, it is observed that all the advertisers are satisfied,
and possible allocations are a = {b }, a = {b ,b }, a = {b ,b ,b }. But, in
1 4 2 1 3 3 2 6 8
practice, for any subset of billboard slots, their aggregated influence will always
be less than or equal to their individual influence sum. Therefore, the influence
provided to the advertisers will be less than the required, and the remaining
required influence will be supplied using marginal regret, as represented in def-
inition 9. Finally, all the advertisers are satisfied, and the allocation of the slot
is a = {b }, a = {b ,b ,b }, a = {b ,b ,b ,b ,b }. From Table 1d, it is clear
1 4 2 1 3 7 3 2 5 6 8 9
thatsomeexcessiveregret(ER)occursinthecaseofadvertisersa anda .Still,
2 3
no unsatisfied regret (UR) occurs as billboard providers have sufficient slots.
A a a a
1 2 3
BS b b b b b b b b b b BS b b ,b b ,b ,b
i 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 i 4 1 3 2 6 8
I(b ) 4 6 5 7 3 2 3 2 3 3 I(BS )- I 0 0 0
i i i
Satisfied Yes Yes Yes
(a) Billboard Influence.
(b) Initial Allotment.
A a a a
1 2 3
A a a a BS b b ,b ,b b ,b ,b ,b ,b
1 2 3 i 4 1 3 7 2 5 6 8 9
I 7 9 10 I(BS )- I 0 0.3 0.65
i i i
L $12$14$15 Satisfied Yes Yes Yes
i
Regret ER: NoER: Yes ER: Yes
(c) Advertiser Information.
(d) Final Allotment.Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 13
4.2 Effective Advertiser Driven One-by-One Exchange Policy
(EAOE)
Thegenerationofthislocalsearchpolicyconsistsofthreesteps.First,weassign
billboard slots to each advertiser using an effective allocation policy described
in Algorithm 1. Next, we calculate the regret for each advertiser. After that,
we perform a one-by-one exchange policy to explore its neighborhood search
space by exchanging billboard slots assigned to one advertiser with the set of
billboardslotsassignedtootheradvertisers.Thisapproachiterativelyselectstwo
advertisersfromtheadvertisersetAandchecksifexchangingassignedbillboard
slots leads to less regret than the previous allocation, then exchanging billboard
slots between them occurs. We can also say that by taking advertisers one by
one where a ∈ A for all i = 1,2,...,n. and for each advertiser a ∈ A\a ,
i j i
if there exists S ∈ a and S ∈ a such that exchange [S ,S ] will satisfy
x i y j x y
RegretNew(a ) < RegretOld(a ) then we exchange billboard slots between a
i i i
and a . Otherwise, no exchange occurs, i.e., allocations remain the same. This
j
exchange policy terminates its executions when there are no improvements in
regret minimization after exchanging slots between advertisers. We called this
localsearchanAdvertiserDrivenOne-by-OneExchangepolicyandpresentedit
in Algorithm 2.
Algorithm 2: Effective Advertiser driven One-by-One Billboard Slot
Exchange Policy for the Regret Minimization Problem
Data:TrajectoryDatabaseD,BillboardSlotInformationBS,AdvertiserDatabaseA,and
theInfluenceFunctionI().
Result:AnallocationY ofthebillboardslotsthatminimizesthetotalregret
1 InitializeY←{S1,S2,...,S|A|}ofemptylists;
2
YNew←EffectiveAllocationPolicy(D,BS,A,Y);
3 whileTrue do
4 YOld←YNew foreachai∈Ado
5 foreachaj ∈A\{ai}do
6 if ∃Sx∈ai, Sy∈aj suchthatexchange[Sx,Sy]will minimizeR(YOld)
then
7 ai←ai∪{Sy};
8 aj ←aj∪{Sx};
9 ai←ai\{Sx};
10 aj ←aj\{Sy};
11 end
12 end
13 end
14 if R(YOld)<R(YNew)then
15
YNew←YOld
16 end
17 else
18 Exit;
19 end
20 end
21
returnYNew;14 Ali et al.
Complexity Analysis. Now, we analyze the time and space requirement of
Algorithm 2. First, in Line No. 1 initializing Y will take O(n). In-Line No. 2,
the ‘EA’ approach will take O(nlogn+ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ.t) time in total as shown in
Algorithm 1. Next, in Line No 4 copying YOld to YNew will take O(ℓ) time in
theworstcase.In-LineNo.5For LoopwillexecuteforO(n)timeandFor Loop
at Line No. 6 will execute for (n−1) times as total n number of advertisers are
there. At Line No. 7 in the worst case, exchanging slots between a with a will
i j
takeO(ℓ)timeandtocalculateregretofYOld weneedtocomputetheinfluence
of ℓ number of slots that will take O(n2.ℓ.t) time where t is the number of tuple
in the trajectory database. In Line No. 8 to 11 will take O(n2) time to execute.
Hence,fromLineNo.4to13willtakeO(n2.ℓ.t+n2.ℓ+n2)time.InLineNo.15,
regret will be calculated twice, and it will take O(2.n2.ℓ.t) time. Finally, in Line
No. 16 copying from YOld to YNew will take O(n) time. Therefore, Algorithm 2
willtaketotalO(n2.ℓ.t+n2.ℓ+n2+2.n2.ℓ.t+n2)i.e.,O(n2.ℓ.t)timetoexecute
one iteration of the While Loop in Line no 3.
Now,theadditionalspacerequirementforAlgorithm2isforYNew andYOld
will be O(n) and O(n) respectively. In Line No. 2 effective allocation will take
extraO(n·ℓ)Hence,totalspacerequirementofAlgorithm2willbeO(n+n+n·ℓ)
i.e., O(n·ℓ).
4.3 Effective Billboard Driven One-by-One Exchange Policy
(EBOE)
Inthissection,wedescribetheEffectiveBillboardDrivenOne-by-OneExchange
policy. When an advertiser holds a large no of billboard slots, the Advertiser
DrivenOne-by-OneExchangepolicycanescapealocalminimum,andexchang-
ing already allocated billboard slots among advertisers could miss a better solu-
tion.ToovercomethedrawbackoftheAdvertiserDrivenOne-by-OneExchange
policy,weintroduceabillboardslotsallocationpolicywhereinsteadofexchang-
ingalreadyallocatedslotstotheadvertiser,weexchange already allocatedslots
with remaining unallocated slots as shown in Algorithm 3.
First,weallocatethebillboardslotstotheadvertisersusingtheEffectiveAl-
location policy shown in Algorithm 1. After Effective Allocation, the remaining
unallocated billboard slots are divided into three clusters using the binary tree
fashion. This tree method divides the total billboard slots into two clusters. In
the first cluster (C ) assigned first ⌊ (1/3)*length of total unallocated billboard
1
slots ⌋ many billboard slots from top to bottom and other cluster (C′) holds
1
remaining ⌈ (2/3)*length of total billboard slots ⌉ many billboard slots. Again,
theremainingbillboardslotsinC′ aredividedintotwoclusters,thefirstcluster
1
(C ) assigned ⌊ (1/3)*length of remaining total billboard slots ⌋ many billboard
2
slots from top to bottom and another cluster (C ) holds remaining billboard
3
slots. Here, one thing needs to be observed as billboard slots are already sorted
based on their influence: cluster C holds maximum influential, cluster C holds
1 2
medium influential, and cluster C holds low influential billboard slots. In Al-
3
gorithm 3, C is denoted as
BS′′
and only
BS′′
is used in One-by-One exchange
3 3 3Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 15
policy as most influential billboard slots are already allocated during the Effec-
tive allocation. Next, we calculate the regret for each advertiser. After that, we
perform a one-by-one exchange policy to explore its neighborhood search space
by exchanging billboard slots assigned to an advertiser with one billboard slot
fromtheremainingunallocatedbillboardslots.Thisapproachiterativelyselects
one advertiser from the advertiser set A and checks if exchanging an assigned
billboard slot with the remaining unallocated slot leads to less regret than the
previous allocation, then exchanging billboard slots performs. We can say that
for each a ∈ A and b ∈
BS′′
if there exists b ∈ a and b ∈
BS′′
such
i j 3 i i j 3
that exchange [b ,b ] will satisfy RegretNew(a )<RegretOld(a ) then exchange
i j i i
billboard slots between them. This local search terminates when no further im-
provement in terms of regret minimization occurs. Hence, all advertisers should
getacombinationofthemostinfluentialandlessinfluentialbillboardslotsafter
the exchange operation.
Algorithm3: EffectiveBillboardDrivenOne-by-OneExchangePolicy
for the Regret Minimization Problem
Data:TrajectoryDatabaseD,BillboardSlotInformationBS,AdvertiserDatabaseA,and
theInfluenceFunctionI().
Result: AnallocationY ofthebillboardslotsthatminimizesthetotalregret
1 initializeY←{S1,S2,...,S|A|}ofemptylists;
2
YNew←EffectiveAllocationPolicy(D,BS,A,Y)
′
3 S ←AssignedBillboardSlotsinAllocationY;
4
BS′ =BS\S′
;
5 fori=1to2do
6
Ci←⌈(1/3)∗len(BS′ )⌉no.ofBillboardSlotsfromBS′
indescendingorder;
7
BS′ ←BS′
\Ci;
8 end
9
BS′ 3′ ←BS′
;
10 whileTRUE do
11
YOld←YNew;
12 foreachai∈Ado
13 foreachbj
∈BS′ 3′
do
14 if ∃bi∈ai andbj
∈BS′ 3′
suchthatexchange
[bi,bj]will minimizeR(YOld)then
15
BS′ 3′ ←BS′ 3′
∪{bi};
16 ai←ai∪{bj};
17
BS′ 3′ ←BS′ 3′
\{bj};
18 ai←ai\{bi}
19 end
20 end
21 end
22 if R(YOld)<R(YNew)then
23
YNew←YOld
24 end
25 else
26 Exit;
27 end
28 end
29
returnYNew;16 Ali et al.
Complexity Analysis. Now, we analyze the time and space requirement of
Algorithm 3. First, in Line No. 1 initializing Y will take O(n). In-Line No. 2,
the ‘EA’ approach will take O(nlogn+ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ.t) time in total as shown in
Algorithm1.Next,copyingassignedbillboardslotstoS′ fromY willtakeO(n.ℓ)
timeaseachadvertisercanholdℓmanybillboardslotsintheworstcase.InLine
4removingalreadyallottedslotsS′ fromtheBSwilltakeO(1).Now,for loop
inLineNo.5to8willtakeO(1)time.Next,inLineNo11copyingYOld toYNew
will take O(ℓ) time in the worst case. In-Line No. 12 for loop will execute for
O(n) time and for loop at Line No. 13 will execute for O(ℓ) times as total ℓ
number of billboard slots are there in worst case. At Line No. 14 in the worst
case, exchanging slots between a with
BS′
will take O(ℓ) time and to calculate
i
regretofYOldweneedtocomputetheinfluenceofℓnumberofslotsthatwilltake
O(n.ℓ2.t)timewheretisthenumberoftupleinthetrajectorydatabase.InLine
No.15to18willtakeO(n.ℓ)timetoexecute.Hence,fromLineNo.12to21will
take O(n.ℓ2.t+n.ℓ) time. In Line No. 22 will take constant time while Line No.
23 copying from YOld to YNew will take O(n) time. Therefore, Algorithm 3 will
taketotalO(nlogn+ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ.t+n.ℓ+ℓ+n+n.ℓ2.t+ℓ+ℓ+ℓ+n.ℓ2.t+n.ℓ+n)
i.e., O(nlogn+ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ2.t) time to execute one iteration of the While Loop
in Line no 10.
Now, the additional space requirement for Algorithm 3 is for S′, BS′ , C ,
i
YNew andYOld willbeO(n),O(ℓ),O(ℓ),O(n)andO(n)respectively.Addition-
ally, in Line No. 2 effective allocation space requirement is O(n·ℓ) Hence, total
spacerequirementofAlgorithm3willbeO(n+ℓ+ℓ+n+n+n·ℓ)i.e.,O(n·ℓ).
4.4 Effective Billboard Driven One-by-Two Exchange Policy
(EBTE)
Inthissection,wedescribetheEffectiveBillboardDrivenOne-by-TwoExchange
Policy. In advertiser-driven local search [40], releasing all billboards from an ad-
vertiser is a coarse-grained optimization. Also, this can escape a local minimum
whenanadvertiserholdsmanybillboardslots.Now,toovercomethisdrawback,
we propose a one-by-two exchange policy where we exchange one billboard slot
fromanadvertiserwithtwobillboardslotsfromremainingunallocatedbillboard
slots instead of exchanging two sets of billboard slots at a time as proposed in
advertiser-driven local search [40]. In particular, given an efficient allocation
policy, we try to find a neighborhood search space around efficient allocation
such that total regret should be minimized, as shown in Algorithm 4. Initially,
we allocate billboard slots to the advertiser using an effective allocation pol-
icy. Next, we split the remaining unallocated billboard slots into three different
clusters C , C , and C as shown in Algorithm 4. Now, for each advertiser
1 2 3
a ∈ A and for each set of two billboard slots (b ,b ) ∈
BS′′
if there exists
i x y 3
b ∈a and (b ,b
)∈BS′′
such that exchange [b ,(b ,b )] will minimize the to-
i i x y 3 i x y
tal regret then exchange billboard slots between them. Finally, if an individual
advertiser’s regret is minimized, then total regret is also minimized. This Bill-
board Driven One-by-Two Exchange Policy will terminate its execution when
no improvement can be achieved from further moves.Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 17
Algorithm4: EffectiveBillboardDrivenOne-by-TwoExchangePolicy
for the Regret Minimization Problem
Data:TrajectoryDatabaseD,BillboardSlotInformationBS,AdvertiserDatabaseA,and
theInfluenceFunctionI().
Result: AnallocationY ofthebillboardslotsthatminimizesthetotalregret
1 initializeY←{S1,S2,...,S|A|}ofemptylists;
2
YNew←EffectiveAllocationPolicy(D,BS,A,Y)
′
3 S ←AssignedBillboardSlotsinAllocationY;
4
BS′ =BS\S′
;
5 fori=1to2do
6
Ci←⌈(1/3)∗len(BS′ )⌉no.ofBillboardSlotsfromBS′
indescendingorder;
7
BS′ ←BS′
\Ci;
8 end
9
BS′ 3′ ←BS′
;
10 whileTRUE do
11
YOld←YNew;
12 foreachai∈Ado
13
foreach{bx,by}∈BS′ 3′
do
14 if ∃bi∈ai
and{bx,by}∈BS′ 3′
suchthatexchange[bi,{bx,by}]
will minimizeR(YOld)then
15
BS′ 3′ ←BS′ 3′
∪{bi};
16 ai←ai∪{bx,by};
17
BS′ 3′ ←BS′ 3′
\{bx,by};
18 ai←ai\{bi}
19 end
20 end
21 end
22 if R(YOld)<R(YNew)then
23
YNew←YOld
24 end
25 else
26 Exit;
27 end
28 end
29
returnYNew;
Complexity Analysis. Now, we analyze the time and space requirement of
Algorithm 4. First, in Line No. 1 initializing Y will take O(n). In-Line No. 2,
the ‘EA’ approach will take O(nlogn+ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ.t) time in total as shown in
Algorithm1.Next,copyingassignedbillboardslotstoS′ fromY willtakeO(n.ℓ)
timeaseachadvertisercanholdℓmanybillboardslotsintheworstcase.InLine
4removingalreadyallottedslotsS′ fromtheBSwilltakeO(1).Now,for loop
inLineNo.5to8willtakeO(1)time.Next,inLineNo11copyingYOld toYNew
will take O(ℓ) time in the worst case. In-Line No. 12 for loop will execute for
O(n) time and for loop at Line No. 13 will execute for O(ℓ) times as total ℓ
number of billboard slots are there in worst case. At Line No. 14 in the worst
case, exchanging slots between a with
BS′
will take O(ℓ) time and to calculate
i
regretofYOldweneedtocomputetheinfluenceofℓnumberofslotsthatwilltake
O(n.ℓ2.t)timewheretisthenumberoftupleinthetrajectorydatabase.InLine
No.15to18willtakeO(n.ℓ)timetoexecute.Hence,fromLineNo.12to21will
take O(n.ℓ2.t+n.ℓ) time. In Line No. 22 will take constant time while Line No.18 Ali et al.
23 copying from YOld to YNew will take O(n) time. Therefore, Algorithm 4 will
taketotalO(nlogn+ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ.t+n.ℓ+ℓ+n+n.ℓ2.t+ℓ+ℓ+ℓ+n.ℓ2.t+n.ℓ+n)
i.e., O(nlogn+ℓlogℓ+n.ℓ2.t) time to execute one iteration of the While Loop
in Line no 9.
Now, the additional space requirement for Algorithm 4 is for S′, BS′ , C ,
i
YNew and YOld will be O(n), O(ℓ), O(ℓ), O(n) and O(n) respectively. In-Line
No.2toexecuteeffectiveallocationpolicywilltakeO(n·ℓ)amountofadditional
space. Hence, total space requirement of Algorithm 4 will be O(n+ℓ+ℓ+n+
n+n·ℓ) i.e., O(n·ℓ).
5 Experimental Details
This section describes the experimental evaluation of the proposed solution ap-
proaches. Initially, we start by describing the datasets.
5.1 Description of the Datasets
Inthissection,wedescribetheexperimentalevaluationoftheproposedsolution
methodology. Initially, we start by describing the datasets.
The datasets used in our study have also been used by existing studies as
well [38]. The trajectory data is obtained from two real-world datasets. The
first one is the TLC trip record dataset 4 for NYC, and the second one is the
Foursquare check-in dataset 5 Both these datasets contain the records of green
taxi trips from Jan 2013 to Sep 2016 and different location types such as Mall,
Beach, Bank, and so on. From these trajectory datasets, we separate the tuples
corresponding to the following 5 locations: ‘Beach’, ‘Mall’, ‘Bank’, ‘Park’, and
‘Airport’,andcreatefivedifferentdatasets.Next,thebillboarddatasetprovided
by LAMAR 6 is also divided into five different datasets according to location
types: ‘Beach’, ‘Mall’, ‘Bank’, ‘Park’, and ‘Airport’. The basic statistics of this
dataset have been listed in Table 2, and here, ‘# Rows1’ and ‘# Rows2’ denote
the size of the billboard and trajectory, respectively.
Next, we describe different parameter settings along with the experimental
details.
5.2 Experimental Setup
Now, we describe the experimental setup involved in our experiments. We con-
sider the influence probability value to be fixed for all our experiments. In the
billboarddatasetprovidedbyLAMAR,wehaveinformationaboutthepanelsize
of the billboards. From all the billboards, we calculate the influence probability
of a billboard as a ratio of that billboard’s panel size and the largest billboard
4 http://www.nyc.gov/html/tlc/html/about/trip_record_data.shtml.
5 https://sites.google.com/site/yangdingqi/home.
6 http://www.lamar.com/InventoryBrowser.Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 19
Table 2: Basis Statistics of the Datasets
Location Type# Rows1# Rows2# Billboard Slots
Beach 76 575 21888
Mall 86 1186 24768
Bank 671 2232 193248
Airport 313 2852 90144
Park 536 4804 154368
panel size. The influence probability of all billboard slots corresponding with
thatbillboardisthesameforall.However,therearesomestandardmethodsfor
calculating the value [1,38,40]. Next, we start to define the cost of the billboard
slots.
Billboard Slot Cost. Unfortunately, most billboard advertising companies do
not provide the exact cost of billboard slots; instead, they provide a range of
costs. So, as reported in the recent studies [37,40,34], we calculate the cost of
billboardslotsbyafunctionproportionaltothenumberoftrajectoriesinfluenced
by the billboard slots denoted as C(bs ) = ⌊δ∗I(bs )/10⌋), where δ denotes a
i i
factor randomly chosen from 0.9 to 1.1 to simulate various costs and benefit
ratio. I(bs ) denotes the number of trajectories influenced by a billboard slot
i
bs , where bs ∈BS.
i i
Performancemeasurement. Weevaluatetheperformanceoftheexistingand
proposed method by the run time and the total regret. Total regret consists of
two types of regret: unsatisfied regret and excessive regret. Each experiment for
allexistingandproposedmethodsisrepeatedthrice,andtheaverageresultsare
reported in this paper.
Environment Setup. All codes are implemented in Python using the Jupyter
Notebook environment, and experiments are conducted on a system with a 3.50
GHz Intel 24 Core CPU and 64 GB memory running the Ubuntu operating
system.
5.3 Key Parameters
This section will discuss all the parameters used in our experiment. The list of
parameters are Demand-Supply ratio α, Average-Individual Demand ratio IID,
Advertiser’s Demand I, Advertiser’s Payment W, Unsatisfied Penalty ratio γ
and distance λ. Now, we start describing the Demand-Supply ratio α.
Demand-Supply ratio α. It is the ratio of global demand of the advertisers
over the influence provider supply, i.e., α = IA/IH, where IA = (cid:80) I ,
a∈A a20 Ali et al.
denotes the total demand of all available advertisers and IH = (cid:80) I(bs )
bsi∈BS i
denotes the supply of influence corresponding to the advertiser’s demand. We
report our experiment results on different Demand-Supply ratio (α) values, i.e.,
low (40%), average (60%), high (80%), full (100%), and excessive (120%).
Average-Individual Demand ratio IID. It refers to the percentage of the
average individual demand (IID) over the influence provider supply (IH), i.e.,
p(IID)=IID/IH,whereIID =IA/|A|istheaverageindividualdemand.Here,
we consider four different cases of p(IID), i.e., 1%, 2%, 5%, and 10% to adjust
the demand of the advertisers.
Advertiser’s Demand I. We generate the demand of all the advertisers
individually based on I = ⌊β ∗ IH ∗ IID⌋, where β is the factor randomly
a
chosen from 0.8 to 1.2 to generate payment for individual advertisers. When
the Demand-Supply ratio α and Average-Individual Demand ratio p(IID) are
known, then we can calculate the average demand of advertisers.
Advertiser’s Payment W. By following recent studies [40], we consider
an advertiser’s payment to be proportional to the influence demand of that
particular advertiser. We calculate payment as W = ⌊τ ∗I ⌋, where τ is the
a a
factor chosen randomly between 0.9 to 1.1 to generate different payments.
Unsatisfied Penalty ratio γ. The unsatisfied penalty ratio (γ) came into
existence when the influence provider could not satisfy the desired influence de-
mand of the advertiser. We assume γ ∈ [0,1], and it controls the fraction of
the penalty. Here, two extreme cases can occur, in case one when γ = 0 influ-
ence provider cannot receive any payment due to not fulfilling the advertiser’s
required demand. In the other case, when γ = 1, the influence provider can
receive an equal fraction of payment as the amount of influence is satisfied to
the advertisers. In our experiment, we have considered the default unsatisfied
penalty ratio γ =0.5.
Distanceλ. Withtheincreaseofλ,theinfluenceofabillboardslotincreasesas
a single billboard slot can influence more trajectories. But a threshold value, λ,
determines the maximum distance a billboard can influence a trajectory. In our
experiment, we have considered the distance as λ = 100 meters for calculating
the influence of individual billboard slots.
5.4 Goals of the Experiments
The goals of the experiments are four folded, and they are mentioned below:Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 21
– The Effectiveness of Preprocessing: Finding out the effectiveness of
preprocessing and understanding its benefits from computational aspects is
the first experimental goal of our study. As the influence function, I() holds
thepropertyofsubmodularity;therefore,removingthebillboardslotshaving
zero influence, i.e., that particular slots do not influence any trajectory, will
not make any difference in calculating the influence of billboard slots.
– Effectiveness of Splitting: One of our goals is to study the percentage
of the billboard slots pruned out after splitting the remaining unallocated
billboard slots into three parts, i.e., most influential, medium influential,
and less influential, and it is good if the remaining unallocated number of
billboard slots are sufficiently large. Hence, without much computational
burden, we can easily apply the Effective Billboard Driven One-by-One and
One-by-Two Exchange Policy.
– Minimization of Regret: Another goal of our study is to compare the
proposed and existing methods based on regret minimization.
– Computational Time Requirement: Finally, we aim to compare the
computational time among the proposed and existing methods.
5.5 Algorithms Compared
We compare the performance of the proposed solution approaches with the fol-
lowing methods.
– Budget Effective Greedy (BG): This is a greedy heuristic algorithm
whose working principle is as follows. First, all the advertisers are sorted
basedontheirbudgetoverinfluencedemandvalue.Then,initializeasmany
empty sets as the number of advertisers and keep allocating billboard slots
that can minimize the regret of that particular advertiser. After satisfying
the first advertiser, do the same for all the remaining advertisers until all
are satisfied or the influence provider runs out of billboard slots. The main
drawbackofthisgreedyalgorithmisthatmostinfluentialbillboardslotsare
exhaustedfirstastheseareallocatedtothefirstfewadvertisersserially,and
the rest of the advertisers may not get the ideal billboard slots.
– SynchronousGreedy(SG):ThisistheextensionoftheG-orderalgorithm
introduced by Zhang et al. [40]. Here, ideal billboard slots are assigned to
eachadvertisersynchronously.Ifassigningnewbillboardslotsminimizesthe
regret, it allocates them to the advertisers whose demand still needs to be
satisfied. In the worst case, if there are no billboard slots to assign and
more than two advertisers are still unsatisfied, remove less budget-effective
advertisers one by one and allocate those released slots to the remaining
unsatisfied advertisers until no fewer than two are unsatisfied.
– AdvertiserDrivenlocalSearch(ALS):Theadvertiser-drivenlocalsearch
method follows a baseline plan consisting of two steps. First, randomly as-
sign billboard slots to the advertisers. Second, allocate the remaining bill-
board slots to the advertisers using the Synchronous Greedy method [40].
Afterthat,alocalsearchtechniqueisusedtoexploreaneighborhoodsearch22 Ali et al.
space. Later, exchange a set of billboard slots from one advertiser with the
set of billboard slots assigned to another if total regret minimizes.
6 Observations with Explanation
In this section, we describe the effectiveness of the proposed approach and ex-
perimental observations, along with their explanations.
6.1 Effectiveness Study
The Effectiveness of Preprocessing During our experiments, we observed
that in most cases, a significantly large number of billboard slots are removed
from BS after the preprocessing step. The preprocessing step is significant in
terms of the computational time requirement. When we consider the location
type ‘Mall’ among 24768 billboard slots, only 938 billboard slots remain left,
and in percentage, more than 96% of billboard slots are removed. These obser-
vationsareconsistentwithotherlocationtypes,e.g.,‘Beach’,‘Bank’,‘Park’,and
‘Airport’. After the preprocessing step for different location types, the number
and percentage of removed billboard slots are shown in Table 3. Here, BS de-
notes the set of billboard slots before preprocessing, and
BS′
denotes slots after
preprocessing.
Table 3: Experimental results of the Preprocessing Step
Location Type |BS| |BS′ |Percentage
Beach 21888 455 97.92 %
Mall 24768 938 96.21 %
Bank 193248 2949 98.47 %
Park 90144 4446 95.06 %
Airport 154368 8749 94.33 %
The Effectiveness of Splitting As discussed previously, splitting is an im-
portant step for the proposed Algorithm 3 and Algorithm 4. Now, for location
type ‘Mall’ number of billboard slots,
BS′
after the preprocessing step is 938.
After that, using
BS′
in Algorithm 3 allocate billboard slots effectively, and the
remaining number of billboard slots in
BS′′
is 674. Now, if we apply ‘Splitting’
ontheremainingbillboardslots,thenthenumberofbillboardslotsinlowinflu-
entialbillboardslotsetBS′′ willbe300.ThisBS′′
furtherusedintheAlgorithm
3 3
3 and Algorithm 4 to reduce computational burden. These observations are also
consistent with other location types, as shown in table 4.Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 23
Table 4: Experimental results related to the Splitting Step
Location
Type|BS′ ||BS′′ ||BS′′
|Splitting (%)Preprocessing+Splitting (%)
3
Beach 455 254 144 55.11 % 99.47 %
Mall 938 674 300 55.48 % 98.78 %
Bank 2949 1908 848 55.55 % 99.56 %
Park 4446 3210 1427 55.54 % 98.41 %
Airport 8749 6559 2916 55.54 % 98.11 %
Minimization of Regret Our primary goal in this experimental study is to
minimize the total regret from the influence provider’s perspective. Hence, bill-
boardslotsareallocatedsothatexcessiveandunsatisfiedregret,i.e.,totalregret,
shouldbeminimized.Now,whenweconsiderthelocationtype‘Mall’inthegiven
figure 2, it is clear that our proposed algorithms outperform existing methods.
These observations are consistent with other location types also, as shown in
Figure 1,3,4,5.
6.2 Parameter Study
In our experiments, we first fix two parameters, unsatisfied penalty ratio (γ)
anddistance(λ),as0.5and100meters,respectively.Then,weevaluatehowthe
varying Demand-Supply ratio (α) and Average-Individual demand ratio (IID)
impact in total regret. In our experiment, we report unsatisfied regret from
unsatisfied advertisers and excessive regret over satisfied advertisers as total
regretaccordingtoDefinitionNo.5.Now,onequestionarisesinourmind:ifthe
globaldemandforadvertisersisdeficient,closeto,orovertheinfluenceprovider
influence supply, then what will happen? We vary the Demand-Supply ratio, α,
toaddressthisquestionfrom40%to120%.Duringourexperiment,weobserved
thatwhenthevalueofαislow,globaldemandisalsolow,andalladvertisersare
satisfied by the influence provider. However, when the value of α is very large,
the global demand exceeds the supplied influence by the influence provider. So,
some advertisers may not be satisfied due to billboard slots running out. We
have also varied Average-Individual Demand ratio, IID, from 1% to 10% to
check which type of advertisers are most profitable for influence provider, i.e., a
minimal number of advertisers with high individual influence demand or a vast
number of advertisers with small individual influence demands.
In the following, we will present the results of the different location types
with four cases. For better understanding, we used stacked bars to represent
total regret, including excessive and unsatisfied regret.
Case 1: Low α, Low IID (parts a, b, c, f, g, h of Figure 1,2,3,4,5)
In case 1, we have a Demand-Supply ratio, α ≤ 80%, and Average-Individual
Demand ratio, IID ≤2%. This means that both α and IID are low, i.e., global
andindividualdemandbotharelow.Asαisverysmall,influenceprovidershave
many small advertisers, and all advertisers are satisfied. Therefore, the total24 Ali et al.
regret consists only of excessive influence regret except for the budget-effective
greedy approach. We have three main observations.
First, as the α value increases, the excessive regret of all the algorithms also
decreases because when both α and IID are small, the influence demand of
all the advertisers is also small. Hence, it is easy for the influence provider to
satisfy the influence demand of all the advertisers by allocating billboard slots.
However, the influence provider suffers from higher excessive regret when the
influence supply crosses the influence demand of the advertisers.
Second, in our experiment, the ‘EA’, ‘EBOE’, and ‘EBTE’ controls the ex-
cessive regret better because ‘EBOE’ and ‘EBTE’ satisfy the advertisers with
fewer billboard slots. The ‘EBOE’ and ‘EBTE’ achieve equal or less regret than
‘EA’because‘EBOE’and‘EBTE’trytoexchangebillboardslotsbetweenallthe
advertisers. The ‘EBOE’ and ‘EBTE’ explore finer-grained exchange compared
to ‘EAOE’, reducing the gap between the advertiser’s influence demand and its
corresponding influence supply from the influence provider.
Third, we observe the behavior of different algorithms on several datasets.
In the ‘Beach’ dataset, only excessive regret is there. However, only the ‘BG’
has excessive and unsatisfied regret in the case of α = 100%. Among baseline
methods,the‘ALS’performsbetterthanthe‘SG’and‘BG’.Next,inthe‘Bank’
dataset,allthealgorithmssufferfrombothexcessiveandunsatisfiedregretwhen
α = 100%. The same observations were observed in the case of the ‘Airport’
dataset as in the ‘Bank’ dataset. At last, the ‘Mall’ and ‘Park’ datasets behave
similarly to the ‘Beach’ dataset.
Case 2: Low α, High IID (parts k, l, m, p, q, r of Figure 1,2,3,4,5)
Corresponding to case 2, we have the Demand-Supply ratio, α ≤ 80%, and
Average-Individual Demand ratio, IID ≥5%. This refers to individual demand
being high but global demand being low, i.e., influence provider have a small
number of big advertisers. Here, we have three main observations.
First, the excessive regret for all the algorithms decreased compared to case
1 because the individual demand of each advertiser increased. Also, with the
increaseofIID,thenumberofadvertisersdecreased,buttheindividualdemand
oftheadvertiserswasstillhigher.Theinfluencesupplytotheadvertisersiscloser
to the advertiser’s individual influence demand, which is the reason behind the
decrease in advertisers.
Second, as individual influence demand is high, the influence provider must
deploy many billboard slots to satisfy the advertiser’s demand. Hence, ‘EAOE’,
‘EBOE’, and ‘EBTE’ need to explore more neighborhood search space to ex-
change billboard slots, and these methods hugely outperform ‘BG’, ‘SG’, and
‘ALS’.
Third, when α increases from 40% to 80% among baseline methods, the
performanceof‘BG’degradesrapidly.However,EBTE’and‘EBOE’outperform
theotherproposedmethods.Now,consideracasewhenαvalueis40%,60%and
IID = 5% ‘BG’ performs better compared to ‘SG’ and ‘ALS’ methods. Among
the proposed methods, ‘EAOE’ performs equal to or better than ‘EA’ as ‘EA’Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 25
is used as the initial allocation for the remaining proposed methods. When IID
increases from 5% to 10%, the ‘ALS’ performs better than ‘SG’ and ‘BG’.
Case 3: High α, Low IID (parts d, e, i, j of Figure 1,2,3,4,5) In case
3, we have the Demand-Supply ratio, α ≥ 100%, and the Average-Individual
Demand ratio, IID ≤ 2%. This refers to a situation where individual demand
is low, but the global demand is very high, i.e., the influence provider has many
advertisers whose influence demand is less. We have made some observations.
First, when α ≥ 100%, i.e., very high global demand, none of our proposed
and existing algorithms can satisfy all the advertisers. Even when α = 100%,
i.e., the global demand is equal to the influence provider supply, all advertisers
are unsatisfied because the excessive regrets cannot be fully minimized. Most
of the portion of total regret comes from unsatisfied regret. When α = 120%,
the advertiser’s influence demand exceeds the supply, and the unsatisfied regret
becomes very high.
Second,astheinfluenceproviderneedsasufficientbillboardslottofulfillthe
influence demand of the advertisers, there is a risk of losing some advertisers.
Hence, all allocations are critical, and the ‘EA’, ‘EBTE’, and ‘EBOE’ carefully
handled these risks of losing advertisers. The advantage of the ‘EA’, ‘EBTE’,
and ‘EBOE’ in minimizing total regret is more efficient than existing baseline
approaches. However, these approaches can satisfy more advertisers, and the
influenceprovidersuffersfromminorunsatisfiedregret,i.e.,theoverallregretof
the influence provider decreases.
Third, in most cases when α = 100% and IID = 1% or 2%, only the ‘BG’
suffers from both excessive and unsatisfied regret. However, when α = 120%,
all the proposed and baseline methods suffer from excessive and unsatisfied re-
gret. These observations are shown in the ‘Beach’, ‘Mall’, and ‘Park’ datasets.
Inthecaseof‘Bank’and‘Airport’datasets,whenIID increasesfrom1%to2%,
unsatisfied regret increases because global influence demand is already high. In
addition,whenindividualinfluenceincreases,unsatisfiedregretalsoincreases.If
weevaluatetheproposedandbaselinemethods,obviously,‘EBOE’and‘EBTE’
reduce the overall regret best. Among baseline methods, ‘ALS’ and ‘SG’ out-
perform ‘BG’ and reduce total regret by almost 40% to 45% and 50% to 60%,
respectively. So, among baseline, ‘ALS’ performs better. Next, among proposed
approaches,‘EA’,‘EBOE’,and‘EBTE’reducesoverallregretcomparedto‘ALS’
are 60% to 65%, 79% to 84% and 75% to 80%, respectively.
Case 4: High α, High IID (parts n, o, s, t of Figure 1,2,3,4,5) In case
4, we have the Demand-Supply ratio, α ≥ 100%, and the Average-Individual
Demand ratio, IID ≥ 5%. This refers to individual and global demand being
very high, i.e., influence provider is over-demanded by a small number of big
advertisers. We have three main observations.
First, every unsatisfied penalty from the advertisers leads to higher regret
fortheinfluenceproviderduetolargeα,andIID value.Hence,alltheproposed
and baseline methods suffer from higher overall regret, and the advantage of26 Ali et al.
the ‘EBOE’ and ‘EBTE’ is not very effective, especially compared to the ‘EA’
approach.
Second, when IID increases from 5% to 10% total regret also increases as
shown in Figure 1,2,3,4,5. All the algorithms suffer from excessive and unsatis-
fied regret because of higher individual and global influence demand. The ‘BG’
approach suffers from more excessive regret than other approaches because the
ideal billboard slots are allocated first to the advertisers individually until all
the advertisers are satisfied or billboard slots run out.
Third, the advantage of ‘EBOE’ and ‘EBTE’ becomes less significant than
‘ALS’ because of higher global and individual demand. Hence, if the influence
provider has sufficient billboard slots to satisfy all the advertisers, then a large
numberofadvertiserswithsmallindividualinfluencedemandisdesirableforthe
influence provider. Because in this setting, the unsatisfied regret will be much
less. However, excessive regret will be there as it can not be fully diminished.
6.3 Efficiency Study
Efficiency study is an important parameter in this regret minimization problem
as every day, more than a thousand advertisers come to the influence provider
with the required influence demand. Hence, we conduct efficiency evaluation to
find out computational cost varying different α, IID and the number of adver-
tisers, |A|. The results are reported in Figure 6,7,8,9,10 over different datasets.
We have some observations over different datasets.
First, among baseline methods, both ‘ALS’ and ‘SG’ take more computa-
tional time compared to the ‘BG’ approach as they use ‘BG’ as their initial
allotment plan of billboard slots and try to improve the allocation further over
it by exchanging billboard slots among the advertisers. Out of all the proposed
approaches, the ‘EA’ takes less time compared to other ones because they use
the ‘EA’ as their initial allocation plan for slots allocation like the ‘ALS’ and
‘SG’ and further exchange billboard slots among advertisers to get an effective
allotment plan requires more computational search time.
Second, when the α value increases from 40% to 120%, all the algorithms
take more computational search time to explore all the billboard slots. In this
case,theinfluenceprovidermustallocatemorebillboardslotstotheadvertisers.
Next, when IID value increases from 1% to 10%, the individual influence de-
mandofalltheadvertisersincreases,andalmostallthealgorithmsrequiremore
computational time. Among the proposed approaches, ‘EBTE’, ‘EBOE’, and
‘EAOE’needamoresignificantnumberofiterationstoexploreallthebillboard
slots to find a better alternative allocation over the ‘EA’.
Third, when α value increases from 40% to 60% and the IID value from
1% to 2%, the computational cost for all the algorithms increases except the
‘EBTE’becauseofincreasingindividualdemandvalue,influenceproviderneeds
more billboard slots to satisfy the advertisers. When the α value increases from
100% to 120%, the influence demand of all the advertisers is equal to or more
thantheinfluencesupplyfromtheinfluenceprovider.Hence,veryfewbillboard
slots remain to allocate further using the ‘EBTE’ or ‘EBOE’ methods.Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 27
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)α=40% (b)α=60% (c)α=80% (d)α=100%
(e)α=120% (f)α=40% (g)α=60% (h)α=80%
(i)α=100% (j)α=120% (k)α=40% (l)α=60%
(m)α=80% (n)α=100% (o)α=120% (p)α=40%
(q)α=60% (r)α=80% (s)α=100% (t)α=120%
Fig.1: Regret varying α when IID =1%,|A|=100 (a, b, c, d, e), when IID =
2%,|A| = 50 (f,g,h,i,j), when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (k,l,m,n,o) and when IID =
10%,|A|=10 (p, q, r, s, t)for Beach location type
Inthecaseof‘Bank’,‘Park’,and‘Airport’datasetswiththeincreasingvalue
of α and IID, the computational time for all the algorithms also increases.
But, in the case of the ‘Beach’ and ‘Mall’ dataset, when α value rises from
80% to 120%, the computational time of ‘EA’ increases because there is a huge
number of billboard slots to allocate, and it takes more computational search
time. After effectively allocating slots to the advertisers, very few slots remain28 Ali et al.
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)α=40% (b)α=60% (c)α=80% (d)α=100%
(e)α=120% (f)α=40% (g)α=60% (h)α=80%
(i)α=100% (j)α=120% (k)α=40% (l)α=60%
(m)α=80% (n)α=100% (o)α=120% (p)α=40%
(q)α=60% (r)α=80% (s)α=100% (t)α=120%
Fig.2: Regret varying α when IID =1%,|A|=100 (a, b, c, d, e), when IID =
2%,|A| = 50 (f,g,h,i,j), when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (k,l,m,n,o) and when IID =
10%,|A|=10 (p, q, r, s, t)for Mall location type
intheinfluenceprovider’shandtouseinotherproposedapproaches.Therefore,
in most cases, the proposed methods dominate baselines regarding efficiency.Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 29
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)α=40% (b)α=60% (c)α=80% (d)α=100%
(e)α=120% (f)α=40% (g)α=60% (h)α=80%
(i)α=100% (j)α=120% (k)α=40% (l)α=60%
(m)α=80% (n)α=100% (o)α=120% (p)α=40%
(q)α=60% (r)α=80% (s)α=100% (t)α=120%
Fig.3: Regret varying α when IID =1%,|A|=100 (a, b, c, d, e), when IID =
2%,|A| = 50 (f,g,h,i,j), when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (k,l,m,n,o) and when IID =
10%,|A|=10 (p, q, r, s, t)for Bank location type
6.4 Additional Discussion
This section discusses the additional parameters used in our experiments, e.g.,
γ and λ. We have two main observations.
First,weobservethatthetotalregretforalltheproposedandbaselinemeth-
ods increases with the distance (λ) increase. As one billboard slot can influence30 Ali et al.
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)α=40% (b)α=60% (c)α=80% (d)α=100%
(e)α=120% (f)α=40% (g)α=60% (h)α=80%
(i)α=100% (j)α=120% (k)α=40% (l)α=60%
(m)α=80% (n)α=100% (o)α=120% (p)α=40%
(q)α=60% (r)α=80% (s)α=100% (t)α=120%
Fig.4: Regret varying α when IID =1%,|A|=100 (a, b, c, d, e), when IID =
2%,|A| = 50 (f,g,h,i,j), when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (k,l,m,n,o) and when IID =
10%,|A|=10 (p, q, r, s, t)for Park location type
more trajectories, the influence provider influence supply, Ih, increases. While
increasingIh butfixingthevalueofαandλ,theadvertiser’sdemandincreases,
and consequently, regret rises proportionally.
Second, we observed that γ plays a key role in the increase of unsatisfied
regret. As we previously discussed in Definition 5, γ controls the unsatisfied
regret for the unsatisfied advertisers. When the γ value is very small, influenceTowards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 31
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)α=40% (b)α=60% (c)α=80% (d)α=100%
(e)α=120% (f)α=40% (g)α=60% (h)α=80%
(i)α=100% (j)α=120% (k)α=40% (l)α=60%
(m)α=80% (n)α=100% (o)α=120% (p)α=40%
(q)α=60% (r)α=80% (s)α=100% (t)α=120%
Fig.5: Regret varying α when IID =1%,|A|=100 (a, b, c, d, e), when IID =
2%,|A| = 50 (f,g,h,i,j), when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (k,l,m,n,o) and when IID =
10%,|A|=10 (p, q, r, s, t)for Airport location type
providers suffer from higher regret. However, when the γ value increases, the
unsatisfied regret decreases, as represented in Figure 11, 12,13, and 14.32 Ali et al.
EBTE EBOE EAOE EA ALS SG BG
(a)IID=1%,|A|=100 (b)IID=2%,|A|=50 (c)IID=5%,|A|=20 (d)IID=10%,|A|=10
Fig.6: Efficiency Study on Beach location type
EBTE EBOE EAOE EA ALS SG BG
(a)IID=1%,|A|=100 (b)IID=2%,|A|=50 (c)IID=5%,|A|=20 (d)IID=10%,|A|=10
Fig.7: Efficiency Study on Mall location type
EBTE EBOE EAOE EA ALS SG BG
(a)IID=1%,|A|=100 (b)IID=2%,|A|=50 (c)IID=5%,|A|=20 (d)IID=10%,|A|=10
Fig.8: Efficiency Study on Bank location type
EBTE EBOE EAOE EA ALS SG BG
(a)IID=1%,|A|=100 (b)IID=2%,|A|=50 (c)IID=5%,|A|=20 (d)IID=10%,|A|=10
Fig.9: Efficiency Study on Park location typeTowards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 33
EBTE EBOE EAOE EA ALS SG BG
(a)IID=1%,|A|=100 (b)IID=2%,|A|=50 (c)IID=5%,|A|=20 (d)IID=10%,|A|=10
Fig.10: Efficiency Study on Airport location type
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)γ=0 (b)γ=0.25 (c)γ=0.5 (d)γ=0.75 (e)γ=1
Fig.11: Regret of varying γ when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (a, b, c, d, e) for Beach
location
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)γ=0 (b)γ=0.25 (c)γ=0.5 (d)γ=0.75 (e)γ=1
Fig.12: Regret of varying γ when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (a, b, c, d, e) for Mall
location
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)γ=0 (b)γ=0.25 (c)γ=0.5 (d)γ=0.75 (e)γ=1
Fig.13: Regret of varying γ when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (a, b, c, d, e) for Bank
location
7 Concluding Remarks and Future Research Directions
In this paper, we have studied the problem of regret minimization in billboard
advertisements and proposed a number of heuristic solution approaches. All the34 Ali et al.
Unsatisfied Regret Excessive Regret
(a)γ=0 (b)γ=0.25 (c)γ=0.5 (d)γ=0.75 (e)γ=1
Fig.14: Regret of varying γ when IID = 5%,|A| = 20 (a, b, c, d, e) for Park
location
algorithmshavebeenanalyzedtounderstandtheirtimeandspacerequirements.
Severalexperimentshavebeenconductedonreal-worlddatasetsshowingtheef-
fectiveness and efficiency of the proposed solution approaches. Now, this work
can be extended into several directions. First, we have considered that both the
billboardslotsandadvertiserinformationareavailablewellbeforethealgorithm
starts its execution. However, in practice, the ‘online’ setting, where both the
billboard slots and advertisers appear dynamically, is more appealing. Develop-
ing more efficient pruning techniques will remain an active area of research in
the near future.
Acknowledgements. The authors would like to acknowledge Indian Institute
of Technology (IIT) Jammu, India, with grant number SG100047, for providing
the funds required for the project.
References
1. Ali, D., Banerjee, S., Prasad, Y.: Influential billboard slot selection using pruned
submodularitygraph.In:InternationalConferenceonAdvancedDataMiningand
Applications. pp. 216–230. Springer (2022)
2. Ali, D., Banerjee, S., Prasad, Y.: Influential billboard slot selection using spa-
tial clustering and pruned submodularity graph. arXiv preprint arXiv:2305.08949
(2023)
3. Ali, D., Bhagat, A.K., Banerjee, S., Prasad, Y.: Efficient algorithms for regret
minimizationinbillboardadvertisement(studentabstract).In:Proceedingsofthe
AAAI Conference on Artificial Intelligence. vol. 37, pp. 16148–16149 (2023)
4. Ali, D., Gupta, T., Banerjee, S., Prasad, Y.: Influential slot and tag selection in
billboard advertisement (2024)
5. Aslay, C., Lu, W., Bonchi, F., Goyal, A., Lakshmanan, L.V.S.: Viral marketing
meets social advertising: Ad allocation with minimum regret. Proc. VLDB En-
dow.8(7),814–825(feb2015).https://doi.org/10.14778/2752939.2752950,https:
//doi.org/10.14778/2752939.2752950
6. Cabello, S., D´ıaz-Ba´n˜ez, J., Langerman, S., Seara, C., Ventura, I.: Fa-
cility location problems in the plane based on reverse nearest neigh-
bor queries. European Journal of Operational Research 202(1), 99–106
(2010). https://doi.org/https://doi.org/10.1016/j.ejor.2009.04.021, https://www.
sciencedirect.com/science/article/pii/S0377221709002914Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 35
7. Cabello, S., D´ıaz-Ba´n˜ez, J.M., Langerman, S., Seara, C., Ventura, I.: Reverse fa-
cility location problems. Citeseer (2006)
8. Cai, J.L.Z., Yan, M., Li, Y.: Using crowdsourced data in location-based social
networkstoexploreinfluencemaximization.In:IEEEINFOCOM2016-The35th
Annual IEEE International Conference on Computer Communications. pp. 1–9
(2016). https://doi.org/10.1109/INFOCOM.2016.7524471
9. Cai,T.,Sheng,Q.Z.,Song,X.,Yang,J.,Wang,S.,Zhang,W.E.,Wu,J.,Yu,P.S.:A
surveyonlocation-driveninfluencemaximization.arXivpreprintarXiv:2204.08005
(2022)
10. Campbell,M.C.,Keller,K.L.:Brandfamiliarityandadvertisingrepetitioneffects.
Journal of consumer research 30(2), 292–304 (2003)
11. Feder, G., Just, R.E., Zilberman, D.: Adoption of agricultural innovations in de-
veloping countries: A survey. Economic development and cultural change 33(2),
255–298 (1985)
12. Greene, W.H.: Econometric analysis. Pearson Education India (2003)
13. Guo, L., Zhang, D., Cong, G., Wu, W., Tan, K.L.: Influence maximization in tra-
jectorydatabases.IEEETransactionsonKnowledgeandDataEngineering29(3),
627–641 (2017). https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2016.2621038
14. Huang, J., Wen, Z., Qi, J., Zhang, R., Chen, J., He, Z.: Top-k most in-
fluential locations selection. In: Proceedings of the 20th ACM International
Conference on Information and Knowledge Management. p. 2377–2380. CIKM
’11, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2011).
https://doi.org/10.1145/2063576.2063971, https://doi.org/10.1145/2063576.
2063971
15. Kempe,D.,Kleinberg,J.,Tardos,E´.:Maximizingthespreadofinfluencethrough
a social network. In: Proceedings of the ninth ACM SIGKDD international con-
ference on Knowledge discovery and data mining. pp. 137–146 (2003)
16. Lee, S.Y.: Examining the factors that influence early adopters’ smartphone adop-
tion: The case of college students. Telematics and Informatics 31(2), 308–318
(2014)
17. Liu, D., Weng, D., Li, Y., Bao, J., Zheng, Y., Qu, H., Wu, Y.: Smartadp: Vi-
sualanalyticsoflarge-scaletaxitrajectoriesforselectingbillboardlocations.IEEE
transactions on visualization and computer graphics 23(1), 1–10 (2016)
18. Lotfi, R., Mehrjerdi, Y.Z., Mardani, N.: A multi-objective and multi-product ad-
vertising billboard location model with attraction factor mathematical modeling
andsolutions.InternationalJournalofAppliedLogistics(IJAL)7(1),64–86(2017)
19. Malaviya, P.: The moderating influence of advertising context on ad repetition
effects:Theroleofamountandtypeofelaboration.JournalofConsumerResearch
34(1), 32–40 (2007)
20. Nanongkai, D., Sarma, A.D., Lall, A., Lipton, R.J., Xu, J.: Regret-
minimizingrepresentativedatabases.Proc.VLDBEndow.3(1–2),1114–1124(sep
2010). https://doi.org/10.14778/1920841.1920980, https://doi.org/10.14778/
1920841.1920980
21. Palda, K.S.: The measurement of cumulative advertising effects. The Journal of
Business 38(2), 162–179 (1965)
22. Peng, P., Wong, R.C.W.: Geometry approach for k-regret query. In: 2014
IEEE 30th International Conference on Data Engineering. pp. 772–783 (2014).
https://doi.org/10.1109/ICDE.2014.6816699
23. Sierzchula, W., Bakker, S., Maat, K., Van Wee, B.: The influence of financial
incentives and other socio-economic factors on electric vehicle adoption. Energy
policy 68, 183–194 (2014)36 Ali et al.
24. Taylor, J., Kennedy, R., Sharp, B.: Is once really enough? making generalizations
aboutadvertising’sconvexsalesresponsefunction.JournalofAdvertisingResearch
49(2), 198–200 (2009)
25. Train,K.E.:Discretechoicemethodswithsimulation.Cambridgeuniversitypress
(2009)
26. Wang,D.,Miwa,T.,Morikawa,T.:Bigtrajectorydatamining:asurveyofmeth-
ods, applications, and services. Sensors 20(16), 4571 (2020)
27. Wang, L., Yu, Z., Guo, B., Yang, D., Ma, L., Liu, Z., Xiong, F.: Data-driven
targeted advertising recommendation system for outdoor billboard. ACM Trans-
actions on Intelligent Systems and Technology (TIST) 13(2), 1–23 (2022)
28. Wang,L.,Yu,Z.,Yang,D.,Ma,H.,Sheng,H.:Efficientlytargetedbillboardadver-
tisingusingcrowdsensingvehicletrajectorydata.IEEEtransactionsonindustrial
informatics 16(2), 1058–1066 (2019)
29. Wang,M.,Li,H.,Cui,J.,Deng,K.,Bhowmick,S.S.,Dong,Z.:Pinocchio:Proba-
bilistic influence-based location selection over moving objects. IEEE Transactions
on Knowledge and Data Engineering 28(11), 3068–3082 (2016)
30. Wang,S.,Bao,Z.,Culpepper,J.S.,Sellis,T.,Cong,G.:Reverseknearestneighbor
search over trajectories. IEEE Transactions on Knowledge and Data Engineering
30(4), 757–771 (2018). https://doi.org/10.1109/TKDE.2017.2776268
31. Xia, T., Zhang, D., Kanoulas, E., Du, Y.: On computing top-t most influential
spatial sites. In: Proceedings of the 31st International Conference on Very Large
Data Bases. p. 946–957. VLDB ’05, VLDB Endowment (2005)
32. Xie, M., Wong, R.C.W., Lall, A.: Strongly truthful interactive regret minimiza-
tion. In: Proceedings of the 2019 International Conference on Management of
Data. p. 281–298. SIGMOD ’19, Association for Computing Machinery, New
York, NY, USA (2019). https://doi.org/10.1145/3299869.3300068, https://doi.
org/10.1145/3299869.3300068
33. Xie, M., Wong, R.C.W., Li, J., Long, C., Lall, A.: Efficient k-regret query
algorithm with restriction-free bound for any dimensionality. In: Proceed-
ings of the 2018 International Conference on Management of Data. p.
959–974. SIGMOD ’18, Association for Computing Machinery, New York,
NY, USA (2018). https://doi.org/10.1145/3183713.3196903, https://doi.org/
10.1145/3183713.3196903
34. Zahr´adka, J., Machova´, V., Kuˇcera, J.: What is the price of outdoor advertising:
Acasestudyoftheczechrepublic?AdAlta:JournalofInterdisciplinaryResearch
(2021)
35. Zhang,C.,Wang,H.,Xiong,H.:Anautomaticapproachfortransitadvertisingin
public transportation systems. In: 2017 IEEE International Conference on Data
Mining (ICDM). pp. 1183–1188. IEEE (2017)
36. Zhang, K., Zhou, J., Tao, D., Karras, P., Li, Q., Xiong, H.: Geodemographic
influence maximization. In: Proceedings of the 26th ACM SIGKDD Inter-
national Conference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. p. 2764–2774.
KDD ’20, Association for Computing Machinery, New York, NY, USA (2020).
https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.3403327, https://doi.org/10.1145/3394486.
3403327
37. Zhang, P., Bao, Z., Li, Y., Li, G., Zhang, Y., Peng, Z.: Trajectory-driven influen-
tialbillboardplacement.In:Proceedingsofthe24thACMSIGKDDinternational
conference on knowledge discovery & data mining. pp. 2748–2757 (2018)
38. Zhang,P.,Bao,Z.,Li,Y.,Li,G.,Zhang,Y.,Peng,Z.:Towardsanoptimaloutdoor
advertisingplacement:Whenabudgetconstraintmeetsmovingtrajectories.ACM
Transactions on Knowledge Discovery from Data (TKDD) 14(5), 1–32 (2020)Towards Regret Free Slot Allocation in Billboard Advertisement 37
39. Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Bao, Z., Mo, S., Zhang, P.: Optimizing impression counts for
outdooradvertising.In:Proceedingsofthe25thACMSIGKDDInternationalCon-
ference on Knowledge Discovery & Data Mining. pp. 1205–1215 (2019)
40. Zhang, Y., Li, Y., Bao, Z., Zheng, B., Jagadish, H.: Minimizing the regret of
an influence provider. In: Proceedings of the 2021 International Conference on
Management of Data. pp. 2115–2127 (2021)
41. Zheng,Y.:Trajectorydatamining:anoverview.ACMTransactionsonIntelligent
Systems and Technology (TIST) 6(3), 1–41 (2015)
42. Zhou, Z., Wu, W., Li, X., Lee, M.L., Hsu, W.: Maxfirst for maxbrknn. In: 2011
IEEE 27th International Conference on Data Engineering. pp. 828–839. IEEE
(2011)